energy is capacity for performing work: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is limit? limit is that which terminates, circumscribes, restrains, or confines; the bound, border, or edge; the utmost extent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
time is duration, considered independently of any system of measurement or any employment of terms which designate limited portions thereof: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is atom? atom is an ultimate indivisible particle of matter: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
perception is the faculty of perceiving; the faculty, or peculiar part, of man's constitution by which he has knowledge through the medium or instrumentality of the bodily organs; the act of apperhending material objects or qualities through the senses: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
control is A duplicate book, register, or account, kept to correct or check another account or register; a counter register: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
dream is the thoughts, or series of thoughts, or imaginary transactions, which occupy the mind during sleep; a sleeping vision: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is category? category is one of the highest classes to which the objects of knowledge or thought can be reduced, and by which they can be arranged in a system; an ultimate or undecomposable conception; a predicament: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
phase is A particular appearance or state in a regularly recurring cycle of changes with respect to quantity of illumination or form of enlightened disk: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
analogy is A resemblance of relations; an agreement or likeness between things in some circumstances or effects, when the things are otherwise entirely different: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
physics is the science of nature, or of natural objects; that branch of science which treats of the laws and properties of matter, and the forces acting upon it: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is conception? conception is the act of conceiving in the womb; the initiation of an embryonic animal life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
regression is the act of passing back or returning; retrogression; retrogradation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
choice is act of choosing; the voluntary act of selecting or separating from two or more things that which is preferred; the determination of the mind in preferring one thing to another; election: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pleasure is the gratification of the senses or of the mind; agreeable sensations or emotions; the excitement, relish, or happiness produced by the expectation or the enjoyment of something good, delightful, or satisfying: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is continuity? continuity is the state of being continuous; uninterupted connection or succession; close union of parts; cohesion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conversion is the act of interchanging the terms of a proposition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
influence is A flowing in or upon; influx: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
stability is the state or quality of being stable, or firm; steadiness; firmness; strength to stand without being moved or overthrown: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is notation? notation is the act or practice of recording anything by marks, figures, or characters: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
duration is the state or quality of lasting; continuance in time; the portion of time during which anything exists: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
separation is the act of separating, or the state of being separated, or separate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
event is that which comes, arrives, or happens; that which falls out; any incident, good or bad: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
abstraction is the act of abstracting, separating, or withdrawing, or the state of being withdrawn; withdrawal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
soul is the spiritual, rational, and immortal part in man; that part of man which enables him to think, and which renders him a subject of moral government: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is quality? quality is the condition of being of such and such a sort as distinguished from others; nature or character relatively considered: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
aesthetics is the theory or philosophy of taste; the science of the beautiful in nature and art: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
momentum is the quantity of motion in a moving body, being always proportioned to the quantity of matter multiplied into the velocity; impetus: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
light is A West Indian fish of the genus Ephippus, remarkable for its high dorsal fin and brilliant colors: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is conductor? conductor is A substance or body capable of being a medium for the transmission of certain forces: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
crystal is the regular form which a substance tends to assume in solidifying, through the inherent power of cohesive attraction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ratio is the relation which one quantity or magnitude has to another of the same kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
infinity is A quantity greater than any assignable quantity of the same kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is plane? plane is A surface, real or imaginary, in which, if any two points are taken, the straight line which joins them lies wholly in that surface; or a surface, any section of which by a like surface is a straight line; a surface without curvature: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
chance is A supposed material or psychical agent or mode of activity other than a force, law, or purpose; fortune; fate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
class is A group of individuals ranked together as possessing common characteristics: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lever is A rigid piece which is capable of turning about one point, or axis (the fulcrum), and in which are two or more other points where forces are applied: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is grammar? grammar is the science which treats of the principles of language; the study of forms of speech, and their relations to one another; the art concerned with the right use aud application of the rules of a language, in speaking or writing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is implication? implication is the act of implicating, or the state of being implicated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
magnet is A bar or mass of steel or iron to which the peculiar properties of the loadstone have been imparted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
calendar is an orderly arrangement of the division of time, adapted to the purposes of civil life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
rainbow is A bow or arch exhibiting, in concentric bands, the several colors of the spectrum, and formed in the part of the hemisphere opposite to the sun by the refraction and reflection of the sun's rays in drops of falling rain: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
bone is the hard, calcified tissue of the skeleton of vertebrate animals, consisting very largely of calcic carbonate, calcic phosphate, and gelatine: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is fever? fever is A diseased state of the system, marked by increased heat, acceleration of the pulse, and a general derangement of the functions, including usually, thirst and loss of appetite: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
seed is A ripened ovule, consisting of an embryo with one or more integuments, or coverings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fossil is A substance dug from the earth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
history is A learning or knowing by inquiry; the knowledge of facts and events, so obtained: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
color is A property depending on the relations of light to the eye, by which individual and specific differences in the hues and tints of objects are apprehended in vision: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое энергия? энергия — это способность данной системы тел, находящихся в данных условиях, совершить некоторое, вполне определенное количество работы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Энергия».
аксиома — это очевидность, ясная по себе и бесспорная истина, не требующая доказательств: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
теплота — это причину, вызывающую в нас специфические, всем известные тепловые ощущения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Теплота».
знак — это признак, примета, отличие; предзнаменование; предвестие; чувственое доказательство, свидетельство; чувственое изъявление, обнаружение чего-либо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое динамика? динамика — это греч. слово (δύναμις — сила), введено Лейбницем и служит наименованием учения о движении тел под влиянием сил: ЭСБЕ, статья «Динамика».
классификация — это весьма важный логический прием, которым пользуются при изучении предмета и который основан на логическом делении понятий: ЭСБЕ, статья «Классификация, логический прием».
горизонт — это граница, отделяющая видимую часть небесного свода от невидимой: ЭСБЕ, статья «Горизонт».
физика — это наука о природе, о законах и явлениях её: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое поток? поток — это одна из наиболее распространенных форм поверхностного залегания новейших изверженных горных пород: ЭСБЕ, статья «Поток».
феноменология — это учение о феноменах, явлениях («φαινόμενον» по-греч. значит все являющееся нашим чувствам, явление): ЭСБЕ, статья «Феноменология».
норма — это общее правило, коему должно следовать во всех подобных случаях; образец или пример: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
имманентность — это означ. пребывание в чем-нибудь, внутреннюю связь в противоположность внешней: ЭСБЕ, статья «Имманентность, имманентный».
что такое метафизика? метафизика — это умозрительное учение о первоначальных основах всякого бытия или о сущности мира: ЭСБЕ, статья «Метафизика».
построение — это графическое изображение какой-либо кривой, фигуры или тела; графическое решение уравнений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Построение».
суждение — это связь (синтез), в которую сознание ставит свои элементы (представления, понятия) с целью объективного познания: ЭСБЕ, статья «Суждение».
движение — это все явления природы состоят в движении вещества или же объясняются движением: ЭСБЕ, статья «Движение».
что такое линия? линия — это граница поверхности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Линия».
дух — это бестелесное существо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
гармония — это соответствие, созвучье, соразмерность, равновесие, равномерность, равнозвучие, взаимность соотношение, согласие, согласность, соглас, стройность, благостройность; соразмерное отношение частей целого; правильное отношение одновременных или современных звуков, аккорд; самая наука с созвучиях: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
фантазия — это воображенье, изобретательная сила ума; творческая сила художника, самобытная сила созиданья: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое критика? критика — это розыск и суждение о достоинствах и недостатках какого-либо труда, особ. сочинения; разбор, оценка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
синтаксис — это граммат, словосочинение: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
кровь — это красная, жизненная жидкость, которая обращается в животном теле, в жилах, силою сердца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
наследственность — это способность организмов передавать свои свойства и особенности от одного поколения в другое, покуда длится самый процесс размножения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Наследственность».
что такое металл? металл — это крушец; а в малом виде, в выплавке: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
стекло — это сплав песку (кремнистого) с поташем, со щелочью; химич. кремнекислый натр, иногда калий, свинцовая окись ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
телеграф — это устройство, для подачи условных знаков, маяк: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
звезда — это одно из светящих (самосветных) небесных тел, видимых в безоблачную ночь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое ветер? ветер — это движение, течение, теча, ток, поток воздуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
вес — это тяготение, тягота, тяга, тягость, тяжесть; стремление всех тел падать на землю; сила, влекущая их к средоточью земли; стремление самой земли и прочих планет к средоточью солнца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
диаметр — это прямая линия, проходящая через центр кривой фигуры (круга, эллипса, гиперболы, параболы и др.): ЭСБЕ, статья «Диаметр».
прогрессия — это лествица; ряд чисел, из которых каждое на столько же или во столько же раз более или менее предыдущего; первая прогрессия арифметическая, вторая геометрическая: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое ритм? ритм — это мера, в музыке или в поэзии; мерное ударение, протяжка голосом, распев: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
миф — это происшествие или человек баснословный, небывалый, сказочный; иносказанье в лицах, вошедшее в поверье: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
median is A median line or point: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
cube is A regular solid body, with six equal square sides: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
медиана — это прямая, соединяющая вершину треугольника с срединой противоположной стороны: ЭСБЕ, статья «Медиана».
coherence is A sticking or cleaving together; union of parts of the same body; cohesion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
invariant is an invariable quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
proof is A process for testing the accuracy of an operation performed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
temperature is condition with respect to heat or cold, especially as indicated by the sensation produced, or by the thermometer or pyrometer; degree of heat or cold: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is brain? brain is the whitish mass of soft matter (the center of the nervous system, and the seat of consciousness and volition) which is inclosed in the cartilaginous or bony cranium of vertebrate animals: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
number is the measure of the relation between quantities or things of the same kind; that abstract species of quantity which is capable of being expressed by figures; numerical value: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
experiment is atrial or special observation, made to confirm or disprove something doubtful: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
comparison is the act of comparing; an examination of two or more objects with the view of discovering the resemblances or differences; relative estimate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is philosophy? philosophy is literally, the love of, including the search after, wisdom; in actual usage, the knowledge of phenomena as explained by, and resolved into, causes and reasons, powers and laws: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
development is the series of changes which animal and vegetable organisms undergo in their passage from the embryonic state to maturity, from a lower to a higher state of organization: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
quantum is quantity; amount: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
operator is the symbol that expresses the operation to be performed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is relativity? relativity is the state of being relative: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
necessity is the negation of freedom in voluntary action; the subjection of all phenomena, whether material or spiritual, to inevitable causation; necessitarianism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
differentiation is the act of differentiating: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
taxonomy is that division of the natural sciences which treats of the classification of animals and plants; the laws or principles of classification: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is reduction? reduction is the act of reducing, or state of being reduced; conversion to a given state or condition; diminution; conquest: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
preservation is the act or process of preserving, or keeping safe; the state of being preserved, or kept from injury, destruction, or decay; security; safety: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
process is the act of proceeding; continued forward movement; procedure; progress; advance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
domain is dominion; empire; authority: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is circuit? circuit is the act of moving or revolving around, or as in a circle or orbit; a revolution: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
monism is that doctrine which refers all phenomena to a single ultimate constituent or agent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
capacity is the power of receiving or containing; extent of room or space; passive power: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
population is the act or process of populating; multiplication of inhabitants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
idea is the transcript, image, or picture of a visible object, that is formed by the mind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
deduction is act or process of deducing or inferring: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is phenomenon? phenomenon is an appearance; anything visible; whatever, in matter or spirit, is apparent to, or is apprehended by, observation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
growth is the process of growing; the gradual increase of an animal or a vegetable body; the development from a seed, germ, or root, to full size or maturity; increase in size, number, frequency, strength, etc.; augmentation; advancement; production; prevalence or influence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pressure is the act of pressing, or the condition of being pressed; compression; a squeezing; a crushing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
current is A flowing or passing; onward motion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is reaction? reaction is any action in resisting other action or force; counter tendency; movement in a contrary direction; reverse action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
measure is A number which is contained in a given number a number of times without a remainder: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
matrix is the womb: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
circle is an instrument of observation, the graduated limb of which consists of an entire circle: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is statistics? statistics is the science which has to do with the collection and classification of certain facts respecting the condition of the people in a state: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
evidence is that which makes evident or manifest; that which furnishes, or tends to furnish, proof; any mode of proof; the ground of belief or judgement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
form is the shape and structure of anything: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
alphabet is the letters of a language arranged in the customary order; the series of letters or signs which form the elements of written language: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
negation is description or definition by denial, exclusion, or exception; statement of what a thing is not, or has not, from which may be inferred what it is or has: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is orbit? orbit is the path described by a heavenly body in its periodical revolution around another body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is telescope? telescope is an optical instrument used in viewing distant objects: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ocean is the whole body of salt water which covers more than three fifths of the surface of the globe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
heart is A hollow, muscular organ, which, by contracting rhythmically, keeps up the circulation of the blood: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
digestion is the conversion of food, in the stomach and intestines, into soluble and diffusible products, capable of being absorbed by the blood: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is root? root is the underground portion of a plant, whether a true root or a tuber, a bulb or rootstock: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is mammal? mammal is one of the Mammalia: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
botany is the science which treats of the structure of plants, the functions of their parts, their places of growth, their classification, and the terms which are employed in their description and denomination: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
rhythm is in the widest sense, a dividing into short portions by a regular succession of motions, impulses, sounds, accents, etc., producing an agreeable effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
prism is A solid whose bases or ends are any similar, equal, and parallel plane figures, and whose sides are parallelograms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое функция? функция — это обозначенье действий над количествами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
время — это длительность бытья; пространство в бытии; последовательность существования; продолжение случаев, событий; дни за днями и века за веками; последовательное течение суток за сутками: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
мозг — это вещество, наполняющее череп человека и высших животных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
теория — это умозрение, умозаключение; заключение, вывод из чего-либо, не по явленью на деле, а по выводам своим; противоположное дело, на деле, опыт, практика: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое интеграция? интеграция — это явление в языке, заключающееся в том, что составные морфологические части известного слова (корень, суффикс, префикс) уже не обособляются в нашем сознании, как отдельные части слова, и все слово (или его часть), хотя бы и разложимое путем научного анализа на свои составные части: ЭСБЕ, статья «Интеграция».
объект — это предмет противоп. субъект или самость: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
интуиция — это непосредственное усмотрение чего-либо в качестве истинного, целесообразного, нравственно доброго или прекрасного: ЭСБЕ, статья «Интуиция».
направление — это правой; если же, при тех же условиях, удаляющаяся точка обходит ось по направлению, противоположному направлению движения часовой стрелки, то винт называется левым: ЭСБЕ, статья «Направление».
что такое момент? момент — это миг, мгновение, минт: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
жизнь — это жись, жизть, простонародное живот; житье, бытье; состояние особи, существование отдельной личности: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
арифметика — это учение о счете, наука о счислении; основа всей математики (науки о величинах, о измеримом); стар. счетная или цыфирная мудрость; счет, счисление, цыфирная сметка, выкладка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
конус — это тело в виде сахарной головы, круглый клин: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое начало? начало — это чем начинается бытье или действие; один из двух пределов, между коими заключено бытье, вещественное либо духовное; почин, зачин, искон, зачало, источник, корень, рождение, исход; противоп. конец: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
схоластика — это философия внешности, основанная на логике или на диалектике; вообще, школярство, школярное направление, сухое, тупое, безжизненое. схоластик, человек схоластического духа; педант, сухой школяр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
свет — это состоянье, противное тьме, темноте, мраку, потемкам, что дает способ видеть; иные свет принимают за сотрясение малейших частиц вещества, другие — за особое, тончайшее вещество, разливаемое всюду солнцем и огнем: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
опыт — это как отдельные состояния сознания, испытываемые или испытанные субъектом, так и совокупность таких состояний у единичных людей и у всего человечества: ЭСБЕ, статья «Опыт».
что такое степень? степень — это ступень, ряд, разряд, порядок, от дел по качеству, достоинству; место и самое собрание однородного, равного во всем, где полагается лествичный порядок, восходящий и нисходящий: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
индукция — это слово «индукция» употребляется в физике для обозначения явлений возбуждения в телах магнитного или электрического состояния, а также возникновения в них электрических токов — под влиянием других тел, находящихся на расстоянии от первых и представляющих собой намагниченные или наэлектризованные тела или, наконец, проводники: ЭСБЕ, статья «Индукция, в физике».
страсть — это страдание, муки, маета, мучение, телесная боль, душевная скорбь, тоска; особ. в знач. подвига, сознательное принятые на себя тяготы, мученичества: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
вера — это уверенность, убеждение, твердое сознание, понятие о чем-либо, особенно о предметах высших, невещественных, духовных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое слово? слово — это исключительная способность человека выражать гласно мысли и чувства свои; дар говорить, сообщаться разумно сочетаемыми звуками; словесная речь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
слух — это одно из пяти чувств, коим распознаются звуки; орудие его ухо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
орган — это орудие, снаряд, средство: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
вода — это стихийная жидкость, ниспадающая в виде дождя и снега, образующая на земле родники, ручьи, реки и озера, а в смеси с солями, — моря: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое газ? газ — это воздушная жидкость, тело или вещество, в виде воздуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
рычаг — это жердь, шесть, для подъема тяжести, на упорной точке; подъем: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
календарь — это роспись всех дней в году, с показанием и других, к сему относящ., сведений; месяцеслов: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
река — это поток водный, проточная по земляному ложу вода, большего объема, чем речка и ручей; речажина пск. речка, реченька, речушка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое радуга? радуга — это всем известное оптическое явление в атмосфере; наблюдается, когда солнце освещает пелену падающего дождя и наблюдатель находится между солнцем и дождем: ЭСБЕ, статья «Радуга».
куб — это перегонный сосуд, алембик, снаряд для перегонки жидкостей, особ. винных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
гипербола — это кривая линия, которая бы обозначилась на поверхности сахарной головы (конуса), если её рассечь с боку, отвесно вдоль: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
формула — это соединение букв или чисел при помощи знаков различных действий: ЭСБЕ, статья «Формула».
что такое призма? призма — это часть прозрачного для света вещества, ограниченную двумя непараллельными плоскостями: ЭСБЕ, статья «Призма».
what is multiple? multiple is A quantity containing another quantity a number of times without a remainder: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
rotation is the act of turning: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
perimeter is the outer boundary of a body or figure, or the sum of all the sides: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
периметр — это полная длина какой-либо замкнутой кривой линии: ЭСБЕ, статья «Периметр».
information is the act of informing, or communicating knowledge or intelligence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
integral is A whole; an entire thing; a whole number; an individual: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
space is extension, considered independently of anything which it may contain; that which makes extended objects conceivable and possible: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
molecule is the smallest part of any substance which possesses the characteristic properties and qualities of that substance, and which can exist alone in a free state: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is thought? thought is the act of thinking; the exercise of the mind in any of its higher forms; reflection; cogitation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
system is an assemblage of parts or organs, either in animal or plant, essential to the performance of some particular function or functions which as a rule are of greater complexity than those manifested by a single organ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
psychology is the science of the human soul: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
interpretation is the act or process of applying general principles or formulæ to the explanation of the results obtained in special cases: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is formula? formula is A prescribed or set form; an established rule; a fixed or conventional method in which anything is to be done, arranged, or said: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
composition is the act or art of composing, or forming a whole or integral, by placing together and uniting different things, parts, or ingredients: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
association is the act of associating, or state of being associated; union; connection, whether of persons of things: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
explanation is the act of explaining, expounding, or interpreting; the act of clearing from obscurity and making intelligible: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is resolution? resolution is the act, operation, or process of resolving: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
completeness is the state of being complete: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reasoning is the act or process of adducing a reason or reasons; manner of presenting one's reasons: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
differential is an increment, usually an indefinitely small one, which is given to a variable quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is defect? defect is want or absence of something necessary for completeness or perfection; deficiency: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intelligence is the act or state of knowing; the exercise of the understanding: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
understanding is the act of one who understands a thing, in any sense of the verb; knowledge; discernment; comprehension; interpretation; explanation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
organism is an organized being; a living body, either vegetable or animal, compozed of different organs or parts with functions which are separate, but mutually dependent, and essential to the life of the individual: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is ethics? ethics is the science of human duty; the body of rules of duty drawn from this science; a particular system of principles and rules concerting duty, whether true or false; rules of practice in respect to a single class of human actions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
signal is A sign made for the purpose of giving notice to a person of some occurence, command, or danger: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intensity is the amount or degree of energy with which a force operates or a cause acts; effectiveness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
judgment is that act of the mind by which two notions or ideas which are apprehended as distinct are compared for the purpose of ascertaining their agreement or disagreement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
will is A species of goatsucker (Antrostomus Carolinensis), of the southern United States: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
substance is that which underlies all outward manifestations; substratum; the permanent subject or cause of phenomena, whether material or spiritual; that in which properties inhere; that which is real, in distinction from that which is apparent; the abiding part of any existence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is heredity? heredity is hereditary transmission of the physical and psychical qualities of parents to their offspring; the biological law by which living beings tend to repeat their characteristics in their descendants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
inertia is that property of matter by which it tends when at rest to remain so, and when in motion to continue in motion, and in the same straight line or direction, unless acted on by some external force; - - sometimes called vis inertiæ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
frequency is the condition of returning frequently; occurrence often repeated; common occurence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
chemistry is that branch of science which treats of the composition of substances, and of the changes which they undergo in consequence of alterations in the constitution of the molecules, which depend upon variations of the number, kind, or mode of arrangement, of the constituent atoms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is solution? solution is the act of separating the parts of any body, or the condition of undergoing a separation of parts; disruption; breach: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
proportion is the equality or similarity of ratios, especially of geometrical ratios; or a relation among quantities such that the quotient of the first divided by the second is equal to that of the third divided by the fourth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
point is that which pricks or pierces; the sharp end of anything: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
dimension is the degree of manifoldness of a quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is certainty? certainty is the quality, state, or condition, of being certain: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
genus is A class of objects divided into several subordinate species; a class more extensive than a species; a precisely defined and exactly divided class; one of the five predicable conceptions, or sorts of terms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
wheel is the wheel in a clock which regulates the number of strokes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
noun is A word used as the designation or appellation of a creature or thing, existing in fact or in thought; a substantive: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
planet is A celestial body which revolves about the sun in an orbit of a moderate degree of eccentricity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thermometer is an instrument for measuring temperature, founded on the principle that changes of temperature in bodies are accompained by proportional changes in their volumes or dimensions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is clock? clock is A machine for measuring time, indicating the hour and other divisions by means of hands moving on a dial plate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lightning is A discharge of atmospheric electricity, accompanied by a vivid flash of light, commonly from one cloud to another, sometimes from a cloud to the earth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
skin is the external membranous integument of an animal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
disease is lack of ease; uneasiness; trouble; vexation; disquiet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
insect is one of the Insecta: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is biology? biology is that branch of biology which treats of the electrical phenomena of living organisms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
art is the employment of means to accomplish some desired end; the adaptation of things in the natural world to the uses of life; the application of knowledge or power to practical purposes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
shadow is shade within defined limits; obscurity or deprivation of light, apparent on a surface, and representing the form of the body which intercepts the rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
вероятность — это отношение числа случаев, благоприятствующих событию, к полному числу случаев, допускающих и исключающих ожидаемое событие: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вероятность, в математике».
что такое закон? закон — это предел, постановленный свободе воли или действий; неминучее начало, основание; правило, постановление высшей власти: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
атом — это неделимое; вещество в крайних пределах делимости своей, незримая пылинка, из каких будто бы составлены все тела, всякое вещество, как бы из песчинок: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
система — это план, порядок расположения частей целого, предначертанное устройство, ход чего-либо, в последовательном, связном порядке: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
проблема — это задача, вопрос, загадка, что предложено на разрешение, на научное решение; задача, для отыскания неизвестного по данному: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое логика? логика — это по мнению одних, наука о доказательстве, по мнению других, наука о законах и формах мышления: ЭСБЕ, статья «Логика».
эволюция — это так же, как и в философии: ЭСБЕ, статья «Эволюция, в биологии».
философия — это свободное исследование основных проблем бытия, человеческого познания, деятельности и красоты: ЭСБЕ, статья «Философия».
самонаблюдение — это направление внимания на собственные психические процессы, на деятельность нашего мышления, на наши чувствования и волевые импульсы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Самонаблюдение».
что такое градиент? градиент — это разность в показаниях барометров (приведенных к уровню моря) в двух местах, лежащих по тому направлению, по которому в данный момент упругость воздуха убывает всего быстрее: ЭСБЕ, статья «Градиент».
экология — это часть зоологии, обнимающая собой сведения касательно жилищ животных: ЭСБЕ, статья «Экология».
индикатор — это указатель хода или действия машины: ЭСБЕ, статья «Индикатор, в технике».
метод — это и метода ж. способ, порядок, основания; принятый путь для хода, достижения чего-либо, в виде общих правил: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое практика? практика — это опыт, самое дело, опыт на деле, дело на опыте, в приложении; исполнение или попытка к тому, испытание: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
разум — это духовная сила, могущая помнить (постигать, познавать), сулить (соображать, применять, сравнивать) и заключать (решать, выводить следствие); способность верного, последовательного сцепления мыслей, от причины, следствий её и до цели, конца, особенно в приложении к делу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
давление — это совокупность сил, сплошным образом приложенных к поверхности тела и направленных по нормалям ее внутрь тела: ЭСБЕ, статья «Давление».
угол — это перелом, излом, колено, локоть, выступ или залом (впадина) об одной грани: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое форма? форма — это понятие, игравшее в философии большую роль и обозначающее некоторую противоположность содержанию и субстанции: ЭСБЕ, статья «Форма, в философии».
добро — это философский термин, равнозначащий термину благо, но последний обыкновенно понимается шире: ЭСБЕ, статья «Добро, в философии».
сон — это состояние спящего; отдых тела, в забытьи чувств; противоп. бдение, бодрость, явь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
диалектика — это умосложение, логика на деле, в прении, наука правильного рассуждения; по злоупотреблению, искусство убедительного пустословие, ловкого спора, словопрения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое буква? буква — это брюква, известный вид репы; бухма, бушма: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
сердце — это грудное черево, принимающее в себя кровь из всего тела, очищающее её чрез легкие и рассылающее обновленную кровь по всем частям, для питания, для обращения её в плоть: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
рост — это таган, решетка, под которою разводится огонь, и на которую ставят сковороду, кастрюлю: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
золото — это самый дорогой крушец (металл), находимый в самородном виде, то есть не в руде: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое магнит? магнит — это тело, способное притягивать железо и некоторые другие металлы и вещества, или, общнее, тело, создающее в окружающем его пространстве магнитное поле: ЭСБЕ, статья «Магнит».
фотография — это искусство снимать предметы на бумагу посредством света; светопись, солнопись: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
планета — это небесное темное тело, земля, один из земных шаров вселенной, обтекающих солнце: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
дождь — это вода в каплях или струями из облаков: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое длина? длина — это протяжение вдоль, долина; пск. долица, должина, твр. пск. длинь, прм. доль; за длину пространства, тела или вещи обычно берется направление наибольшего протяжения его; длина, ширина и вышина, или мера по уровню вдоль и поперек и мера по отвесу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
радиус — это полупоперечник круга, полуось шара, луч, нога, которою круг очерчен; черта или мера от остья (средоточия, центра) до обода: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
пропорция — это соразмерность; величина или количество, отвечающее чему-либо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
тень — это сень, стень, затинь, застень, юж. зап. холодок; отсутствие прямого, лучистого света, особ. солнечного, перенятого каким-либо предметом, который застеняет, застит, омрачает: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is prime? prime is the first part; the earliest stage; the beginning or opening: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is progression? progression is the act of moving forward; a proceeding in a course; motion onward: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
exponent is A number, letter, or any quantity written on the right hand of and above another quantity, and denoting how many times the latter is repeated as a factor to produce the power indicated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
матрица — это вогнутая часть формы, в которой пластическое тело формуется давлением: ЭСБЕ, статья «Матрица».
reflection is the transference of an excitement from one nerve fiber to another by means of the nerve cells: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
group is A cluster, crowd, or throng; an assemblage, either of persons or things, collected without any regular form or arrangement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
law is in general, a rule of being or of conduct, established by an authority able to enforce its will; a controlling regulation; the mode or order according to which an agent or a power acts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
heat is A force in nature which is recognized in various effects, but especially in the phenomena of fusion and evaporation, and which: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
memory is the faculty of the mind by which it retains the knowledge of previous thoughts, impressions, or events: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is algorithm? algorithm is the art of calculating by nine figures and zero: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
measurement is the act or result of measuring; mensuration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
problem is A question proposed for solution; a matter stated for examination or proof: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
refinement is the act of refining, or the state of being refined: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is identity? identity is the state or quality of being identical, or the same; sameness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
imagination is the imagine-making power of the mind; the power to create or reproduce ideally an object of sense previously perceived; the power to call up mental imagines: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
activity is the state or quality of being active; nimbleness; agility; vigorous action or operation; energy; active force: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
learning is the acquisition of knowledge or skill: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is syntax? syntax is connected system or order; union of things; a number of things jointed together; organism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
emotion is A moving of the mind or soul; excitement of the feelings, whether pleasing or painful; disturbance or agitation of mind caused by a specific exciting cause and manifested by some sensible effect on the body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
channel is the hollow bed where a stream of water runs or may run: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
animal is an organized living being endowed with sensation and the power of voluntary motion, and also characterized by taking its food into an internal cavity or stomach for digestion; by giving carbonic acid to the air and taking oxygen in the process of respiration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is universe? universe is all created things viewed as constituting one system or whole; the whole body of things, or of phenomena; the mundus of the Latins; the world; creation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
purpose is A counter or opposing purpose: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
environment is act of environing; state of being environed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
constant is A quantity that does not change its value: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is reality? reality is the state or quality of being real; actual being or existence of anything, in distinction from mere appearance; fact: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is causality? causality is the agency of a cause; the action or power of a cause, in producing its effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is sensation? sensation is an impression, or the consciousness of an impression, made upon the central nervous organ, through the medium of a sensory or afferent nerve or one of the organs of sense; a feeling, or state of consciousness, whether agreeable or disagreeable: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
knowledge is the act or state of knowing; clear perception of fact, truth, or duty; certain apprehension; familiar cognizance; cognition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
syllogism is the regular logical form of every argument, consisting of three propositions, of which the first two are called the premises, and the last, the conclusion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
metaphysics is the science of real as distinguished from phenomenal being; ontology: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is motion? motion is the act, process, or state of changing place or position; movement; the passing of a body from one place or position to another, whether voluntary or involuntary: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
density is the ratio of mass, or quantity of matter, to bulk or volume: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
potential is anything that may be possible; a possibility; potentially: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
hydrogen is A gaseous element, colorless, tasteless, and odorless, the lightest known substance, being fourteen and a half times lighter than air (hence its use in filling balloons), and over eleven thousand times lighter than water: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is unit? unit is A single thing or person: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
series is any comprehensive group of animals or plants including several subordinate related groups: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
curve is A bending without angles; that wcich is bent; a flexure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
average is that service which a tenant owed his lord, to be done by the work beasts of the tenant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is demonstration? demonstration is the act of demonstrating; an exhibition; proof: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
structure is manner of organization; the arrangement of the different tissues or parts of animal and vegetable organisms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
letter is A mark or character used as the representative of a sound, or of an articulation of the human organs of speech; a first element of written language: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conjunction is the act of conjoining, or the state of being conjoined, united, or associated; union; association; league: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ether is A medium of great elasticity and extreme tenuity, supposed to pervade all space, the interior of solid bodies not excepted, and to be the medium of transmission of light and heat; hence often called luminiferous ether: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
telegraph is an apparatus, or a process, for communicating intelligence rapidly between distant points, especially by means of preconcerted visible or audible signals representing words or ideas, or by means of words and signs, transmitted by electrical action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is mountain? mountain is A large mass of earth and rock, rising above the common level of the earth or adjacent land; earth and rock forming an isolated peak or a ridge; an eminence higher than a hill; a mount: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lung is an organ for aërial respiration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
respiration is the act of respiring or breathing again, or catching one's breath: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
leaf is A colored, usually green, expansion growing from the side of a stem or rootstock, in which the sap for the use of the plant is elaborated under the influence of light; one of the parts of a plant which collectively constitute its foliage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
nucleus is the body or the head of a comet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is sociology? sociology is that branch of philosophy which treats of the constitution, phenomena, and development of human society; social science: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
harmony is the just adaptation of parts to each other, in any system or combination of things, or in things, or things intended to form a connected whole; such an agreement between the different parts of a design or composition as to produce unity of effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
spectrum is an apparition; a specter: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
предел — это начало или конец, кон, межа, грань, раздел, край, рубеж или граница; конец одного и начало другого, в смысле вещественном и духовном: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое сила? сила — это причина, сообщающая ускорение свободной материальной точке, к которой она приложена: ЭСБЕ, статья «Сила, в механике».
память — это способность помнить, не забывать прошлого; свойство души хранить, помнить сознание о былом: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
аналогия — это как один из факторов, действующих в истории развития языка, была замечена очень давно, но только в новейшее время ученые лингвисты, занимающиеся тщательным анализом всех вообще действующих тут факторов, изучили влияние аналогии поближе: ЭСБЕ, статья «Аналогия, в лингвистике».
принцип — это научное или нравственное начало, основание, правило, основа, от которой не отступают: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое различие? различие — это результат умственного процесса, в котором сопоставляются два или большее количество объектов мысли, причем каждый из этих объектов принимается за самостоятельное целое, отличное от всякого другого или только числом, или же и качественно: ЭСБЕ, статья «Различие».
монизм — это собой философское направление, признающее только один принцип бытия: ЭСБЕ, статья «Монизм».
область — это великая власть, широкая сила, право и мочь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
онтология — это учение о сущем; в особенности так обозначается основная, формальная часть философии в системе Христиана Вольфа, который, следуя Аристотелю, называет ее также «первой философией»: ЭСБЕ, статья «Онтология».
что такое здоровье? здоровье — это состояние животного тела (или растения), когда все жизненные отправления идут в полном порядке; отсутствие недуга, болезни: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
аспект — это положение луны или планеты в отношении к солнцу или к другим планетам: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
кривизна — это большее или меньшее уклонение ее от прямолинейного вида, и можно сказать, что окружность тем кривее, чем меньшим радиусом она описана; при очень больших радиусах окружность уклоняется от прямолинейного направления весьма постепенно: ЭСБЕ, статья «Кривизна».
орбита — это круговой путь планеты около солнца; круговина: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое наука? наука — это совокупность всяких сведений, подвергнутых некоторой умственной проверке или отчету и приведенных в известный систематический порядок, начиная от теологии, метафизики, чистой математики и кончая геральдикой, нумизматикой, учением о копыте кавалерийских лошадей: ЭСБЕ, статья «Наука».
звук — это все что слышит ухо, что доходит до слуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
мера — это способ определенья количества по принятой единице; мера вообще прилагается к протяженью и к пространству, а отвлеченно, вообще предел, ино пора, срок: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
идея — это понятие о вещи; умопонятие, представление, воображение предмета; умственное изображение: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое дедукция? дедукция — это термин современной логики, обозначающий выведение одной мысли из другой, делаемое на основании логических законов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дедукция».
инстинкт — это безотчетное побуждение, по которому действуют животные; побудок сев. побудка вост: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
скептицизм — это одно из основных философских направлений, противоположное догматической философии и отрицающее возможность построения философской системы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Скептицизм».
имя — это названье, наименованье, слово, которым зовут, означают о́собь, личность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое глаз? глаз — это орган зрения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Глаз».
вид — это одинаково употребляемый в зоологии и в ботанике для обозначения различных форм растительных и животных организмов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вид, в биологии».
земля — это планета, один из миров или несамосветлых шаров, коловращающихся вокруг солнца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
пар — это жидкость, обращенная жаром в летучее и воздушное вещество: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое колесо? колесо — это плоский круг, обращающийся на оси: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
солнце — это наше дневное светило; величайшее, самосветное и срединное тело нашей вселенной, господствующее силою тяготения, светом и теплом над всеми земными мирами, планетами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
гора — это общее название всякой земной возвышенности, противопол. дол, раздол, долина, лог, низменность; (а плоскость, равнина, отсутствие того и другого): Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
молния — это электрический разряд между двумя облаками, или между частями одного и того же облака, или между облаком и землею: ЭСБЕ, статья «Молния».
что такое шар? шар — это геометрическое тело, ограниченное сферической или шаровой поверхностью: ЭСБЕ, статья «Шар, геометрическое тело».
координаты — это величины, определяющие положение точки: ЭСБЕ, статья «Координаты, в математике».
музыка — это мусикия, искусство стройного и согласного сочетания звуков, как последовательных (мелодия, напев, голос), так и совместных (гармония, соглас, созвучье); равно искусство это в действии: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
история — это слово, принятое от древних почти во все европейских языки, вообще в знач. того, что было или есть, в противоположность сказке, басне; в тесном знач. бытописание, дееписание, бытословие, деи, описание происшествий, повесть о событиях, о быте и жизни народов: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
factor is one of the elements or quantities which, when multiplied together, from a product: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is coefficient? coefficient is that which unites in action with something else to produce the same effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pronoun is A word used instead of a noun or name, to avoid the repetition of it. The personal pronouns in English are I, thou or you, he, she, it, we, ye, and they: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is entropy? entropy is A certain property of a body, expressed as a measurable quantity, such that when there is no communication of heat the quantity remains constant, but when heat enters or leaves the body the quantity increases or diminishes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
probability is likelihood of the occurrence of any event in the doctrine of chances, or the ratio of the number of favorable chances to the whole number of chances, favorable and unfavorable: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
theorem is A statement of a principle to be demonstrated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
force is any action between two bodies which changes, or tends to change, their relative condition as to rest or motion; or, more generally, which changes, or tends to change, any physical relation between them, whether mechanical, thermal, chemical, electrical, magnetic, or of any other kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
cell is A very small and close apartment: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thinking is the act of thinking; mode of thinking; imagination; cogitation; judgment: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is model? model is A miniature representation of a thing, with the several parts in due proportion; sometimes, a facsimile of the same size: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
context is the part or parts of something written or printed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
nature is the existing system of things; the world of matter, or of matter and mind; the creation; the universe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
algebra is that branch of mathematics which treats of the relations and properties of quantity by means of letters and other symbols: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is construction? construction is the process or art of constructing; the act of building; erection; the act of devising and forming; fabrication; composition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
elimination is act of causing a quantity to disappear from an equation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intellect is the part or faculty of the human soul by which it knows: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
extension is that property of a body by which it occupies a portion of space: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is decomposition? decomposition is the act or process of resolving the constituent parts of a compound body or substance into its elementary parts; separation into constituent part; analysis; the decay or dissolution consequent on the removal or alteration of some of the ingredients of a compound; disintegration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
trust is assured resting of the mind on the integrity, veracity, justice, friendship, or other sound principle, of another person; confidence; reliance; reliance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
extraction is the act of extracting, or drawing out: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
duality is the quality or condition of being two or twofold; dual character or usage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is intuition? intuition is A looking after; a regard to: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
calculus is any solid concretion, formed in any part of the body, but most frequent in the organs that act as reservoirs, and in the passages connected with them: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
transformation is the act of transforming, or the state of being transformed; change of form or condition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
hypnosis is supervention of sleep: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is strategy? strategy is the science of military command, or the science of projecting campaigns and directing great military movements; generalship: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is inversion? inversion is the act of inverting, or turning over or backward, or the state of being inverted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is definition? definition is the act of defining; determination of the limits: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
habit is the general appearance and manner of life of a living organism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
essence is the constituent elementary notions which constitute a complex notion, and must be enumerated to define it; sometimes called the nominal essence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
species is A group of individuals agreeing in common attributes, and designated by a common name; a conception subordinated to another conception, called a genus, or generic conception, from which it differs in containing or comprehending more attributes, and extending to fewer individuals: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is gravity? gravity is the state of having weight; beaviness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
electricity is that branch of science which treats of the development of electricity by the action of magnets: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
element is one of the simplest or essential parts or principles of which anything consists, or upon which the constitution or fundamental powers of anything are based: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
equilibrium is equality of weight or force; an equipoise or a state of rest produced by the mutual counteraction of two or more forces: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is fraction? fraction is the act of breaking, or state of being broken, especially by violence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
line is that which has length, but not breadth or thickness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
coordinate is A thing of the same rank with another thing; one two or more persons or things of equal rank, authority, or importance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
doubt is A fluctuation of mind arising from defect of knowledge or evidence; uncertainty of judgment or mind; unsettled state of opinion concerning the reality of an event, or the truth of an assertion, etc.; hesitation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is universal? universal is the whole; the general system of the universe; the universe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
code is A body of law, sanctioned by legislation, in which the rules of law to be specifically applied by the courts are set forth in systematic form; a compilation of laws by public authority; a digest: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
paradox is A tenet or proposition contrary to received opinion; an assertion or sentiment seemingly contradictory, or opposed to common sense; that which in appearance or terms is absurd, but yet may be true in fact: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
star is one of the innumerable luminous bodies seen in the heavens; any heavenly body other than the sun, moon, comets, and nebulæ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
barometer is an instrument for determining the weight or pressure of the atmosphere, and hence for judging of the probable changes of weather, or for ascertaining the height of any ascent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
climate is one of thirty regions or zones, parallel to the equator, into which the surface of the earth from the equator to the pole was divided, according to the successive increase of the length of the midsummer day: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is echo? echo is A sound reflected from an opposing surface and repeated to the ear of a listener; repercussion of sound; repetition of a sound: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
eye is aldebaran, a bright star in the eye of Taurus or the Bull: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
medicine is the science which relates to the prevention, cure, or alleviation of disease: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fish is A name loosely applied in popular usage to many animals of diverse characteristics, living in the water: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
physiology is the science which treats of the phenomena of living organisms; the study of the processes incidental to, and characteristic of, life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is music? music is the science and the art of tones, or musical sounds, i.e., sounds of higher or lower pitch, begotten of uniform and synchronous vibrations: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mirror is A looking-glass or a speculum; any glass or polished substance that forms images by the reflection of rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
симметрия — это соразмер, соразмерность, равноподобие (или разноподобие), равномерие, равнообразие, соответствие, сходность; одинаковость, либо соразмерное подобие расположения частей целого, двух половин; сообразие, сообразность; противоравенство, противоподобие: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
причина — это требуемое логически условие всего бывающего, или то, без чего, по предположению нашего разума, данный факт не может произойти, а при наличности чего он происходит с необходимостью: ЭСБЕ, статья «Причина».
что такое молекула? молекула — это система или группа атомов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Молекула».
модель — это подобие какого-либо предмета, сделанное из дерева, пробки, картона, воску, глины, металла или другого вещества, воспроизводящее этот предмет с точностью, но в уменьшенном виде: ЭСБЕ, статья «Модель, понятие».
категория — это логический и метафизический термин, введенный Аристотелем, ныне употребляемый в значении, данном Кантом: ЭСБЕ, статья «Категория».
архитектура — это искуство располагать, строить и украшать здания; строительное искусство, зодчество: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое природа? природа — это естество, все вещественное, вселенная, все мироздание, все зримое, подлежащее пяти чувствам; но более наш мир, земля, со всем созданным на ней; противополагается Создателю: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
ценность — это представление человека о хозяйственном значении предметов внешнего мира: ЭСБЕ, статья «Ценность».
аппарат — это совокупность приборов и приспособлений, служащих для выполнения какой-нибудь работы, сооружения или для применения науки к практическим целям: ЭСБЕ, статья «Аппарат».
дифференциация — это термин биологического процесса развития, введенный в науку Гербертом Спенсером: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дифференциация».
что такое этимология? этимология — это грамматический термин (от греч. ἔτυμος — истинный, верный и λογία — учение, наука), имеющий два значения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Этимология».
инерция — это покой, недеятельность тел, без внешнего побуждения; косность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
механика — это наука о движении: ЭСБЕ, статья «Механика».
синтез — это основное свойство сознания, благодаря коему самые разнообразные состояния сознания получают объединение и становятся состояниями этого определенного «я»: ЭСБЕ, статья «Синтез, в психологии и логике».
что такое душа? душа — это бессмертное духовное существо, одаренное разумом и волею; в общем знач. человек, с духом и телом; в более тесном: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
электричество — это то, содержащееся в теле, что сообщает этому телу особые свойства, вызывает в нем способность действовать механически на некоторые другие тела, притягивать или при известных условиях отталкивать их, а также вызывает в самом этом теле способность испытывать подобные же механические действия других тел: ЭСБЕ, статья «Электричество».
круг — это окружность, сомкнутая кривая черта, всюду равно удаленная от средоточия: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
отношение — это частное, получаемое от деления одной величины на другую: ЭСБЕ, статья «Отношение, в математике».
что такое зло? зло — это страдания живых существ и нарушения ими нравственного порядка: ЭСБЕ, статья «Зло».
характер — это нрав человека, нравственные свойства, качества его, свойства души и сердца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
софизм — это преднамеренно ложный вывод в противоположность паралогизму: ЭСБЕ, статья «Софизм».
азбука — это алфавит, абевега, стар. буквица; собрание в порядке всех письмен, букв, какой либо грамоты; азбука славянская собств. буквица, кирилицаУ Даля написано с одним «л»: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое дыхание? дыхание — это ряд беспрерывно чередующихся во время жизни движений грудной клетки в форме вдоха и выдоха и обусловливающих, с одной стороны, прилив свежого воздуха в легкие, а с другой — выведение из них уже испорченного жизненным обменом воздуха: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дыхание».
лечение — это совокупность всех действий, предпринимаемых для улучшения состояния больного: ЭСБЕ, статья «Лечение».
железо — это в животном организме представляет столь важную составную часть крови: ЭСБЕ, статья «Железо, в медицине».
ион — это лад, толк, смысл, пригодность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое телескоп? телескоп — это большая зрительная труба, на сошке, или укрепленная иным образом, более для астрономических наблюдений; есть телескоп стекольный и есть зеркальный: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
комета — это небесное тело, сравнительно с прочими, огромной величины, но редкое или жидкое, сквозящее; иногда в ней заметно ядро, а окружная среда образует как бы хвост, бороду или космы; звезда с хвостом, косматая: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
снег — это мерзлые пары, падающие, в виде хлопьев, клочьев, с облаков; самый рыхлый лед, заменяющий зимой дождь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
площадь — это часть поверхности, ограниченная каким-либо замкнутым контуром: ЭСБЕ, статья «Площадь».
что такое хорда? хорда — это отрезок прямой, ограниченный точками, лежащими на данной кривой или на данной поверхности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Хорда, в геометрии».
процент — это или проценты мн. счет или цифра, означающая доход или плату с сотни; рез, резы, настав (стар.), соста, рост, росты, верхи, вершки, свершки, лихва: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
зеркало — это зеркальной, а тело с такой поверхностью — зеркалом: ЭСБЕ, статья «Зеркало».
remainder is anything that remains, or is left, after the separation and removal of a part; residue; remnant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
parity is the quality or condition of being equal or equivalent; A like state or degree; equality; close correspondence; analogy: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is triangle? triangle is A figure bounded by three lines, and containing three angles: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
граф — это наследственное дворянское достоинство, местами и доныне владетельское, но у нас только почетное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is freedom? freedom is the state of being free; exemption from the power and control of another; liberty; independence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
function is the appropriate action of any special organ or part of an animal or vegetable organism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
cause is that which produces or effects a result; that from which anything proceeds, and without which it would not exist: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
work is artificial and ornamental rockwork in imitation of a grotto: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
attention is the act or state of attending or heeding; the application of the mind to any object of sense, representation, or thought; notice; exclusive or special consideration; earnest consideration, thought, or regard; obedient or affectionate heed; the supposed power or faculty of attending: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
machine is in general, any combination of bodies so connected that their relative motions are constrained, and by means of which force and motion may be transmitted and modified: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is theory? theory is A doctrine, or scheme of things, which terminates in speculation or contemplation, without a view to practice; hypothesis; speculation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
logic is the science or art of exact reasoning, or of pure and formal thought, or of the laws according to which the processes of pure thinking should be conducted; the science of the formation and application of general notions; the science of generalization, judgment, classification: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
integration is the act or process of making whole or entire: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
principle is any original inherent constituent which characterizes a substance, or gives it its essential properties, and which can usually be separated by analysis: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is pattern? pattern is anything proposed for imitation; an archetype; an exemplar; that which is to be, or is worthy to be, copied or imitated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
classification is the act of forming into a class or classes; a distibution into groups: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
prediction is the act of foretelling: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
tensor is A muscle that stretches a part, or renders it tense: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is individual? individual is A single person, animal, or thing of any kind; a thing or being incapable of separation or division, without losing its identity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
computation is the act or process of computing; calculation; reckoning: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
basis is the foundation of anything; that on which a thing rests: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
discipline is the treatment suited to a disciple or learner; education; development of the faculties by instruction and exercise; training, whether physical, mental, or moral: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is research? research is diligent inquiry or examination in seeking facts or principles; laborius or continued search after truth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
inference is the act or process of inferring by deduction or induction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
correlation is reciprocal relation; corresponding similarity or parallelism of relation or law; capacity of being converted into, or of giving place to, one another, under certain conditions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
relation is the act of relating or telling: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
death is the cessation of all vital phenomena without capability of resuscitation, either in animals or plants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
selection is the act of selecting, or the state of being selected; choice, by preference: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is reason? reason is A thought or a consideration offered in support of a determination or an opinion; a just ground for a conclusion or an action; that which is offered or accepted as an explanation; the efficient cause of an occurrence or a phenomenon: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
proposition is A complete sentence, or part of a sentence consisting of a subject and predicate united by a copula; a thought expressed or propounded in language; a from of speech in which a predicate is affirmed or denied of a subject: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ontology is that department of the science of metaphysics which investigates and explains the nature and essential properties and relations of all beings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
acceleration is the act of accelerating, or the state of being accelerated; increase of motion or action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is weight? weight is A counterpoise: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
resistance is the quality of not yielding to force or external pressure; that power of a body which acts in opposition to the impulse or pressure of another, or which prevents the effect of another power: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
carbon is an elementary substance, not metallic in its nature, which is present in all organic compounds: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
scale is the sign or constellation Libra: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is sequence? sequence is the state of being sequent; succession; order of following; arrangement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
surface is A magnitude that has length and breadth without thickness; superficies: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
error is A wandering; a roving or irregular course: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
order is an assemblage of genera having certain important characters in common: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is organization? organization is the act of organizing; the act of arranging in a systematic way for use or action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sentence is sense; meaning; significance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
disjunction is the act of disjoining; disunion; separation; a parting: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pendulum is A body so suspended from a fixed point as to swing freely to and fro by the alternate action of gravity and momentum: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
photography is the science which relates to the action of light on sensitive bodies in the production of pictures, the fixation of images, and the like: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
earthquake is A shaking, trembling, or concussion of the earth, due to subterranean causes, often accompanied by a rumbling noise: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is muscle? muscle is an organ which, by its contraction, produces motion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
circulation is the movement of the blood in the blood-vascular system, by which it is brought into close relations with almost every living elementary constituent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
flower is in the popular sense, the bloom or blossom of a plant; the showy portion, usually of a different color, shape, and texture from the foliage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
embryo is the first rudiments of an organism, whether animal or plant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
economics is the science of household affairs, or of domestic management: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is melody? melody is A sweet or agreeable succession of sounds: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
свобода — это своя воля, простор, возможность действовать по-своему; отсутствие стеснения, неволи, рабства, подчинения чужой воле: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
интеграл — это конечная, измеримая величина, в отношении к бесконечно малой части её, к дифференциалу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
масса — это вещество, тело, материя: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое язык? язык — это у позвоночных представляет собой непарный выступ нижней поверхности ротовой полости: ЭСБЕ, статья «Язык, в анатомии».
анализ — это разбор, раздробка, разрешение, разложение целого на составные части его; общий вывод из частных заключений; противоп. синтез, синтетический способ, переход от общого к частностям: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
алгебра — это наука о числах и через посредство чисел — о величинах вообще: ЭСБЕ, статья «Алгебра».
критерий — это мерило для оценки истинности суждения или факта: ЭСБЕ, статья «Критерий».
что такое парадокс? парадокс — это мнение, расходящееся с общепринятым: ЭСБЕ, статья «Парадокс».
перспектива — это вид вдаль, вперед, на расстояние, с обстановкой по пути разными предметами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
тождество — это равенство, имеющее место при всех значениях букв в него входящих: ЭСБЕ, статья «Тождество, в математике».
монада — это единица, как начало исхода счета, силы ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое диагноз? диагноз — это распознавание и определение болезни на основании замечаемых местных изменений, предполагаемых причин, а также особенно выдающихся явлений ее: ЭСБЕ, статья «Диагноз».
масштаб — это жезл размерный, стар.: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
патология — это отдел медицины, изучающий сущность, причины и симптомы болезней: ЭСБЕ, статья «Патология».
понятие — это логический термин, обозначающий известную ступень в развитии интеллектуальной деятельности человека: ЭСБЕ, статья «Понятие».
что такое вещество? вещество — это не первоначальная потенция чувственного бытия, а его ближайший реальный субстрат — то, из чего состоят тела, действительная основа и среда всех ощутимых явлений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вещество, в философии».
точка — это значок от укола, от приткнутия к чему острием, кончиком пера, карандаша; мелкая крапина: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
идеал — это представление высшего совершенства в каком-нибудь отношении: ЭСБЕ, статья «Идеал».
силлогизм — это умствование, рассуждение, из трех предложений: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое представление? представление — это воспроизведенное памятью и вызванное в сознании ощущение: ЭСБЕ, статья «Представление».
догматизм — это философский термин, обозначающий определенное отношение к содержанию системы, а не самую систему: ЭСБЕ, статья «Догматизм».
грамматика — это изображение или описание строения известного языка во всех (или только главнейших) его особенностях: ЭСБЕ, статья «Грамматика».
ухо — это снаряд или орудие слуха; внутреннее устройство в височной кости, коим человк. и животн. слышат; в нем различают: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое род? род — это вторая главная категория, следующая за категорией вид: ЭСБЕ, статья «Род, в систематике животных и растений».
камень — это камык, твр. кама ж. общее название всякого твердого ископаемого, кроме чистых металов или крушца, королька: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
кристалл — это однородное твердое тело, имеющее природную форму многогранника, физические свойства которого по различным направлениям, вообще говоря, различны, но подчинены определенным законам (симметрии); по направлениям же, параллельным между собой, все свойства одинаковы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Кристалл».
винт — это шуруп, округлый гвоздь, нарезанный винтом, спиралью, обвоем, который не забивается, а ввертывается, ввинчивается в нарезную же дыру или гнездо, либо прямо, особ. в дерево, а иногда пропускается насквозь в простую дыру, с наверткой на кончик его гайки: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое луна? луна — это спутник Земли, ближайшее к нам небесное тело: ЭСБЕ, статья «Луна, спутник Земли».
климат — это состояние воздуха известной местности, относительно жары и стужи, сухости, сырости, длительности времен года ипр., погодье: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
единица — это один, первый по счету: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
окружность — это кривая линия, все точки которой находятся на одинаковом расстоянии от одной внутренней точки, называемой центром: ЭСБЕ, статья «Окружность».
что такое ряд? ряд — это вереница, строй, предметы по одной черте, по порядку, чередом: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
поэзия — это изящество в письменности; все художественное, духовно и нравственно прекрасное, выраженное словами, и притом более мерною речью: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
религия — это вера, духовная вера, исповедание, богопочитание, или основные духовные убеждения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
mean is A quantity having an intermediate value between several others, from which it is derived, and of which it expresses the resultant value; usually, unless otherwise specified, it is the simple average, formed by adding the quantities together and dividing by their number: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
square is the corner, or angle, of a figure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is glyph? glyph is A sunken channel or groove, usually vertical: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
consciousness is the state of being conscious; knowledge of one's own existence, condition, sensations, mental operations, acts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is symmetry? symmetry is A due proportion of the several parts of a body to each other; adaptation of the form or dimensions of the several parts of a thing to each other; the union and conformity of the members of a work to the whole: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is axiom? axiom is A self-evident and necessary truth, or a proposition whose truth is so evident as first sight that no reasoning or demonstration can make it plainer; a proposition which it is necessary to take for granted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is mass? mass is A quantity of matter cohering together so as to make one body, or an aggregation of particles or things which collectively make one body or quantity, usually of considerable size: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
nerve is one of the whitish and elastic bundles of fibers, with the accompanying tissues, which transmit nervous impulses between nerve centers and various parts of the animal body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
language is any means of conveying or communicating ideas: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
hypothesis is A supposition; a proposition or principle which is supposed or taken for granted, in order to draw a conclusion or inference for proof of the point in question; something not proved, but assumed for the purpose of argument: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is analysis? analysis is A resolution of anything, whether an object of the senses or of the intellect, into its constituent or original elements; an examination of the component parts of a subject, each separately: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
evolution is the formation of an involute by unwrapping a thread from a curve as an evolute: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
science is knowledge; knowledge of principles and causes; ascertained truth of facts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
instinct is specif., the natural, unreasoning, impulse by which an animal is guided to the performance of any action, without of improvement in the method: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is mathematics? mathematics is that science, or class of sciences, which treats of the exact relations existing between quantities or magnitudes, and of the methods by which, in accordance with these relations, quantities sought are deducible from other quantities known or supposed; the science of spatial and quantitative relations: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mechanics is that science, or branch of applied mathematics, which treats of the action of forces on bodies: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mechanism is the arrangement or relation of the parts of a machine; the parts of a machine, taken collectively; the arrangement or relation of the parts of anything as adapted to produce an effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
description is the act of describing; a delineation by marks or signs: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is illustration? illustration is the act of illustrating; the act of making clear and distinct; education: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
neurosis is A functional nervous affection or disease, that is, a disease of the nerves without any appreciable change of nerve structure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
independence is the state or quality of being independent; freedom from dependence; exemption from reliance on, or control by, others; self- subsistence or maintenance; direction of one's own affairs without interference: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
observation is the act or the faculty of observing or taking notice; the act of seeing, or of fixing the mind upon, anything: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is constraint? constraint is the act of constraining, or the state of being constrained; that which compels to, or restrains from, action; compulsion; restraint; necessity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
unity is the state of being one; oneness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
personality is that which constitutes distinction of person; individuality: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
suggestion is the act of suggesting; presentation of an idea: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
manifold is A cylindrical pipe fitting, having a number of lateral outlets, for connecting one pipe with several others: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
concept is an abstract general conception; a notion; a universal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is induction? induction is the act or process of inducting or bringing in; introduction; entrance; beginning; commencement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
existence is the state of existing or being; actual possession of being; continuance in being: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
life is the state of being which begins with generation, birth, or germination, and ends with death: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
gravitation is the act of gravitating: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is magnetism? magnetism is the property, quality, or state, of being magnetic; the manifestation of the force in nature which is seen in a magnet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
compound is A union of two or more ingredients in definite proportions by weight, so combined as to form a distinct substance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thermodynamics is the science which treats of the mechanical action or relations of heat: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
equation is A making equal; equal division; equality; equilibrium: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is angle? angle is the inclosed space near the point where two lines; a corner; a nook: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
arithmetic is the science of numbers; the art of computation by figures: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
belief is assent to a proposition or affirmation, or the acceptance of a fact, opinion, or assertion as real or true, without immediate personal knowledge; reliance upon word or testimony; partial or full assurance without positive knowledge or absolute certainty; persuasion; conviction; confidence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
particular is A separate or distinct member of a class, or part of a whole; an individual fact, point, circumstance, detail, or item, which may be considered separately: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is symbol? symbol is A visible sign or representation of an idea; anything which suggests an idea or quality, or another thing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is contradiction? contradiction is an assertion of the contrary to what has been said or affirmed; denial of the truth of a statement or assertion; contrary declaration; gainsaying: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
comet is A member of the solar system which usually moves in an elongated orbit, approaching very near to the sun in its perihelion, and receding to a very great distance from it at its aphelion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
microscope is an optical instrument, consisting of a lens, or combination of lenses, for making an enlarged image of an object which is too minute to be viewed by the naked eye: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
river is A large stream of water flowing in a bed or channel and emptying into the ocean, a sea, a lake, or another stream; a stream larger than a rivulet or brook: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
blood is the fluid which circulates in the principal vascular system of animals, carrying nourishment to all parts of the body, and bringing away waste products to be excreted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is ear? ear is the organ of hearing; the external ear: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
plant is an oyster which has been bedded, in distinction from one of natural growth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
bird is A warm-blooded, feathered vertebrate provided with wings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
anatomy is the art of dissecting, or artificially separating the different parts of any organized body, to discover their situation, structure, and economy; dissection: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
poetry is the art of apprehending and interpreting ideas by the faculty of imagination; the art of idealizing in thought and in expression: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is lens? lens is A piece of glass, or other transparent substance, ground with two opposite regular surfaces, either both curved, or one curved and the other plane, and commonly used, either singly or combined, in optical instruments, for changing the direction of rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
группа — это чета, купа, кучка; связь, сноп, цепь; грезд, грезно; кружок, толпа: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
материя — это то, из чего состоит и из чего происходит данный предмет: ЭСБЕ, статья «Материя, материальное начало, материальная причина».
нерв — это беложилье, чувственная или чулая жила в теле; проводник чувства и всякой животной деятельности (движения, питания, усвоения), между средоточием мозговой деятельности и прочими частями тела: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое гипотеза? гипотеза — это предположение, делаемое нами для объяснения явлений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Гипотеза, в науках о природе».
инварианты — это особое обозначение в математике: ЭСБЕ, статья «Инварианты».
механизм — это совокупность тел, ограничивающих свободу движения друг друга взаимным сопротивлением настолько, что все точки такой системы способны описывать только вполне определенные кривые (траектории) и при данной скорости одной из точек скорости и ускорения всех остальных точек системы являются вполне определенными: ЭСБЕ, статья «Механизм».
аргумент — это причина, доказательство, убеждение, довод: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое математика? математика — это наука о величинах и количествах; все, что можно выразить цифрою, принадлежит математике: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
базис — это основная линия в сети геодезических треугольников, измеряемых для топографической съемки или для определения фигуры земли: ЭСБЕ, статья «Базис».
дуализм — это общее название учений, все сводящих к двум противоположным принципам: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дуализм, в религии и философии».
агент — это лицо, которому поручено дело от лица же, общины, товарищества или от правительства; нисшая степень поверенного одного государства при другом; частное доверенное лицо по делам, уполномоченный, делец, ходатай, ходок, старатель, стряпчий, поверенный, прикащик: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое качество? качество — это одна из важнейших категорий, выражающих собою условие мыслимости предмета: ЭСБЕ, статья «Качество».
мысль — это всякое одиночное действие ума, разума, рассудка; представленье чего в уме; идея; сужденье, мненье, соображенье и заключенье, предположенье, выдумка, думка ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
субъект — это подлежащее суждения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Субъект, в философии».
воля — это данный человеку произвол действия; свобода, простор в поступках; отсутствие неволи, насилования, принуждения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое магнетизм? магнетизм — это притяжение магнитом кусков железа — известно со времен глубокой древности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Магнетизм».
корень — это корешек, —шечек, коренек умал. корнишка презрительное, корнища увеличительное, подземная часть всякого растения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
определение — это такая часть предложения, которая содержит в себе указания качества или свойства предмета, имя которого выражено в предложении существительным: ЭСБЕ, статья «Определение, в грамматике».
счастье — это рок, судьба, часть и участь, доля: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое темперамент? темперамент — это психологический термин: ЭСБЕ, статья «Темперамент».
символ — это сокращение, перечень, полная картина, сущность в немногих словах или знаках: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
голос — это тоны, произвольно или непроизвольно издаваемые животными организмами при прохождении более или менее сильной струи воздуха через гортань: ЭСБЕ, статья «Голос, в физиологическом смысле».
пища — это все, что служит для питанья, что питает; снедь, яство, еда, все седомое, брашно, харч, харчи, корм, сыть, выть, все питательное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое воздух? воздух — это невидимая, газообразная оболочка земли; присутствием своим обусловливает животную и растительную жизнь, изменения погоды, распространение звука, выветривание горных пород и т. д: ЭСБЕ, статья «Воздух».
соль — это пятая нота в порядке, ге: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
маятник — это тяжелое тело, совершающее колебания около неподвижной точки: ЭСБЕ, статья «Маятник».
барометр — это снаряд, показывающий тяжесть, вес, гнет или давление воздуха (атмосферы, мироколицы), а потому употребляемый для измерения горных высот, для наблюдения над переменами в тяжести воздуха, предвещающими перемену погоды; буревестник, пагодник: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое океан? океан — это окиян, киян; всемирное море; солоногорькие воды, окружающие весь материк земной, сушу, и занимающие более двух третей земной поверхности: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
туман — это густой пар, водяные пары в нисших слоях воздуха, на поверхности земли; омраченный парами воздух: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
квадрат — это четырехугольник, все стороны которого равны, а все углы прямые: ЭСБЕ, статья «Квадрат, геометрическая фигура».
парабола — это иносказание, притча: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое случай? случай — это быть или быль, приключение, происшествие, притча, дело, что сталось, случилось, сбылось; обстоятельство, встреча; все нежданное, не предвиденное, внезапное, нечаянное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
линза — это сферическое выпуклое или вогнутое стекло: ЭСБЕ, статья «Линза».
quotient is the number resulting from the division of one number by another, and showing how often a less number is contained in a greater; thus, the quotient of twelve divided by four is three: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
discriminant is the eliminant of the n partial differentials of any homogenous function of n variables: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
area is the superficial contents of any figure; the surface included within any given lines; superficial extent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое коэффициент? коэффициент — это постоянное количество, показывающее сколько раз некоторая буква или целое алгебраическое выражение должно быть взято слагаемым: ЭСБЕ, статья «Коэффициент, в алгебре».

coherence is A sticking or cleaving together; union of parts of the same body; cohesion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
integral is an expression which, being differentiated, will produce a given differential: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
heat is A force in nature which is recognized in various effects, but especially in the phenomena of fusion and evaporation, and which: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
language is any means of conveying or communicating ideas: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
dream is the thoughts, or series of thoughts, or imaginary transactions, which occupy the mind during sleep; a sleeping vision: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
refinement is the act of refining, or the state of being refined: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
instinct is natural inward impulse; unconscious, involuntary, or unreasoning prompting to any mode of action, whether bodily, or mental, without a distinct apprehension of the end or object to be accomplished: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conception is the act of conceiving in the womb; the initiation of an embryonic animal life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is necessity? necessity is the quality or state of being necessary, unavoidable, or absolutely requisite; inevitableness; indispensableness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reasoning is the act or process of adducing a reason or reasons; manner of presenting one's reasons: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
animal is an organized living being endowed with sensation and the power of voluntary motion, and also characterized by taking its food into an internal cavity or stomach for digestion; by giving carbonic acid to the air and taking oxygen in the process of respiration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intuition is A looking after; a regard to: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is inference? inference is the act or process of inferring by deduction or induction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
personality is that which constitutes distinction of person; individuality: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
event is that which comes, arrives, or happens; that which falls out; any incident, good or bad: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
idea is the transcript, image, or picture of a visible object, that is formed by the mind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
substance is that which underlies all outward manifestations; substratum; the permanent subject or cause of phenomena, whether material or spiritual; that in which properties inhere; that which is real, in distinction from that which is apparent; the abiding part of any existence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
motion is the act, process, or state of changing place or position; movement; the passing of a body from one place or position to another, whether voluntary or involuntary: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is electricity? electricity is A power in nature, a manifestation of energy, exhibiting itself when in disturbed equilibrium or in activity by a circuit movement, the fact of direction in which involves polarity, or opposition of properties in opposite directions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
carbon is an elementary substance, not metallic in its nature, which is present in all organic compounds: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
equation is A making equal; equal division; equality; equilibrium: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
plane is A surface, real or imaginary, in which, if any two points are taken, the straight line which joins them lies wholly in that surface; or a surface, any section of which by a like surface is a straight line; a surface without curvature: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is evidence? evidence is that which makes evident or manifest; that which furnishes, or tends to furnish, proof; any mode of proof; the ground of belief or judgement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
wheel is the wheel in a clock which regulates the number of strokes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conjunction is the meeting of two or more stars or planets in the same degree of the zodiac: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
barometer is an instrument for determining the weight or pressure of the atmosphere, and hence for judging of the probable changes of weather, or for ascertaining the height of any ascent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
earthquake is A shaking, trembling, or concussion of the earth, due to subterranean causes, often accompanied by a rumbling noise: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ear is the organ of hearing; the external ear: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is seed? seed is A ripened ovule, consisting of an embryo with one or more integuments, or coverings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
anatomy is the art of dissecting, or artificially separating the different parts of any organized body, to discover their situation, structure, and economy; dissection: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
color is A property depending on the relations of light to the eye, by which individual and specific differences in the hues and tints of objects are apprehended in vision: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
предел — это начало или конец, кон, межа, грань, раздел, край, рубеж или граница; конец одного и начало другого, в смысле вещественном и духовном: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
молекула — это система или группа атомов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Молекула».
что такое анализ? анализ — это логический прием определения данного понятия, когда это понятие разлагают по признаками на составные части, чтобы таким образом сделать познавание его ясным в полном его объеме: ЭСБЕ, статья «Анализ, в философии».
механизм — это совокупность тел, ограничивающих свободу движения друг друга взаимным сопротивлением настолько, что все точки такой системы способны описывать только вполне определенные кривые (траектории) и при данной скорости одной из точек скорости и ускорения всех остальных точек системы являются вполне определенными: ЭСБЕ, статья «Механизм».
физика — это наука о природе, о законах и явлениях её: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
момент — это миг, мгновение, минт: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое экология? экология — это часть зоологии, обнимающая собой сведения касательно жилищ животных: ЭСБЕ, статья «Экология».
кривизна — это большее или меньшее уклонение ее от прямолинейного вида, и можно сказать, что окружность тем кривее, чем меньшим радиусом она описана; при очень больших радиусах окружность уклоняется от прямолинейного направления весьма постепенно: ЭСБЕ, статья «Кривизна».
синтез — это основное свойство сознания, благодаря коему самые разнообразные состояния сознания получают объединение и становятся состояниями этого определенного «я»: ЭСБЕ, статья «Синтез, в психологии и логике».
вещество — это не первоначальная потенция чувственного бытия, а его ближайший реальный субстрат — то, из чего состоят тела, действительная основа и среда всех ощутимых явлений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вещество, в философии».
что такое корень? корень — это в индоевропейских языках главная часть слова, повторяющаяся неизменно или с незначительными изменениями в целом ряде родственных этимологически (т. е. схожих в звуковом отношении и близких по значению) слов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Корень, часть слова».
гармония — это соответствие, созвучье, соразмерность, равновесие, равномерность, равнозвучие, взаимность соотношение, согласие, согласность, соглас, стройность, благостройность; соразмерное отношение частей целого; правильное отношение одновременных или современных звуков, аккорд; самая наука с созвучиях: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
вера — это признание чего-либо истинным с такою решительностью, которая превышает силу внешних фактических и формально-логических доказательств Это не значит, что истины веры не подлежат никаким доказательствам, а значит только, что сила веры зависит от особого самостоятельного психического акта, не определяемого всецело эмпирическими и логическими основаниями: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вера».
буква — это брюква, известный вид репы; бухма, бушма: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое вид? вид — это одинаково употребляемый в зоологии и в ботанике для обозначения различных форм растительных и животных организмов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вид, в биологии».
что такое соль? соль — это огромное количество химических соединений, имеющих определенную химическую функцию, отличающую их от других классов соединений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Соль, в химии».
телеграф — это устройство, для подачи условных знаков, маяк: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
река — это поток водный, проточная по земляному ложу вода, большего объема, чем речка и ручей; речажина пск. речка, реченька, речушка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
длина — это протяжение вдоль, долина; пск. долица, должина, твр. пск. длинь, прм. доль; за длину пространства, тела или вещи обычно берется направление наибольшего протяжения его; длина, ширина и вышина, или мера по уровню вдоль и поперек и мера по отвесу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое координаты? координаты — это величины, определяющие положение точки: ЭСБЕ, статья «Координаты, в математике».
зеркало — это весьма гладкая, металлическая или стеклянная доска, отражающая предметы: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is median? median is A median line or point: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
perimeter is the outer boundary of a body or figure, or the sum of all the sides: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is reflection? reflection is the act of reflecting, or turning or sending back, or the state of being reflected: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is theorem? theorem is A statement of a principle to be demonstrated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is work? work is artificial and ornamental rockwork in imitation of a grotto: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is number? number is that which admits of being counted or reckoned; a unit, or an aggregate of units; a numerable aggregate or collection of individuals; an assemblage made up of distinct things expressible by figures: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
psychology is the science of the human soul: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
integration is the operation of finding the primitive function which has a given function for its differential coefficient: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
quantum is A definite portion of a manifoldness, limited by a mark or by a boundary: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
explanation is the act of explaining, expounding, or interpreting; the act of clearing from obscurity and making intelligible: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
syntax is connected system or order; union of things; a number of things jointed together; organism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is trust? trust is assured resting of the mind on the integrity, veracity, justice, friendship, or other sound principle, of another person; confidence; reliance; reliance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
basis is the foundation of anything; that on which a thing rests: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
observation is the act or the faculty of observing or taking notice; the act of seeing, or of fixing the mind upon, anything: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
notation is the act or practice of recording anything by marks, figures, or characters: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is monism? monism is that doctrine which refers all phenomena to a single ultimate constituent or agent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is intensity? intensity is the state or quality of being intense; intenseness; extreme degree: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is knowledge? knowledge is the act or state of knowing; clear perception of fact, truth, or duty; certain apprehension; familiar cognizance; cognition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
essence is the constituent elementary notions which constitute a complex notion, and must be enumerated to define it; sometimes called the nominal essence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
acceleration is the act of accelerating, or the state of being accelerated; increase of motion or action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
magnetism is the property, quality, or state, of being magnetic; the manifestation of the force in nature which is seen in a magnet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is crystal? crystal is the regular form which a substance tends to assume in solidifying, through the inherent power of cohesive attraction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
matrix is the womb: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
dimension is measure in a single line: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
demonstration is the exhibition and explanation of a dissection or other anatomical preparation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is code? code is A body of law, sanctioned by legislation, in which the rules of law to be specifically applied by the courts are set forth in systematic form; a compilation of laws by public authority; a digest: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is disjunction? disjunction is the act of disjoining; disunion; separation; a parting: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is microscope? microscope is an optical instrument, consisting of a lens, or combination of lenses, for making an enlarged image of an object which is too minute to be viewed by the naked eye: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
rainbow is A bow or arch exhibiting, in concentric bands, the several colors of the spectrum, and formed in the part of the hemisphere opposite to the sun by the refraction and reflection of the sun's rays in drops of falling rain: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
digestion is the act or process of digesting; reduction to order; classification; thoughtful consideration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fruit is the ripened ovary of a flowering plant, with its contents and whatever parts are consolidated with it.: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is botany? botany is the science which treats of the structure of plants, the functions of their parts, their places of growth, their classification, and the terms which are employed in their description and denomination: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
shadow is shade within defined limits; obscurity or deprivation of light, apparent on a surface, and representing the form of the body which intercepts the rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
интеграл — это конечная, измеримая величина, в отношении к бесконечно малой части её, к дифференциалу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
нерв — это беложилье, чувственная или чулая жила в теле; проводник чувства и всякой животной деятельности (движения, питания, усвоения), между средоточием мозговой деятельности и прочими частями тела: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
динамика — это наука о движении тел, о силах двигающих: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое объект? объект — это соотносительно с понятием субъекта (подлежащее) означает вообще то, что дано в познании, или на что направлена познавательная деятельность: ЭСБЕ, статья «Объект, в философии».
философия — это любомудрие, наука о достижении человеком мудрости, о познании истины и добра: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
онтология — это учение о сущем; в особенности так обозначается основная, формальная часть философии в системе Христиана Вольфа, который, следуя Аристотелю, называет ее также «первой философией»: ЭСБЕ, статья «Онтология».
этимология — это грамматический термин (от греч. ἔτυμος — истинный, верный и λογία — учение, наука), имеющий два значения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Этимология».
что такое масштаб? масштаб — это отношение длины линии на плане или вообще чертеже к ее действительной длине: ЭСБЕ, статья «Масштаб».
субъект — это подлежащее суждения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Субъект, в философии».
движение — это все явления природы состоят в движении вещества или же объясняются движением: ЭСБЕ, статья «Движение».
степень — это ступень, ряд, разряд, порядок, от дел по качеству, достоинству; место и самое собрание однородного, равного во всем, где полагается лествичный порядок, восходящий и нисходящий: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое добро? добро — это философский термин, равнозначащий термину благо, но последний обыкновенно понимается шире: ЭСБЕ, статья «Добро, в философии».
скептицизм — это сомненье, доведенное до правила, до учения; искание истин путем сомнения, недоверия, даже к очевидным истинам: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
азбука — это алфавит, абевега, стар. буквица; собрание в порядке всех письмен, букв, какой либо грамоты; азбука славянская собств. буквица, кирилицаУ Даля написано с одним «л»: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
род — это вторая главная категория, следующая за категорией вид: ЭСБЕ, статья «Род, в систематике животных и растений».
газ — это воздушная жидкость, тело или вещество, в виде воздуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое фотография? фотография — это искусство снимать предметы на бумагу посредством света; светопись, солнопись: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
гора — это общее название всякой земной возвышенности, противопол. дол, раздол, долина, лог, низменность; (а плоскость, равнина, отсутствие того и другого): Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
площадь — это часть поверхности, ограниченная каким-либо замкнутым контуром: ЭСБЕ, статья «Площадь».
ряд — это вереница, строй, предметы по одной черте, по порядку, чередом: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое линза? линза — это сферическое выпуклое или вогнутое стекло: ЭСБЕ, статья «Линза».
progression is regular or proportional advance in increase or decrease of numbers; continued proportion, arithmetical, geometrical, or harmonic: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is pronoun? pronoun is A word used instead of a noun or name, to avoid the repetition of it. The personal pronouns in English are I, thou or you, he, she, it, we, ye, and they: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
freedom is the state of being free; exemption from the power and control of another; liberty; independence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
axiom is A self-evident and necessary truth, or a proposition whose truth is so evident as first sight that no reasoning or demonstration can make it plainer; a proposition which it is necessary to take for granted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
atom is an ultimate indivisible particle of matter: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
algorithm is the art of calculating by nine figures and zero: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is context? context is the part or parts of something written or printed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is phase? phase is A particular appearance or state in a regularly recurring cycle of changes with respect to quantity of illumination or form of enlightened disk: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is imagination? imagination is the imagine-making power of the mind; the power to create or reproduce ideally an object of sense previously perceived; the power to call up mental imagines: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intellect is the part or faculty of the human soul by which it knows: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
tensor is A muscle that stretches a part, or renders it tense: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
illustration is the act of illustrating; the act of making clear and distinct; education: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is conversion? conversion is the act of turning or changing from one state or condition to another, or the state of being changed; transmutation; change: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
process is any marked prominence or projecting part, especially of a bone; anapophysis: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
organism is organic structure; organization: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reality is the state or quality of being real; actual being or existence of anything, in distinction from mere appearance; fact: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
inversion is A change in the order of the terms of a proportion, so that the second takes the place of the first, and the fourth of the third: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reason is ratio; proportion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is existence? existence is the state of existing or being; actual possession of being; continuance in being: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
momentum is the quantity of motion in a moving body, being always proportioned to the quantity of matter multiplied into the velocity; impetus: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
current is A flowing or passing; onward motion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
solution is the act or process by which a body (whether solid, liquid, or gaseous) is absorbed into a liquid, and, remaining or becoming fluid, is diffused throughout the solvent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is series? series is A number of things or events standing or succeeding in order, and connected by a like relation; sequence; order; course; a succession of things: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
coordinate is A thing of the same rank with another thing; one two or more persons or things of equal rank, authority, or importance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
order is regular arrangement; any methodical or established succession or harmonious relation; method; system: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
symbol is any character used to represent a quantity, an operation, a relation, or an abbreviation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
implication is the act of implicating, or the state of being implicated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
telescope is an optical instrument used in viewing distant objects: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is lightning? lightning is A discharge of atmospheric electricity, accompanied by a vivid flash of light, commonly from one cloud to another, sometimes from a cloud to the earth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
respiration is the act of resping or breathing; the act of taking in and giving out air; the aggregate of those processes bu which oxygen is introduced into the system, and carbon dioxide, or carbonic acid, removed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
insect is one of the Insecta: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sociology is that branch of philosophy which treats of the constitution, phenomena, and development of human society; social science: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is mirror? mirror is A looking-glass or a speculum; any glass or polished substance that forms images by the reflection of rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое аксиома? аксиома — это общее предложение, истинность которого представляется очевидной нашему уму по самому смыслу и значению слов, его составляющих, очевидным непосредственно, без всякого вывода его из какого-либо другого: ЭСБЕ, статья «Аксиома».
мозг — это вещество, наполняющее череп человека и высших животных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
проблема — это научный вопрос, могущий быть различно решенным, причем в пользу каждого из возможных решений имеются веские доводы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Проблема».
различие — это результат умственного процесса, в котором сопоставляются два или большее количество объектов мысли, причем каждый из этих объектов принимается за самостоятельное целое, отличное от всякого другого или только числом, или же и качественно: ЭСБЕ, статья «Различие».
что такое ценность? ценность — это представление человека о хозяйственном значении предметов внешнего мира: ЭСБЕ, статья «Ценность».
тождество — это равенство, имеющее место при всех значениях букв в него входящих: ЭСБЕ, статья «Тождество, в математике».
агент — это латинское слово, означает «действующее», и в физике и химии употребляется в том же смысле, как «сила»: ЭСБЕ, статья «Агент, в физике и химии».
метафизика — это с греч., наука, учение о мире невещественном, о существеном, духовном: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое схоластика? схоластика — это философия внешности, основанная на логике или на диалектике; вообще, школярство, школярное направление, сухое, тупое, безжизненое. схоластик, человек схоластического духа; педант, сухой школяр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
давление — это совокупность сил, сплошным образом приложенных к поверхности тела и направленных по нормалям ее внутрь тела: ЭСБЕ, статья «Давление».
идея — это понятие о вещи; умопонятие, представление, воображение предмета; умственное изображение: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
зло — это худое, лихое, худо, лихо; противопол. добро: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое догматизм? догматизм — это философский термин, обозначающий определенное отношение к содержанию системы, а не самую систему: ЭСБЕ, статья «Догматизм».
голос — это звук, звон, тягучий шум разного рода; звук или зык из гортани человека или животного: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
наследственность — это способность организмов передавать свои свойства и особенности от одного поколения в другое, покуда длится самый процесс размножения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Наследственность».
пар — это лишь газообразное состояние тела при температурах ниже критической, называя это состояние при температурах выше критической — газом этого тела: ЭСБЕ, статья «Пар, в физике и химии».
телескоп — это большая зрительная труба, на сошке, или укрепленная иным образом, более для астрономических наблюдений; есть телескоп стекольный и есть зеркальный: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое климат? климат — это состояние воздуха известной местности, относительно жары и стужи, сухости, сырости, длительности времен года ипр., погодье: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
квадрат — это равносторонний и прямоугольный четырехугольник; народ называет его круглым четырехугольником или клеткою: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
прогрессия — это такой ряд чисел: ЭСБЕ, статья «Прогрессия, в математике».
призма — это часть прозрачного для света вещества, ограниченную двумя непараллельными плоскостями: ЭСБЕ, статья «Призма».
parity is the quality or condition of being equal or equivalent; A like state or degree; equality; close correspondence; analogy: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
glyph is A sunken channel or groove, usually vertical: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
energy is internal or inherent power; capacity of acting, operating, or producing an effect, whether exerted or not: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
proof is any effort, process, or operation designed to establish or discover a fact or truth; an act of testing; a test; a trial: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
cell is A jar of vessel, or a division of a compound vessel, for holding the exciting fluid of a battery: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
machine is in general, any combination of bodies so connected that their relative motions are constrained, and by means of which force and motion may be transmitted and modified: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
analysis is A resolution of anything, whether an object of the senses or of the intellect, into its constituent or original elements; an examination of the component parts of a subject, each separately: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
formula is A rule or principle expressed in algebraic language: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pattern is anything proposed for imitation; an archetype; an exemplar; that which is to be, or is worthy to be, copied or imitated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is mechanics? mechanics is that science, or branch of applied mathematics, which treats of the action of forces on bodies: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
choice is act of choosing; the voluntary act of selecting or separating from two or more things that which is preferred; the determination of the mind in preferring one thing to another; election: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
taxonomy is that division of the natural sciences which treats of the classification of animals and plants; the laws or principles of classification: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
defect is want or absence of something necessary for completeness or perfection; deficiency: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is purpose? purpose is A counter or opposing purpose: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
transformation is the act of transforming, or the state of being transformed; change of form or condition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
relation is the act of relating or telling: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
manifold is A copy of a writing made by the manifold process: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
soul is the spiritual, rational, and immortal part in man; that part of man which enables him to think, and which renders him a subject of moral government: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
phenomenon is an appearance; anything visible; whatever, in matter or spirit, is apparent to, or is apprehended by, observation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is inertia? inertia is that property of matter by which it tends when at rest to remain so, and when in motion to continue in motion, and in the same straight line or direction, unless acted on by some external force; - - sometimes called vis inertiæ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
potential is in the theory of gravitation, or of other forces acting in space, a function of the rectangular coordinates which determine the position of a point: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
equilibrium is equality of weight or force; an equipoise or a state of rest produced by the mutual counteraction of two or more forces: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sequence is simple succession, or the coming after in time, without asserting or implying causative energy: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is arithmetic? arithmetic is the science of numbers; the art of computation by figures: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
class is A group of individuals ranked together as possessing common characteristics: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
alphabet is the letters of a language arranged in the customary order; the series of letters or signs which form the elements of written language: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
planet is A celestial body which revolves about the sun in an orbit of a moderate degree of eccentricity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
telegraph is an apparatus, or a process, for communicating intelligence rapidly between distant points, especially by means of preconcerted visible or audible signals representing words or ideas, or by means of words and signs, transmitted by electrical action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
echo is A sound reflected from an opposing surface and repeated to the ear of a listener; repercussion of sound; repetition of a sound: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is circulation? circulation is the act of moving in a circle, or in a course which brings the moving body to the place where its motion began: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fish is an oviparous, vertebrate animal usually having fins and a covering scales or plates: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
economics is the science of household affairs, or of domestic management: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lens is A piece of glass, or other transparent substance, ground with two opposite regular surfaces, either both curved, or one curved and the other plane, and commonly used, either singly or combined, in optical instruments, for changing the direction of rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
закон — это предел, постановленный свободе воли или действий; неминучее начало, основание; правило, постановление высшей власти: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое память? память — это лишь воспроизведение прежде бывших в сознании образов, причем воспроизводящее лицо сознает, что оно имеет дело с вторичными состояниями, имеющими сходство с первичными: ЭСБЕ, статья «Память».
категория — это разряд, порядок или отдел предметов: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
критерий — это мерило для оценки истинности суждения или факта: ЭСБЕ, статья «Критерий».
математика — это наука о величинах и количествах; все, что можно выразить цифрою, принадлежит математике: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое феноменология? феноменология — это учение о феноменах, явлениях («φαινόμενον» по-греч. значит все являющееся нашим чувствам, явление): ЭСБЕ, статья «Феноменология».
арифметика — это учение о счете, наука о счислении; основа всей математики (науки о величинах, о измеримом); стар. счетная или цыфирная мудрость; счет, счисление, цыфирная сметка, выкладка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
метод — это специальный путь исследования какого-либо предмета: ЭСБЕ, статья «Метод».
наука — это учение, выучка, обучение: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое электричество? электричество — это то, содержащееся в теле, что сообщает этому телу особые свойства, вызывает в нем способность действовать механически на некоторые другие тела, притягивать или при известных условиях отталкивать их, а также вызывает в самом этом теле способность испытывать подобные же механические действия других тел: ЭСБЕ, статья «Электричество».
идеал — это представление высшего совершенства в каком-нибудь отношении: ЭСБЕ, статья «Идеал».
счастье — это рок, судьба, часть и участь, доля: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
критика — это розыск и суждение о достоинствах и недостатках какого-либо труда, особ. сочинения; разбор, оценка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое слух? слух — это одно из пяти чувств, коим распознаются звуки; орудие его ухо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
рост — это таган, решетка, под которою разводится огонь, и на которую ставят сковороду, кастрюлю: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
кристалл — это ископаемое, образующее от природы правильное геометрическое тело; гранка, гранник, самогранник; переиначено в хрусталь, самородное, горное стекло, или белое, граненое стекло: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
барометр — это инструмент, которым измеряют давление воздуха: ЭСБЕ, статья «Барометр».
ветер — это движение, течение, теча, ток, поток воздуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое куб? куб — это перегонный сосуд, алембик, снаряд для перегонки жидкостей, особ. винных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
пропорция — это соразмерность; величина или количество, отвечающее чему-либо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
история — это слово, принятое от древних почти во все европейских языки, вообще в знач. того, что было или есть, в противоположность сказке, басне; в тесном знач. бытописание, дееписание, бытословие, деи, описание происшествий, повесть о событиях, о быте и жизни народов: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
discriminant is the eliminant of the n partial differentials of any homogenous function of n variables: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
медиана — это прямая, соединяющая вершину треугольника с срединой противоположной стороны: ЭСБЕ, статья «Медиана».
information is the act of informing, or communicating knowledge or intelligence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
law is in general, a rule of being or of conduct, established by an authority able to enforce its will; a controlling regulation; the mode or order according to which an agent or a power acts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is nerve? nerve is one of the whitish and elastic bundles of fibers, with the accompanying tissues, which transmit nervous impulses between nerve centers and various parts of the animal body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
control is A duplicate book, register, or account, kept to correct or check another account or register; a counter register: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
comparison is the act of comparing; an examination of two or more objects with the view of discovering the resemblances or differences; relative estimate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
algebra is that branch of mathematics which treats of the relations and properties of quantity by means of letters and other symbols: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
physics is the science of nature, or of natural objects; that branch of science which treats of the laws and properties of matter, and the forces acting upon it: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
relativity is the state of being relative: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is completeness? completeness is the state of being complete: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
channel is the hollow bed where a stream of water runs or may run: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
duality is the quality or condition of being two or twofold; dual character or usage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
research is diligent inquiry or examination in seeking facts or principles; laborius or continued search after truth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is unity? unity is the state of being one; oneness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
separation is the act of separating, or the state of being separated, or separate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is population? population is the act or process of populating; multiplication of inhabitants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
will is A species of goatsucker (Antrostomus Carolinensis), of the southern United States: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
metaphysics is the science of real as distinguished from phenomenal being; ontology: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
gravity is the tendency of a mass of matter toward a center of attraction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is resistance? resistance is the act of resisting; opposition, passive or active: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thermodynamics is the science which treats of the mechanical action or relations of heat: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
infinity is unlimited extent of time, space, or quantity; eternity; boundlessness; immensity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
statistics is the science which has to do with the collection and classification of certain facts respecting the condition of the people in a state: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is genus? genus is A class of objects divided into several subordinate species; a class more extensive than a species; a precisely defined and exactly divided class; one of the five predicable conceptions, or sorts of terms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
letter is A mark or character used as the representative of a sound, or of an articulation of the human organs of speech; a first element of written language: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
star is one of the innumerable luminous bodies seen in the heavens; any heavenly body other than the sun, moon, comets, and nebulæ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
photography is the science which relates to the action of light on sensitive bodies in the production of pictures, the fixation of images, and the like: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
blood is the fluid which circulates in the principal vascular system of animals, carrying nourishment to all parts of the body, and bringing away waste products to be excreted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fever is A diseased state of the system, marked by increased heat, acceleration of the pulse, and a general derangement of the functions, including usually, thirst and loss of appetite: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is bird? bird is A warm-blooded, feathered vertebrate provided with wings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
history is A learning or knowing by inquiry; the knowledge of facts and events, so obtained: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
prism is A solid whose bases or ends are any similar, equal, and parallel plane figures, and whose sides are parallelograms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
причина — это требуемое логически условие всего бывающего, или то, без чего, по предположению нашего разума, данный факт не может произойти, а при наличности чего он происходит с необходимостью: ЭСБЕ, статья «Причина».
язык — это у позвоночных представляет собой непарный выступ нижней поверхности ротовой полости: ЭСБЕ, статья «Язык, в анатомии».
что такое инварианты? инварианты — это особое обозначение в математике: ЭСБЕ, статья «Инварианты».
горизонт — это окраина земной поверхности, вкруг наблюдателя, где примыкает небо; небосклон, кругозор, небозём, небоскат, закат неба; глазоём, зреймо; завесь, завесь, закрой касп. озор, овидь арх. оглядь орл. черта, отделяющая видимую нами часть неба и земли от невидимой: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
направление — это правой; если же, при тех же условиях, удаляющаяся точка обходит ось по направлению, противоположному направлению движения часовой стрелки, то винт называется левым: ЭСБЕ, статья «Направление».
градиент — это разность в показаниях барометров (приведенных к уровню моря) в двух местах, лежащих по тому направлению, по которому в данный момент упругость воздуха убывает всего быстрее: ЭСБЕ, статья «Градиент».
что такое аспект? аспект — это положение луны или планеты в отношении к солнцу или к другим планетам: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
механика — это математика, приложенная к законам равновесия и движения тел; наука о силе и сопротивлении ей; искусство применять силу к делу и строить машины; наука выгодного приспособления сил. механический, механичный, к механике относящийся: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
понятие — это логический термин, обозначающий известную ступень в развитии интеллектуальной деятельности человека: ЭСБЕ, статья «Понятие».
магнетизм — это притяжение магнитом кусков железа — известно со времен глубокой древности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Магнетизм».
что такое дух? дух — это бестелесное существо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
страсть — это страдание, муки, маета, мучение, телесная боль, душевная скорбь, тоска; особ. в знач. подвига, сознательное принятые на себя тяготы, мученичества: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
диалектика — это искусство вести беседу: ЭСБЕ, статья «Диалектика».
глаз — это орудие чувственного зрения, око; глазное яблоко; шары сиб. талы вят. буркала; баньки юж. глядела, гляделки, зенки; мн. глаза, глазы; ол. глазия; собир. глазие; глазина, глазища увелич. глазик, глазок, глазочек. глазенок, глазеночек ипр. умал: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое лечение? лечение — это совокупность всех действий, предпринимаемых для улучшения состояния больного: ЭСБЕ, статья «Лечение».
что такое стекло? стекло — это сплав песку (кремнистого) с поташем, со щелочью; химич. кремнекислый натр, иногда калий, свинцовая окись ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
календарь — это роспись всех дней в году, с показанием и других, к сему относящ., сведений; месяцеслов: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
дождь — это один из видов атмосферных осадков: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дождь».
шар — это геометрическое тело, ограниченное сферической или шаровой поверхностью: ЭСБЕ, статья «Шар, геометрическое тело».
что такое процент? процент — это сотая часть числа: ЭСБЕ, статья «Процент, сотая часть числа».
религия — это вера, духовная вера, исповедание, богопочитание, или основные духовные убеждения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is rotation? rotation is the act of turning: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
матрица — это изложница, льяло, льяк, гнездо, форма для отливки печатальных букв: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is probability? probability is the quality or state of being probable; appearance of reality or truth; reasonable ground of presumption; likelihood: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is cause? cause is that which produces or effects a result; that from which anything proceeds, and without which it would not exist: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
brain is the whitish mass of soft matter (the center of the nervous system, and the seat of consciousness and volition) which is inclosed in the cartilaginous or bony cranium of vertebrate animals: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is system? system is an assemblage of objects arranged in regular subordination, or after some distinct method, usually logical or scientific; a complete whole of objects related by some common law, principle, or end; a complete exhibition of essential principles or facts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is logic? logic is the science or art of exact reasoning, or of pure and formal thought, or of the laws according to which the processes of pure thinking should be conducted; the science of the formation and application of general notions; the science of generalization, judgment, classification: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
science is knowledge; knowledge of principles and causes; ascertained truth of facts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
association is the act of associating, or state of being associated; union; connection, whether of persons of things: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
learning is the acquisition of knowledge or skill: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
decomposition is the act or process of resolving the constituent parts of a compound body or substance into its elementary parts; separation into constituent part; analysis; the decay or dissolution consequent on the removal or alteration of some of the ingredients of a compound; disintegration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is computation? computation is the act or process of computing; calculation; reckoning: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
independence is the state or quality of being independent; freedom from dependence; exemption from reliance on, or control by, others; self- subsistence or maintenance; direction of one's own affairs without interference: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
stability is the state or quality of being stable, or firm; steadiness; firmness; strength to stand without being moved or overthrown: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
circuit is the act of moving or revolving around, or as in a circle or orbit; a revolution: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is signal? signal is A sign made for the purpose of giving notice to a person of some occurence, command, or danger: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sensation is an impression, or the consciousness of an impression, made upon the central nervous organ, through the medium of a sensory or afferent nerve or one of the organs of sense; a feeling, or state of consciousness, whether agreeable or disagreeable: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is habit? habit is the usual condition or state of a person or thing, either natural or acquired, regarded as something had, possessed, and firmly retained: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ontology is that department of the science of metaphysics which investigates and explains the nature and essential properties and relations of all beings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
gravitation is the act of gravitating: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conductor is A substance or body capable of being a medium for the transmission of certain forces: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is measure? measure is A standard of dimension; a fixed unit of quantity or extent; an extent or quantity in the fractions or multiples of which anything is estimated and stated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
point is A fixed conventional place for reference, or zero of reckoning, in the heavens, usually the intersection of two or more great circles of the sphere, and named specifically in each case according to the position intended: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
average is that service which a tenant owed his lord, to be done by the work beasts of the tenant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
universal is the whole; the general system of the universe; the universe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is sentence? sentence is sense; meaning; significance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is comet? comet is A member of the solar system which usually moves in an elongated orbit, approaching very near to the sun in its perihelion, and receding to a very great distance from it at its aphelion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is calendar? calendar is an orderly arrangement of the division of time, adapted to the purposes of civil life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
heart is A hollow, muscular organ, which, by contracting rhythmically, keeps up the circulation of the blood: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
disease is lack of ease; uneasiness; trouble; vexation; disquiet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mammal is one of the Mammalia: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is art? art is the employment of means to accomplish some desired end; the adaptation of things in the natural world to the uses of life; the application of knowledge or power to practical purposes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое свобода? свобода — это своя воля, простор, возможность действовать по-своему; отсутствие стеснения, неволи, рабства, подчинения чужой воле: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
материя — это вещество; все весомое, все занимающее пространство или все земное (камень, дерево, воздух ипр.); общее отвлеченное понятие вещественности, телесности, всего, что подлежит чувствам: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
знак — это признак, примета, отличие; предзнаменование; предвестие; чувственое доказательство, свидетельство; чувственое изъявление, обнаружение чего-либо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
интеграция — это явление в языке, заключающееся в том, что составные морфологические части известного слова (корень, суффикс, префикс) уже не обособляются в нашем сознании, как отдельные части слова, и все слово (или его часть), хотя бы и разложимое путем научного анализа на свои составные части: ЭСБЕ, статья «Интеграция».
что такое эволюция? эволюция — это так же, как и в философии: ЭСБЕ, статья «Эволюция, в биологии».
область — это великая власть, широкая сила, право и мочь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
дифференциация — это термин биологического процесса развития, введенный в науку Гербертом Спенсером: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дифференциация».
диагноз — это распознавание и определение болезни на основании замечаемых местных изменений, предполагаемых причин, а также особенно выдающихся явлений ее: ЭСБЕ, статья «Диагноз».
что такое мысль? мысль — это всякое одиночное действие ума, разума, рассудка; представленье чего в уме; идея; сужденье, мненье, соображенье и заключенье, предположенье, выдумка, думка ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
суждение — это связь (синтез), в которую сознание ставит свои элементы (представления, понятия) с целью объективного познания: ЭСБЕ, статья «Суждение».
опыт — это как отдельные состояния сознания, испытываемые или испытанные субъектом, так и совокупность таких состояний у единичных людей и у всего человечества: ЭСБЕ, статья «Опыт».
форма — это фигура, наружный вид, ураз, образ, очерк или стать: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое инстинкт? инстинкт — это безотчетное побуждение, по которому действуют животные; побудок сев. побудка вост: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
софизм — это лжеумствование, лжемудрствование, ложный вывод, заключение, суждение, которому придан внешний вид истины: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
ухо — это слуховой аппарат позвоночных животных, хотя для низших позвоночных, а именно для рыб, слуховая функция этого аппарата не доказана: ЭСБЕ, статья «Ухо, анатомия».
воздух — это невидимая, газообразная оболочка земли; присутствием своим обусловливает животную и растительную жизнь, изменения погоды, распространение звука, выветривание горных пород и т. д: ЭСБЕ, статья «Воздух».
магнит — это магнитный камень, железняк, руда, со свойством притягивать железо и, обращаясь на перевес, указывать на север и на юг, а также передавать свойство это железу; это магнит естественный, природный; намагниченная ж им стальная полоса, или несколько их, соединенных в одной оправе, магнит искусственный: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое солнце? солнце — это наше дневное светило; величайшее, самосветное и срединное тело нашей вселенной, господствующее силою тяготения, светом и теплом над всеми земными мирами, планетами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
снег — это мерзлые пары, падающие, в виде хлопьев, клочьев, с облаков; самый рыхлый лед, заменяющий зимой дождь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
окружность — это кривая линия, все точки которой находятся на одинаковом расстоянии от одной внутренней точки, называемой центром: ЭСБЕ, статья «Окружность».
случай — это быть или быль, приключение, происшествие, притча, дело, что сталось, случилось, сбылось; обстоятельство, встреча; все нежданное, не предвиденное, внезапное, нечаянное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое миф? миф — это происшествие или человек баснословный, небывалый, сказочный; иносказанье в лицах, вошедшее в поверье: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
coefficient is A number, commonly used in computation as a factor, expressing the amount of some change or effect under certain fixed conditions as to temperature, length, volume: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое граф? граф — это наследственное дворянское достоинство, местами и доныне владетельское, но у нас только почетное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
symmetry is the law of likeness; similarity of structure; regularity in form and arrangement; orderly and similar distribution of parts, such that an animal may be divided into parts which are structurally symmetrical: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
time is duration, considered independently of any system of measurement or any employment of terms which designate limited portions thereof: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
memory is the faculty of the mind by which it retains the knowledge of previous thoughts, impressions, or events: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
model is A miniature representation of a thing, with the several parts in due proportion; sometimes, a facsimile of the same size: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
category is one of the highest classes to which the objects of knowledge or thought can be reduced, and by which they can be arranged in a system; an ultimate or undecomposable conception; a predicament: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
identity is an identical equation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is elimination? elimination is the act of expelling or throwing off; (Physiol.): Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
prediction is the act of foretelling: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
description is the act of describing; a delineation by marks or signs: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
continuity is the state of being continuous; uninterupted connection or succession; close union of parts; cohesion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is preservation? preservation is the act or process of preserving, or keeping safe; the state of being preserved, or kept from injury, destruction, or decay; security; safety: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
understanding is the act of one who understands a thing, in any sense of the verb; knowledge; discernment; comprehension; interpretation; explanation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
constant is A quantity that does not change its value: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
strategy is the science of military command, or the science of projecting campaigns and directing great military movements; generalship: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
selection is the act of selecting, or the state of being selected; choice, by preference: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
induction is the act or process of reasoning from a part to a whole, from particulars to generals, or from the individual to the universal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is aesthetics? aesthetics is the theory or philosophy of taste; the science of the beautiful in nature and art: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pressure is the action of a force against some obstacle or opposing force; a force in the nature of a thrust, distributed over a surface, often estimated with reference to the upon a unit's area: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
chemistry is that branch of science which treats of the composition of substances, and of the changes which they undergo in consequence of alterations in the constitution of the molecules, which depend upon variations of the number, kind, or mode of arrangement, of the constituent atoms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
unit is the least whole number; one: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is line? line is linen thread or string; a slender, strong cord: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
error is the difference between the approximate result and the true result: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
particular is A separate or distinct member of a class, or part of a whole; an individual fact, point, circumstance, detail, or item, which may be considered separately: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
grammar is the science which treats of the principles of language; the study of forms of speech, and their relations to one another; the art concerned with the right use aud application of the rules of a language, in speaking or writing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
orbit is the path described by a heavenly body in its periodical revolution around another body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
clock is A plant of the genus Mirabilis: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is lung? lung is an organ for aërial respiration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
medicine is the science which relates to the prevention, cure, or alleviation of disease: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
nucleus is A kernel: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
music is A more or less musical sound made by many of the lower animals: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
энергия — это способность данной системы тел, находящихся в данных условиях, совершить некоторое, вполне определенное количество работы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Энергия».
что такое время? время — это длительность бытья; пространство в бытии; последовательность существования; продолжение случаев, событий; дни за днями и века за веками; последовательное течение суток за сутками: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
система — это план, порядок расположения частей целого, предначертанное устройство, ход чего-либо, в последовательном, связном порядке: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
принцип — это то, чем объединяется в мысли и в действительности известная совокупность фактов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Принцип, в метафизике».
природа — это естество, все вещественное, вселенная, все мироздание, все зримое, подлежащее пяти чувствам; но более наш мир, земля, со всем созданным на ней; противополагается Создателю: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое перспектива? перспектива — это картинной плоскостью; место глаза наблюдателя — точкой зрения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Перспектива».
дуализм — это общее название учений, все сводящих к двум противоположным принципам: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дуализм, в религии и философии».
имманентность — это означ. пребывание в чем-нибудь, внутреннюю связь в противоположность внешней: ЭСБЕ, статья «Имманентность, имманентный».
начало — это чем начинается бытье или действие; один из двух пределов, между коими заключено бытье, вещественное либо духовное; почин, зачин, искон, зачало, источник, корень, рождение, исход; противоп. конец: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое разум? разум — это существенная для человека, как такого, способность мыслить всеобщее в отличие от непосредственно данных единичных фактов, какими исключительно занято мышление прочих животных: ЭСБЕ, статья «Разум».
мера — это способ определенья количества по принятой единице; мера вообще прилагается к протяженью и к пространству, а отвлеченно, вообще предел, ино пора, срок: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
отношение — это частное, получаемое от деления одной величины на другую: ЭСБЕ, статья «Отношение, в математике».
представление — это воспроизведенное памятью и вызванное в сознании ощущение: ЭСБЕ, статья «Представление».
что такое символ? символ — это сокращение, перечень, полная картина, сущность в немногих словах или знаках: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
кровь — это красная, жизненная жидкость, которая обращается в животном теле, в жилах, силою сердца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
вода — это стихийная жидкость, ниспадающая в виде дождя и снега, образующая на земле родники, ручьи, реки и озера, а в смеси с солями, — моря: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
ион — это лад, толк, смысл, пригодность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
луна — это спутник земли, небесное тело, которое ходит вкруг земли; месяц: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое туман? туман — это такое состояние нижнего слоя атмосферы, когда совершенно прозрачный при обыкновенных условиях воздух теряет свою прозрачность, делается мутным и предметы, даже находящиеся сравнительно близко от наблюдателя, становятся плохо видимыми: ЭСБЕ, статья «Туман».
диаметр — это поперечник, говоря о круге или шаре: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
формула — это соединение букв или чисел при помощи знаков различных действий: ЭСБЕ, статья «Формула».
prime is any number expressing the combining weight or equivalent of any particular element: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
square is the corner, or angle, of a figure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
коэффициент — это число, на которое помножается другая величина; множитель, сомножитель (если их более одного): Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
invariant is an invariable quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
space is extension, considered independently of anything which it may contain; that which makes extended objects conceivable and possible: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
attention is the act or state of attending or heeding; the application of the mind to any object of sense, representation, or thought; notice; exclusive or special consideration; earnest consideration, thought, or regard; obedient or affectionate heed; the supposed power or faculty of attending: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
hypothesis is A supposition; a proposition or principle which is supposed or taken for granted, in order to draw a conclusion or inference for proof of the point in question; something not proved, but assumed for the purpose of argument: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
interpretation is the act of interpreting; explanation of what is obscure; translation; version; construction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
principle is beginning; commencement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mathematics is that science, or class of sciences, which treats of the exact relations existing between quantities or magnitudes, and of the methods by which, in accordance with these relations, quantities sought are deducible from other quantities known or supposed; the science of spatial and quantitative relations: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is regression? regression is the act of passing back or returning; retrogression; retrogradation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
differentiation is the act of distinguishing or describing a thing, by giving its different, or specific difference; exact definition or determination: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
differential is an increment, usually an indefinitely small one, which is given to a variable quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
universe is all created things viewed as constituting one system or whole; the whole body of things, or of phenomena; the mundus of the Latins; the world; creation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is calculus? calculus is any solid concretion, formed in any part of the body, but most frequent in the organs that act as reservoirs, and in the passages connected with them: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
correlation is reciprocal relation; corresponding similarity or parallelism of relation or law; capacity of being converted into, or of giving place to, one another, under certain conditions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
suggestion is the act or power of originating or recalling ideas or relations, distinguished as original and relative: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
abstraction is the act process of leaving out of consideration one or more properties of a complex object so as to attend to others; analysis: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
deduction is act or process of deducing or inferring: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
heredity is hereditary transmission of the physical and psychical qualities of parents to their offspring; the biological law by which living beings tend to repeat their characteristics in their descendants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is density? density is the quality of being dense, close, or thick; compactness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
element is one of the simplest essential parts, more commonly called cells, of which animal and vegetable organisms, or their tissues and organs, are composed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
scale is one of the small, thin, membranous, bony or horny pieces which form the covering of many fishes and reptiles, and some mammals, belonging to the dermal part of the skeleton, or dermoskeleton: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
angle is the figure made by. two lines which meet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is chance? chance is A supposed material or psychical agent or mode of activity other than a force, law, or purpose; fortune; fate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
form is that assemblage or disposition of qualities which makes a conception, or that internal constitution which makes an existing thing to be what it is: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
noun is A word used as the designation or appellation of a creature or thing, existing in fact or in thought; a substantive: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ether is A medium of great elasticity and extreme tenuity, supposed to pervade all space, the interior of solid bodies not excepted, and to be the medium of transmission of light and heat; hence often called luminiferous ether: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
climate is one of thirty regions or zones, parallel to the equator, into which the surface of the earth from the equator to the pole was divided, according to the successive increase of the length of the midsummer day: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
muscle is an organ which, by its contraction, produces motion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is plant? plant is an oyster which has been bedded, in distinction from one of natural growth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
embryo is the first rudiments of an organism, whether animal or plant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
poetry is the art of apprehending and interpreting ideas by the faculty of imagination; the art of idealizing in thought and in expression: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
вероятность — это отношение числа случаев, благоприятствующих событию, к полному числу случаев, допускающих и исключающих ожидаемое событие: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вероятность, в математике».
сила — это источник, начало, основная (неведомая) причина всякого действия, движенья, стремленья, понужденья, всякой вещественой перемены в пространстве: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое модель? модель — это подобие какого-либо предмета, сделанное из дерева, пробки, картона, воску, глины, металла или другого вещества, воспроизводящее этот предмет с точностью, но в уменьшенном виде: ЭСБЕ, статья «Модель, понятие».
алгебра — это наука счисления буквами и другими условными знаками, взамен цыфр, которые вставляются только при окончательном выводе; буквосчисление, общая арифметика: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
аргумент — это основание доказательства или ту часть доказательства и решения, на которой основывается действительность или истина предложения, то есть часть, в которой заключается главная доказательная сила: ЭСБЕ, статья «Аргумент».
поток — это одна из наиболее распространенных форм поверхностного залегания новейших изверженных горных пород: ЭСБЕ, статья «Поток».
что такое жизнь? жизнь — это такой способ существования, в котором множественность частей и различие форм данного целого связываются целесообразно известным единством, находящимся в самом этом целом, а не полагаемым извне: ЭСБЕ, статья «Жизнь, в философии».
индикатор — это указатель хода или действия машины: ЭСБЕ, статья «Индикатор, в технике».
орбита — это путь небесного светила в пространстве: ЭСБЕ, статья «Орбита, в астрономии».
душа — это бессмертное духовное существо, одаренное разумом и волею; в общем знач. человек, с духом и телом; в более тесном: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое точка? точка — это значок от укола, от приткнутия к чему острием, кончиком пера, карандаша; мелкая крапина: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
определение — это такая часть предложения, которая содержит в себе указания качества или свойства предмета, имя которого выражено в предложении существительным: ЭСБЕ, статья «Определение, в грамматике».
фантазия — это деятельность воображения, отличающаяся наибольшею отрешенностью от условий действительности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Фантазия».
слово — это исключительная способность человека выражать гласно мысли и чувства свои; дар говорить, сообщаться разумно сочетаемыми звуками; словесная речь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое сердце? сердце — это мускулистое, ритмически сокращающееся расширение сосудистой системы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Сердце».
земля — это планета, один из миров или несамосветлых шаров, коловращающихся вокруг солнца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
маятник — это тяжелое тело, совершающее колебания около неподвижной точки: ЭСБЕ, статья «Маятник».
звезда — это небесное тело, светящееся собственным светом и представляющееся земным наблюдателям светлой точкой: ЭСБЕ, статья «Звезда, небесное тело».
радуга — это всем известное оптическое явление в атмосфере; наблюдается, когда солнце освещает пелену падающего дождя и наблюдатель находится между солнцем и дождем: ЭСБЕ, статья «Радуга».
что такое радиус? радиус — это полупоперечник круга, полуось шара, луч, нога, которою круг очерчен; черта или мера от остья (средоточия, центра) до обода: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
музыка — это мусикия, искусство стройного и согласного сочетания звуков, как последовательных (мелодия, напев, голос), так и совместных (гармония, соглас, созвучье); равно искусство это в действии: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is quotient? quotient is the number resulting from the division of one number by another, and showing how often a less number is contained in a greater; thus, the quotient of twelve divided by four is three: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
cube is A regular solid body, with six equal square sides: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
периметр — это полная длина какой-либо замкнутой кривой линии: ЭСБЕ, статья «Периметр».
group is A variously limited assemblage of animals or planta, having some resemblance, or common characteristics in form or structure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is force? force is any action between two bodies which changes, or tends to change, their relative condition as to rest or motion; or, more generally, which changes, or tends to change, any physical relation between them, whether mechanical, thermal, chemical, electrical, magnetic, or of any other kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is perception? perception is the act of perceiving; cognizance by the senses or intellect; apperhension by the bodily organs, or by the mind, of what is presented to them; discernment; apperhension; cognition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
experiment is atrial or special observation, made to confirm or disprove something doubtful: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
nature is the existing system of things; the world of matter, or of matter and mind; the creation; the universe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
analogy is A relation or correspondence in function, between organs or parts which are decidedly different: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
operator is the symbol that expresses the operation to be performed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
resolution is the act or process of solving; solution: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is emotion? emotion is A moving of the mind or soul; excitement of the feelings, whether pleasing or painful; disturbance or agitation of mind caused by a specific exciting cause and manifested by some sensible effect on the body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
extraction is the act of extracting, or drawing out: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
discipline is the treatment suited to a disciple or learner; education; development of the faculties by instruction and exercise; training, whether physical, mental, or moral: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
constraint is the act of constraining, or the state of being constrained; that which compels to, or restrains from, action; compulsion; restraint; necessity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is duration? duration is the state or quality of lasting; continuance in time; the portion of time during which anything exists: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is capacity? capacity is the power of receiving or containing; extent of room or space; passive power: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is judgment? judgment is the act of judging; the operation of the mind, involving comparison and discrimination, by which a knowledge of the values and relations of thins, whether of moral qualities, intellectual concepts, logical propositions, or material facts, is obtained: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
syllogism is the regular logical form of every argument, consisting of three propositions, of which the first two are called the premises, and the last, the conclusion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
species is visible or sensible presentation; appearance; a sensible percept received by the imagination; an image: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
weight is A counterpoise: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is compound? compound is A union of two or more ingredients in definite proportions by weight, so combined as to form a distinct substance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ratio is the relation which one quantity or magnitude has to another of the same kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
circle is A plane figure, bounded by a single curve line called its circumference, every part of which is equally distant from a point within it, called the center: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
certainty is the quality, state, or condition, of being certain: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is structure? structure is the act of building; the practice of erecting buildings; construction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is paradox? paradox is A tenet or proposition contrary to received opinion; an assertion or sentiment seemingly contradictory, or opposed to common sense; that which in appearance or terms is absurd, but yet may be true in fact: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pendulum is A body so suspended from a fixed point as to swing freely to and fro by the alternate action of gravity and momentum: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
river is A large stream of water flowing in a bed or channel and emptying into the ocean, a sea, a lake, or another stream; a stream larger than a rivulet or brook: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
bone is the hard, calcified tissue of the skeleton of vertebrate animals, consisting very largely of calcic carbonate, calcic phosphate, and gelatine: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
root is the underground portion of a plant, whether a true root or a tuber, a bulb or rootstock: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is fossil? fossil is A substance dug from the earth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
rhythm is in the widest sense, a dividing into short portions by a regular succession of motions, impulses, sounds, accents, etc., producing an agreeable effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
симметрия — это соразмер, соразмерность, равноподобие (или разноподобие), равномерие, равнообразие, соответствие, сходность; одинаковость, либо соразмерное подобие расположения частей целого, двух половин; сообразие, сообразность; противоравенство, противоподобие: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
масса — это вещество, тело, материя: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
гипотеза — это ипотеза, предположение, догадка, умозрительное положение: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое классификация? классификация — это весьма важный логический прием, которым пользуются при изучении предмета и который основан на логическом делении понятий: ЭСБЕ, статья «Классификация, логический прием».
интуиция — это непосредственное усмотрение чего-либо в качестве истинного, целесообразного, нравственно доброго или прекрасного: ЭСБЕ, статья «Интуиция».
самонаблюдение — это направление внимания на собственные психические процессы, на деятельность нашего мышления, на наши чувствования и волевые импульсы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Самонаблюдение».
здоровье — это состояние животного тела (или растения), когда все жизненные отправления идут в полном порядке; отсутствие недуга, болезни: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое инерция? инерция — это свойство материи, состоящее в стремлении каждой точки материального тела сохранять без изменения величину и направление своей скорости: ЭСБЕ, статья «Инерция».
патология — это наука о болезнях, свойстве, причинах и признаках их. патологический, патологичный, к сему относящ: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
воля — это данный человеку произвол действия; свобода, простор в поступках; отсутствие неволи, насилования, принуждения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
линия — это черта; порядок, строй или ряд: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое индукция? индукция — это слово «индукция» употребляется в физике для обозначения явлений возбуждения в телах магнитного или электрического состояния, а также возникновения в них электрических токов — под влиянием других тел, находящихся на расстоянии от первых и представляющих собой намагниченные или наэлектризованные тела или, наконец, проводники: ЭСБЕ, статья «Индукция, в физике».
сон — это состояние спящего; отдых тела, в забытьи чувств; противоп. бдение, бодрость, явь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
имя — это названье, наименованье, слово, которым зовут, означают о́собь, личность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
дыхание — это ряд беспрерывно чередующихся во время жизни движений грудной клетки в форме вдоха и выдоха и обусловливающих, с одной стороны, прилив свежого воздуха в легкие, а с другой — выведение из них уже испорченного жизненным обменом воздуха: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дыхание».
металл — это крушец; а в малом виде, в выплавке: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое рычаг? рычаг — это одна из так называемых простых машин: ЭСБЕ, статья «Рычаг».
планета — это небесное темное тело, земля, один из земных шаров вселенной, обтекающих солнце: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
молния — это электрический разряд между двумя облаками, или между частями одного и того же облака, или между облаком и землею: ЭСБЕ, статья «Молния».
хорда — это отрезок прямой, ограниченный точками, лежащими на данной кривой или на данной поверхности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Хорда, в геометрии».
что такое поэзия? поэзия — это изящество в письменности; все художественное, духовно и нравственно прекрасное, выраженное словами, и притом более мерною речью: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
multiple is A quantity containing another quantity a number of times without a remainder: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is exponent? exponent is A number, letter, or any quantity written on the right hand of and above another quantity, and denoting how many times the latter is repeated as a factor to produce the power indicated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
entropy is A certain property of a body, expressed as a measurable quantity, such that when there is no communication of heat the quantity remains constant, but when heat enters or leaves the body the quantity increases or diminishes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is function? function is the act of executing or performing any duty, office, or calling; per formance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mass is the quantity of matter which a body contains, irrespective of its bulk or volume: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thought is the act of thinking; the exercise of the mind in any of its higher forms; reflection; cogitation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is measurement? measurement is the act or result of measuring; mensuration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is evolution? evolution is the act of unfolding or unrolling: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is composition? composition is the act or art of composing, or forming a whole or integral, by placing together and uniting different things, parts, or ingredients: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
activity is the state or quality of being active; nimbleness; agility; vigorous action or operation; energy; active force: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
extension is the act of extending or the state of being extended; a stretching out; enlargement in breadth or continuation of length; increase; augmentation; expansion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
individual is an independent, or partially independent, zooid of a compound animal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is neurosis? neurosis is A functional nervous affection or disease, that is, a disease of the nerves without any appreciable change of nerve structure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
influence is A flowing in or upon; influx: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
domain is dominion; empire; authority: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ethics is the science of human duty; the body of rules of duty drawn from this science; a particular system of principles and rules concerting duty, whether true or false; rules of practice in respect to a single class of human actions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
causality is the agency of a cause; the action or power of a cause, in producing its effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
definition is an exact enunciation of the constituents which make up the logical essence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is proposition? proposition is the act of setting or placing before; the act of offering: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
life is the potential principle, or force, by which the organs of animals and plants are started and continued in the performance of their several and coöperative functions; the vital force, whether regarded as physical or spiritual: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
light is that agent, force, or action in nature by the operation of which upon the organs of sight, objects are rendered visible or luminous: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reaction is the mutual or reciprocal action of chemical agents upon each other, or the action upon such chemical agents of some form of energy: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is proportion? proportion is the relation or adaptation of one portion to another, or to the whole: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
curve is A line described according to some low, and having no finite portion of it a straight line: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
doubt is A fluctuation of mind arising from defect of knowledge or evidence; uncertainty of judgment or mind; unsettled state of opinion concerning the reality of an event, or the truth of an assertion, etc.; hesitation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
organization is the act of organizing; the act of arranging in a systematic way for use or action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
contradiction is an assertion of the contrary to what has been said or affirmed; denial of the truth of a statement or assertion; contrary declaration; gainsaying: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is magnet? magnet is A bar or mass of steel or iron to which the peculiar properties of the loadstone have been imparted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is ocean? ocean is the whole body of salt water which covers more than three fifths of the surface of the globe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
skin is the external membranous integument of an animal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
leaf is A colored, usually green, expansion growing from the side of a stem or rootstock, in which the sap for the use of the plant is elaborated under the influence of light; one of the parts of a plant which collectively constitute its foliage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
biology is that branch of biology which treats of the electrical phenomena of living organisms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is harmony? harmony is the just adaptation of parts to each other, in any system or combination of things, or in things, or things intended to form a connected whole; such an agreement between the different parts of a design or composition as to produce unity of effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое группа? группа — это чета, купа, кучка; связь, сноп, цепь; грезд, грезно; кружок, толпа: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
теплота — это причину, вызывающую в нас специфические, всем известные тепловые ощущения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Теплота».
теория — это умозрение, умозаключение; заключение, вывод из чего-либо, не по явленью на деле, а по выводам своим; противоположное дело, на деле, опыт, практика: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
логика — это наука здравомыслия, наука правильно рассуждать; умословие: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое монизм? монизм — это собой философское направление, признающее только один принцип бытия: ЭСБЕ, статья «Монизм».
аппарат — это совокупность приборов и приспособлений, служащих для выполнения какой-нибудь работы, сооружения или для применения науки к практическим целям: ЭСБЕ, статья «Аппарат».
монада — это единица, как начало исхода счета, силы ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
качество — это свойство или принадлежность, все что составляет сущность лица или вещи: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое построение? построение — это графическое изображение какой-либо кривой, фигуры или тела; графическое решение уравнений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Построение».
свет — это состоянье, противное тьме, темноте, мраку, потемкам, что дает способ видеть; иные свет принимают за сотрясение малейших частиц вещества, другие — за особое, тончайшее вещество, разливаемое всюду солнцем и огнем: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
угол — это перелом, излом, колено, локоть, выступ или залом (впадина) об одной грани: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
дедукция — это термин современной логики, обозначающий выведение одной мысли из другой, делаемое на основании логических законов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дедукция».
что такое характер? характер — это нрав человека, нравственные свойства, качества его, свойства души и сердца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
грамматика — это изображение или описание строения известного языка во всех (или только главнейших) его особенностях: ЭСБЕ, статья «Грамматика».
пища — это все, что служит для питанья, что питает; снедь, яство, еда, все седомое, брашно, харч, харчи, корм, сыть, выть, все питательное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
золото — это самый дорогой крушец (металл), находимый в самородном виде, то есть не в руде: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
колесо — это плоский круг, обращающийся на оси: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое комета? комета — это небесное тело, сравнительно с прочими, огромной величины, но редкое или жидкое, сквозящее; иногда в ней заметно ядро, а окружная среда образует как бы хвост, бороду или космы; звезда с хвостом, косматая: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
единица — это один, первый по счету: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
парабола — это иносказание, притча: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
ритм — это мера, в музыке или в поэзии; мерное ударение, протяжка голосом, распев: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
factor is one of the elements or quantities which, when multiplied together, from a product: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
triangle is A figure bounded by three lines, and containing three angles: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
consciousness is the state of being conscious; knowledge of one's own existence, condition, sensations, mental operations, acts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
limit is A determining feature; a distinguishing characteristic a differentia: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
temperature is constitution; state; degree of any quality: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thinking is the act of thinking; mode of thinking; imagination; cogitation; judgment: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
theory is A doctrine, or scheme of things, which terminates in speculation or contemplation, without a view to practice; hypothesis; speculation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
philosophy is literally, the love of, including the search after, wisdom; in actual usage, the knowledge of phenomena as explained by, and resolved into, causes and reasons, powers and laws: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
construction is the process or art of constructing; the act of building; erection; the act of devising and forming; fabrication; composition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is classification? classification is the act of forming into a class or classes; a distibution into groups: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mechanism is the arrangement or relation of the parts of a machine; the parts of a machine, taken collectively; the arrangement or relation of the parts of anything as adapted to produce an effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pleasure is the gratification of the senses or of the mind; agreeable sensations or emotions; the excitement, relish, or happiness produced by the expectation or the enjoyment of something good, delightful, or satisfying: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reduction is the act or process of reducing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is intelligence? intelligence is the act or state of knowing; the exercise of the understanding: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
environment is act of environing; state of being environed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
hypnosis is supervention of sleep: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
death is the cessation of all vital phenomena without capability of resuscitation, either in animals or plants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
concept is an abstract general conception; a notion; a universal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
quality is the condition of being of such and such a sort as distinguished from others; nature or character relatively considered: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is growth? growth is the process of growing; the gradual increase of an animal or a vegetable body; the development from a seed, germ, or root, to full size or maturity; increase in size, number, frequency, strength, etc.; augmentation; advancement; production; prevalence or influence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
frequency is the condition of returning frequently; occurrence often repeated; common occurence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
hydrogen is A gaseous element, colorless, tasteless, and odorless, the lightest known substance, being fourteen and a half times lighter than air (hence its use in filling balloons), and over eleven thousand times lighter than water: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fraction is one or more aliquot parts of a unit or whole number; an expression for a definite portion of a unit or magnitude: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is surface? surface is the exterior part of anything that has length and breadth; one of the limits that bound a solid: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
belief is assent to a proposition or affirmation, or the acceptance of a fact, opinion, or assertion as real or true, without immediate personal knowledge; reliance upon word or testimony; partial or full assurance without positive knowledge or absolute certainty; persuasion; conviction; confidence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lever is A rigid piece which is capable of turning about one point, or axis (the fulcrum), and in which are two or more other points where forces are applied: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
negation is the act of denying; assertion of the nonreality or untruthfulness of anything; declaration that something is not, or has not been, or will not be; denial: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thermometer is an instrument for measuring temperature, founded on the principle that changes of temperature in bodies are accompained by proportional changes in their volumes or dimensions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mountain is A large mass of earth and rock, rising above the common level of the earth or adjacent land; earth and rock forming an isolated peak or a ridge; an eminence higher than a hill; a mount: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is eye? eye is A small circular or oval wooden block without sheaves, having a groove around it and a hole through it, used for connecting rigging: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
flower is that part of a plant destined to produce seed, and hence including one or both of the sexual organs; an organ or combination of the organs of reproduction, whether inclosed by a circle of foliar parts or not: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
physiology is the science which treats of the phenomena of living organisms; the study of the processes incidental to, and characteristic of, life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
melody is A sweet or agreeable succession of sounds: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
функция — это обозначенье действий над количествами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое атом? атом — это неделимое; вещество в крайних пределах делимости своей, незримая пылинка, из каких будто бы составлены все тела, всякое вещество, как бы из песчинок: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
аналогия — это сходство, подобие, близость; соотношение двух сходных предметов; выводы из сравнительных заключений: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
архитектура — это искуство располагать, строить и украшать здания; строительное искусство, зодчество: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
парадокс — это мненье странное, на первый взгляд дикое, озадачливое, противное общему: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое базис? базис — это основная линия в сети геодезических треугольников, измеряемых для топографической съемки или для определения фигуры земли: ЭСБЕ, статья «Базис».
норма — это общее правило, коему должно следовать во всех подобных случаях; образец или пример: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
конус — это геометрическое тело, образуемое вращением прямоугольного треугольника около одного из катетов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Конус, геометрическое тело».
практика — это опыт, самое дело, опыт на деле, дело на опыте, в приложении; исполнение или попытка к тому, испытание: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое звук? звук — это все что слышит ухо, что доходит до слуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
круг — это окружность, сомкнутая кривая черта, всюду равно удаленная от средоточия: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
силлогизм — это умозаключение, в котором на основании нескольких суждений с необходимостью выводится новое суждение, называемое заключением: ЭСБЕ, статья «Силлогизм».
темперамент — это природа человека, природное сложение его, сообразное с основными качествами души; главных темпераментов четыре: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое синтаксис? синтаксис — это в европ. грамматике этим термином обозначалась та часть ее, которая рассматривает законы сочетания отдельных слов в целые предложения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Синтаксис».
орган — это орудие, снаряд, средство: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
железо — это залезо, зализо юж. зап. металл, крушец, выплавляемый из руды в виде чугуна, и выковываемый из сего последнего под кричным молотом: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
винт — это шуруп, округлый гвоздь, нарезанный винтом, спиралью, обвоем, который не забивается, а ввертывается, ввинчивается в нарезную же дыру или гнездо, либо прямо, особ. в дерево, а иногда пропускается насквозь в простую дыру, с наверткой на кончик его гайки: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
океан — это окиян, киян; всемирное море; солоногорькие воды, окружающие весь материк земной, сушу, и занимающие более двух третей земной поверхности: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое вес? вес — это тяготение, тягота, тяга, тягость, тяжесть; стремление всех тел падать на землю; сила, влекущая их к средоточью земли; стремление самой земли и прочих планет к средоточью солнца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
гипербола — это кривая линия, которая бы обозначилась на поверхности сахарной головы (конуса), если её рассечь с боку, отвесно вдоль: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
тень — это сень, стень, затинь, застень, юж. зап. холодок; отсутствие прямого, лучистого света, особ. солнечного, перенятого каким-либо предметом, который застеняет, застит, омрачает: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
mean is A quantity having an intermediate value between several others, from which it is derived, and of which it expresses the resultant value; usually, unless otherwise specified, it is the simple average, formed by adding the quantities together and dividing by their number: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
area is any plane surface: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.

invariant is an invariable quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mass is A quantity of matter cohering together so as to make one body, or an aggregation of particles or things which collectively make one body or quantity, usually of considerable size: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thinking is the act of thinking; mode of thinking; imagination; cogitation; judgment: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is psychology? psychology is the science of the human soul: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
phase is A particular appearance or state in a regularly recurring cycle of changes with respect to quantity of illumination or form of enlightened disk: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pattern is anything proposed for imitation; an archetype; an exemplar; that which is to be, or is worthy to be, copied or imitated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
learning is the acquisition of knowledge or skill: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is differentiation? differentiation is the act of differentiating: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
neurosis is A functional nervous affection or disease, that is, a disease of the nerves without any appreciable change of nerve structure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intuition is A looking after; a regard to: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
organism is an organized being; a living body, either vegetable or animal, compozed of different organs or parts with functions which are separate, but mutually dependent, and essential to the life of the individual: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is separation? separation is the act of separating, or the state of being separated, or separate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
selection is the act of selecting, or the state of being selected; choice, by preference: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is syllogism? syllogism is the regular logical form of every argument, consisting of three propositions, of which the first two are called the premises, and the last, the conclusion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
growth is the process of growing; the gradual increase of an animal or a vegetable body; the development from a seed, germ, or root, to full size or maturity; increase in size, number, frequency, strength, etc.; augmentation; advancement; production; prevalence or influence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
magnetism is the property, quality, or state, of being magnetic; the manifestation of the force in nature which is seen in a magnet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
equilibrium is equality of weight or force; an equipoise or a state of rest produced by the mutual counteraction of two or more forces: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is point? point is that which pricks or pierces; the sharp end of anything: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
chance is A supposed material or psychical agent or mode of activity other than a force, law, or purpose; fortune; fate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
organization is the act of organizing; the act of arranging in a systematic way for use or action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is conjunction? conjunction is the act of conjoining, or the state of being conjoined, united, or associated; union; association; league: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
telescope is an optical instrument used in viewing distant objects: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
blood is the fluid which circulates in the principal vascular system of animals, carrying nourishment to all parts of the body, and bringing away waste products to be excreted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is medicine? medicine is the science which relates to the prevention, cure, or alleviation of disease: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
biology is that branch of biology which treats of the electrical phenomena of living organisms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
color is A property depending on the relations of light to the eye, by which individual and specific differences in the hues and tints of objects are apprehended in vision: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое интеграл? интеграл — это конечная, измеримая величина, в отношении к бесконечно малой части её, к дифференциалу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
память — это способность помнить, не забывать прошлого; свойство души хранить, помнить сознание о былом: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
интеграция — это явление в языке, заключающееся в том, что составные морфологические части известного слова (корень, суффикс, префикс) уже не обособляются в нашем сознании, как отдельные части слова, и все слово (или его часть), хотя бы и разложимое путем научного анализа на свои составные части: ЭСБЕ, статья «Интеграция».
аргумент — это причина, доказательство, убеждение, довод: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое аппарат? аппарат — это совокупность приборов и приспособлений, служащих для выполнения какой-нибудь работы, сооружения или для применения науки к практическим целям: ЭСБЕ, статья «Аппарат».
экология — это часть зоологии, обнимающая собой сведения касательно жилищ животных: ЭСБЕ, статья «Экология».
метафизика — это умозрительное учение о первоначальных основах всякого бытия или о сущности мира: ЭСБЕ, статья «Метафизика».
понятие — это логический термин, обозначающий известную ступень в развитии интеллектуальной деятельности человека: ЭСБЕ, статья «Понятие».
что такое мера? мера — это способ определенья количества по принятой единице; мера вообще прилагается к протяженью и к пространству, а отвлеченно, вообще предел, ино пора, срок: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
индукция — это слово «индукция» употребляется в физике для обозначения явлений возбуждения в телах магнитного или электрического состояния, а также возникновения в них электрических токов — под влиянием других тел, находящихся на расстоянии от первых и представляющих собой намагниченные или наэлектризованные тела или, наконец, проводники: ЭСБЕ, статья «Индукция, в физике».
вера — это уверенность, убеждение, твердое сознание, понятие о чем-либо, особенно о предметах высших, невещественных, духовных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое голос? голос — это тоны, произвольно или непроизвольно издаваемые животными организмами при прохождении более или менее сильной струи воздуха через гортань: ЭСБЕ, статья «Голос, в физиологическом смысле».
лечение — это совокупность всех действий, предпринимаемых для улучшения состояния больного: ЭСБЕ, статья «Лечение».
магнит — это тело, способное притягивать железо и некоторые другие металлы и вещества, или, общнее, тело, создающее в окружающем его пространстве магнитное поле: ЭСБЕ, статья «Магнит».
звезда — это одно из светящих (самосветных) небесных тел, видимых в безоблачную ночь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое единица? единица — это один, первый по счету: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
координаты — это величины, определяющие положение точки: ЭСБЕ, статья «Координаты, в математике».
призма — это часть прозрачного для света вещества, ограниченную двумя непараллельными плоскостями: ЭСБЕ, статья «Призма».
what is discriminant? discriminant is the eliminant of the n partial differentials of any homogenous function of n variables: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
граф — это наследственное дворянское достоинство, местами и доныне владетельское, но у нас только почетное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is group? group is A cluster, crowd, or throng; an assemblage, either of persons or things, collected without any regular form or arrangement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
temperature is condition with respect to heat or cold, especially as indicated by the sensation produced, or by the thermometer or pyrometer; degree of heat or cold: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is language? language is any means of conveying or communicating ideas: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
context is the part or parts of something written or printed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
formula is A prescribed or set form; an established rule; a fixed or conventional method in which anything is to be done, arranged, or said: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
physics is the science of nature, or of natural objects; that branch of science which treats of the laws and properties of matter, and the forces acting upon it: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is prediction? prediction is the act of foretelling: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
emotion is A moving of the mind or soul; excitement of the feelings, whether pleasing or painful; disturbance or agitation of mind caused by a specific exciting cause and manifested by some sensible effect on the body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reduction is the act of reducing, or state of being reduced; conversion to a given state or condition; diminution; conquest: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
observation is the act or the faculty of observing or taking notice; the act of seeing, or of fixing the mind upon, anything: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is transformation? transformation is the act of transforming, or the state of being transformed; change of form or condition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
signal is A sign made for the purpose of giving notice to a person of some occurence, command, or danger: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is abstraction? abstraction is the act of abstracting, separating, or withdrawing, or the state of being withdrawn; withdrawal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
proposition is A complete sentence, or part of a sentence consisting of a subject and predicate united by a copula; a thought expressed or propounded in language; a from of speech in which a predicate is affirmed or denied of a subject: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
motion is the act, process, or state of changing place or position; movement; the passing of a body from one place or position to another, whether voluntary or involuntary: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
current is A flowing or passing; onward motion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is thermodynamics? thermodynamics is the science which treats of the mechanical action or relations of heat: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
line is that which has length, but not breadth or thickness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
certainty is the quality, state, or condition, of being certain: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lever is A rigid piece which is capable of turning about one point, or axis (the fulcrum), and in which are two or more other points where forces are applied: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
disjunction is the act of disjoining; disunion; separation; a parting: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
telegraph is an apparatus, or a process, for communicating intelligence rapidly between distant points, especially by means of preconcerted visible or audible signals representing words or ideas, or by means of words and signs, transmitted by electrical action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is heart? heart is A hollow, muscular organ, which, by contracting rhythmically, keeps up the circulation of the blood: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
plant is an oyster which has been bedded, in distinction from one of natural growth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
physiology is the science which treats of the phenomena of living organisms; the study of the processes incidental to, and characteristic of, life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is shadow? shadow is shade within defined limits; obscurity or deprivation of light, apparent on a surface, and representing the form of the body which intercepts the rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
аксиома — это очевидность, ясная по себе и бесспорная истина, не требующая доказательств: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
язык — это у позвоночных представляет собой непарный выступ нижней поверхности ротовой полости: ЭСБЕ, статья «Язык, в анатомии».
принцип — это научное или нравственное начало, основание, правило, основа, от которой не отступают: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое интуиция? интуиция — это непосредственное усмотрение чего-либо в качестве истинного, целесообразного, нравственно доброго или прекрасного: ЭСБЕ, статья «Интуиция».
базис — это основная линия в сети геодезических треугольников, измеряемых для топографической съемки или для определения фигуры земли: ЭСБЕ, статья «Базис».
этимология — это грамматический термин (от греч. ἔτυμος — истинный, верный и λογία — учение, наука), имеющий два значения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Этимология».
метод — это и метода ж. способ, порядок, основания; принятый путь для хода, достижения чего-либо, в виде общих правил: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое суждение? суждение — это связь (синтез), в которую сознание ставит свои элементы (представления, понятия) с целью объективного познания: ЭСБЕ, статья «Суждение».
точка — это значок от укола, от приткнутия к чему острием, кончиком пера, карандаша; мелкая крапина: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
дедукция — это термин современной логики, обозначающий выведение одной мысли из другой, делаемое на основании логических законов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дедукция».
что такое скептицизм? скептицизм — это одно из основных философских направлений, противоположное догматической философии и отрицающее возможность построения философской системы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Скептицизм».
слух — это одно из пяти чувств, коим распознаются звуки; орудие его ухо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
воздух — это невидимая, газообразная оболочка земли; присутствием своим обусловливает животную и растительную жизнь, изменения погоды, распространение звука, выветривание горных пород и т. д: ЭСБЕ, статья «Воздух».
ион — это лад, толк, смысл, пригодность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое планета? планета — это небесное темное тело, земля, один из земных шаров вселенной, обтекающих солнце: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
вес — это тяготение, тягота, тяга, тягость, тяжесть; стремление всех тел падать на землю; сила, влекущая их к средоточью земли; стремление самой земли и прочих планет к средоточью солнца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
ряд — это вереница, строй, предметы по одной черте, по порядку, чередом: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
история — это слово, принятое от древних почти во все европейских языки, вообще в знач. того, что было или есть, в противоположность сказке, басне; в тесном знач. бытописание, дееписание, бытословие, деи, описание происшествий, повесть о событиях, о быте и жизни народов: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
rotation is the act of turning: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
коэффициент — это постоянное количество, показывающее сколько раз некоторая буква или целое алгебраическое выражение должно быть взято слагаемым: ЭСБЕ, статья «Коэффициент, в алгебре».
function is the appropriate action of any special organ or part of an animal or vegetable organism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is heat? heat is A force in nature which is recognized in various effects, but especially in the phenomena of fusion and evaporation, and which: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
number is the measure of the relation between quantities or things of the same kind; that abstract species of quantity which is capable of being expressed by figures; numerical value: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
analysis is A resolution of anything, whether an object of the senses or of the intellect, into its constituent or original elements; an examination of the component parts of a subject, each separately: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
algebra is that branch of mathematics which treats of the relations and properties of quantity by means of letters and other symbols: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is association? association is the act of associating, or state of being associated; union; connection, whether of persons of things: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
regression is the act of passing back or returning; retrogression; retrogradation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
individual is A single person, animal, or thing of any kind; a thing or being incapable of separation or division, without losing its identity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
animal is an organized living being endowed with sensation and the power of voluntary motion, and also characterized by taking its food into an internal cavity or stomach for digestion; by giving carbonic acid to the air and taking oxygen in the process of respiration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is process? process is the act of proceeding; continued forward movement; procedure; progress; advance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
unity is the state of being one; oneness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
strategy is the science of military command, or the science of projecting campaigns and directing great military movements; generalship: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
judgment is that act of the mind by which two notions or ideas which are apprehended as distinct are compared for the purpose of ascertaining their agreement or disagreement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
quality is the condition of being of such and such a sort as distinguished from others; nature or character relatively considered: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
acceleration is the act of accelerating, or the state of being accelerated; increase of motion or action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is potential? potential is anything that may be possible; a possibility; potentially: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
measure is A number which is contained in a given number a number of times without a remainder: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
angle is the inclosed space near the point where two lines; a corner; a nook: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
doubt is A fluctuation of mind arising from defect of knowledge or evidence; uncertainty of judgment or mind; unsettled state of opinion concerning the reality of an event, or the truth of an assertion, etc.; hesitation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is wheel? wheel is the wheel in a clock which regulates the number of strokes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
implication is the act of implicating, or the state of being implicated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is photography? photography is the science which relates to the action of light on sensitive bodies in the production of pictures, the fixation of images, and the like: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lung is an organ for aërial respiration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
root is the underground portion of a plant, whether a true root or a tuber, a bulb or rootstock: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is anatomy? anatomy is the art of dissecting, or artificially separating the different parts of any organized body, to discover their situation, structure, and economy; dissection: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mirror is A looking-glass or a speculum; any glass or polished substance that forms images by the reflection of rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
закон — это предел, постановленный свободе воли или действий; неминучее начало, основание; правило, постановление высшей власти: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
знак — это признак, примета, отличие; предзнаменование; предвестие; чувственое доказательство, свидетельство; чувственое изъявление, обнаружение чего-либо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое алгебра? алгебра — это наука о числах и через посредство чисел — о величинах вообще: ЭСБЕ, статья «Алгебра».
монизм — это собой философское направление, признающее только один принцип бытия: ЭСБЕ, статья «Монизм».
момент — это миг, мгновение, минт: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
агент — это лицо, которому поручено дело от лица же, общины, товарищества или от правительства; нисшая степень поверенного одного государства при другом; частное доверенное лицо по делам, уполномоченный, делец, ходатай, ходок, старатель, стряпчий, поверенный, прикащик: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое механика? механика — это наука о движении: ЭСБЕ, статья «Механика».
разум — это духовная сила, могущая помнить (постигать, познавать), сулить (соображать, применять, сравнивать) и заключать (решать, выводить следствие); способность верного, последовательного сцепления мыслей, от причины, следствий её и до цели, конца, особенно в приложении к делу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
линия — это граница поверхности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Линия».
силлогизм — это умствование, рассуждение, из трех предложений: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
догматизм — это философский термин, обозначающий определенное отношение к содержанию системы, а не самую систему: ЭСБЕ, статья «Догматизм».
глаз — это орган зрения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Глаз».
вода — это стихийная жидкость, ниспадающая в виде дождя и снега, образующая на земле родники, ручьи, реки и озера, а в смеси с солями, — моря: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое маятник? маятник — это тяжелое тело, совершающее колебания около неподвижной точки: ЭСБЕ, статья «Маятник».
комета — это небесное тело, сравнительно с прочими, огромной величины, но редкое или жидкое, сквозящее; иногда в ней заметно ядро, а окружная среда образует как бы хвост, бороду или космы; звезда с хвостом, косматая: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
длина — это протяжение вдоль, долина; пск. долица, должина, твр. пск. длинь, прм. доль; за длину пространства, тела или вещи обычно берется направление наибольшего протяжения его; длина, ширина и вышина, или мера по уровню вдоль и поперек и мера по отвесу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
прогрессия — это лествица; ряд чисел, из которых каждое на столько же или во столько же раз более или менее предыдущего; первая прогрессия арифметическая, вторая геометрическая: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое религия? религия — это вера, духовная вера, исповедание, богопочитание, или основные духовные убеждения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
coefficient is that which unites in action with something else to produce the same effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
периметр — это полная длина какой-либо замкнутой кривой линии: ЭСБЕ, статья «Периметр».
limit is that which terminates, circumscribes, restrains, or confines; the bound, border, or edge; the utmost extent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
work is artificial and ornamental rockwork in imitation of a grotto: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
algorithm is the art of calculating by nine figures and zero: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
comparison is the act of comparing; an examination of two or more objects with the view of discovering the resemblances or differences; relative estimate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is science? science is knowledge; knowledge of principles and causes; ascertained truth of facts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
elimination is act of causing a quantity to disappear from an equation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
resolution is the act, operation, or process of resolving: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pleasure is the gratification of the senses or of the mind; agreeable sensations or emotions; the excitement, relish, or happiness produced by the expectation or the enjoyment of something good, delightful, or satisfying: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is basis? basis is the foundation of anything; that on which a thing rests: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
purpose is A counter or opposing purpose: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
circuit is the act of moving or revolving around, or as in a circle or orbit; a revolution: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is suggestion? suggestion is the act of suggesting; presentation of an idea: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
definition is the act of defining; determination of the limits: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
substance is that which underlies all outward manifestations; substratum; the permanent subject or cause of phenomena, whether material or spiritual; that in which properties inhere; that which is real, in distinction from that which is apparent; the abiding part of any existence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is momentum? momentum is the quantity of motion in a moving body, being always proportioned to the quantity of matter multiplied into the velocity; impetus: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
resistance is the quality of not yielding to force or external pressure; that power of a body which acts in opposition to the impulse or pressure of another, or which prevents the effect of another power: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
unit is A single thing or person: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
circle is an instrument of observation, the graduated limb of which consists of an entire circle: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is belief? belief is assent to a proposition or affirmation, or the acceptance of a fact, opinion, or assertion as real or true, without immediate personal knowledge; reliance upon word or testimony; partial or full assurance without positive knowledge or absolute certainty; persuasion; conviction; confidence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
code is A body of law, sanctioned by legislation, in which the rules of law to be specifically applied by the courts are set forth in systematic form; a compilation of laws by public authority; a digest: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
planet is A celestial body which revolves about the sun in an orbit of a moderate degree of eccentricity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
calendar is an orderly arrangement of the division of time, adapted to the purposes of civil life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
muscle is an organ which, by its contraction, produces motion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
leaf is A colored, usually green, expansion growing from the side of a stem or rootstock, in which the sap for the use of the plant is elaborated under the influence of light; one of the parts of a plant which collectively constitute its foliage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
botany is the science which treats of the structure of plants, the functions of their parts, their places of growth, their classification, and the terms which are employed in their description and denomination: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lens is A piece of glass, or other transparent substance, ground with two opposite regular surfaces, either both curved, or one curved and the other plane, and commonly used, either singly or combined, in optical instruments, for changing the direction of rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
причина — это требуемое логически условие всего бывающего, или то, без чего, по предположению нашего разума, данный факт не может произойти, а при наличности чего он происходит с необходимостью: ЭСБЕ, статья «Причина».
что такое система? система — это план, порядок расположения частей целого, предначертанное устройство, ход чего-либо, в последовательном, связном порядке: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
классификация — это весьма важный логический прием, которым пользуются при изучении предмета и который основан на логическом делении понятий: ЭСБЕ, статья «Классификация, логический прием».
парадокс — это мнение, расходящееся с общепринятым: ЭСБЕ, статья «Парадокс».
онтология — это учение о сущем; в особенности так обозначается основная, формальная часть философии в системе Христиана Вольфа, который, следуя Аристотелю, называет ее также «первой философией»: ЭСБЕ, статья «Онтология».
что такое арифметика? арифметика — это учение о счете, наука о счислении; основа всей математики (науки о величинах, о измеримом); стар. счетная или цыфирная мудрость; счет, счисление, цыфирная сметка, выкладка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
мысль — это всякое одиночное действие ума, разума, рассудка; представленье чего в уме; идея; сужденье, мненье, соображенье и заключенье, предположенье, выдумка, думка ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
душа — это бессмертное духовное существо, одаренное разумом и волею; в общем знач. человек, с духом и телом; в более тесном: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
угол — это перелом, излом, колено, локоть, выступ или залом (впадина) об одной грани: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое гармония? гармония — это соответствие, созвучье, соразмерность, равновесие, равномерность, равнозвучие, взаимность соотношение, согласие, согласность, соглас, стройность, благостройность; соразмерное отношение частей целого; правильное отношение одновременных или современных звуков, аккорд; самая наука с созвучиях: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
критика — это розыск и суждение о достоинствах и недостатках какого-либо труда, особ. сочинения; разбор, оценка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
ухо — это снаряд или орудие слуха; внутреннее устройство в височной кости, коим человк. и животн. слышат; в нем различают: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое земля? земля — это планета, один из миров или несамосветлых шаров, коловращающихся вокруг солнца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
рычаг — это жердь, шесть, для подъема тяжести, на упорной точке; подъем: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
океан — это окиян, киян; всемирное море; солоногорькие воды, окружающие весь материк земной, сушу, и занимающие более двух третей земной поверхности: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
площадь — это часть поверхности, ограниченная каким-либо замкнутым контуром: ЭСБЕ, статья «Площадь».
что такое пропорция? пропорция — это соразмерность; величина или количество, отвечающее чему-либо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
миф — это происшествие или человек баснословный, небывалый, сказочный; иносказанье в лицах, вошедшее в поверье: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
square is the corner, or angle, of a figure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
entropy is A certain property of a body, expressed as a measurable quantity, such that when there is no communication of heat the quantity remains constant, but when heat enters or leaves the body the quantity increases or diminishes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is integral? integral is A whole; an entire thing; a whole number; an individual: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
atom is an ultimate indivisible particle of matter: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
machine is in general, any combination of bodies so connected that their relative motions are constrained, and by means of which force and motion may be transmitted and modified: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is problem? problem is A question proposed for solution; a matter stated for examination or proof: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
development is the series of changes which animal and vegetable organisms undergo in their passage from the embryonic state to maturity, from a lower to a higher state of organization: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mathematics is that science, or class of sciences, which treats of the exact relations existing between quantities or magnitudes, and of the methods by which, in accordance with these relations, quantities sought are deducible from other quantities known or supposed; the science of spatial and quantitative relations: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
extension is that property of a body by which it occupies a portion of space: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is reasoning? reasoning is the act or process of adducing a reason or reasons; manner of presenting one's reasons: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conversion is the act of interchanging the terms of a proposition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
research is diligent inquiry or examination in seeking facts or principles; laborius or continued search after truth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
constant is A quantity that does not change its value: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
capacity is the power of receiving or containing; extent of room or space; passive power: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
concept is an abstract general conception; a notion; a universal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is essence? essence is the constituent elementary notions which constitute a complex notion, and must be enumerated to define it; sometimes called the nominal essence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
inertia is that property of matter by which it tends when at rest to remain so, and when in motion to continue in motion, and in the same straight line or direction, unless acted on by some external force; - - sometimes called vis inertiæ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conductor is A substance or body capable of being a medium for the transmission of certain forces: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
scale is the sign or constellation Libra: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is curve? curve is A bending without angles; that wcich is bent; a flexure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
evidence is that which makes evident or manifest; that which furnishes, or tends to furnish, proof; any mode of proof; the ground of belief or judgement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
symbol is A visible sign or representation of an idea; anything which suggests an idea or quality, or another thing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is star? star is one of the innumerable luminous bodies seen in the heavens; any heavenly body other than the sun, moon, comets, and nebulæ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
clock is A machine for measuring time, indicating the hour and other divisions by means of hands moving on a dial plate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
bone is the hard, calcified tissue of the skeleton of vertebrate animals, consisting very largely of calcic carbonate, calcic phosphate, and gelatine: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is flower? flower is in the popular sense, the bloom or blossom of a plant; the showy portion, usually of a different color, shape, and texture from the foliage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sociology is that branch of philosophy which treats of the constitution, phenomena, and development of human society; social science: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
prism is A solid whose bases or ends are any similar, equal, and parallel plane figures, and whose sides are parallelograms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое материя? материя — это то, из чего состоит и из чего происходит данный предмет: ЭСБЕ, статья «Материя, материальное начало, материальная причина».
модель — это подобие какого-либо предмета, сделанное из дерева, пробки, картона, воску, глины, металла или другого вещества, воспроизводящее этот предмет с точностью, но в уменьшенном виде: ЭСБЕ, статья «Модель, понятие».
логика — это по мнению одних, наука о доказательстве, по мнению других, наука о законах и формах мышления: ЭСБЕ, статья «Логика».
физика — это наука о природе, о законах и явлениях её: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое тождество? тождество — это равенство, имеющее место при всех значениях букв в него входящих: ЭСБЕ, статья «Тождество, в математике».
аспект — это положение луны или планеты в отношении к солнцу или к другим планетам: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
начало — это чем начинается бытье или действие; один из двух пределов, между коими заключено бытье, вещественное либо духовное; почин, зачин, искон, зачало, источник, корень, рождение, исход; противоп. конец: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
воля — это данный человеку произвол действия; свобода, простор в поступках; отсутствие неволи, насилования, принуждения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое круг? круг — это окружность, сомкнутая кривая черта, всюду равно удаленная от средоточия: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
добро — это философский термин, равнозначащий термину благо, но последний обыкновенно понимается шире: ЭСБЕ, статья «Добро, в философии».
диалектика — это умосложение, логика на деле, в прении, наука правильного рассуждения; по злоупотреблению, искусство убедительного пустословие, ловкого спора, словопрения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое кровь? кровь — это красная, жизненная жидкость, которая обращается в животном теле, в жилах, силою сердца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
камень — это камык, твр. кама ж. общее название всякого твердого ископаемого, кроме чистых металов или крушца, королька: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
колесо — это плоский круг, обращающийся на оси: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
река — это поток водный, проточная по земляному ложу вода, большего объема, чем речка и ручей; речажина пск. речка, реченька, речушка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое квадрат? квадрат — это четырехугольник, все стороны которого равны, а все углы прямые: ЭСБЕ, статья «Квадрат, геометрическая фигура».
процент — это или проценты мн. счет или цифра, означающая доход или плату с сотни; рез, резы, настав (стар.), соста, рост, росты, верхи, вершки, свершки, лихва: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
prime is the first part; the earliest stage; the beginning or opening: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is cube? cube is A regular solid body, with six equal square sides: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
consciousness is the state of being conscious; knowledge of one's own existence, condition, sensations, mental operations, acts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
theorem is A statement of a principle to be demonstrated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
molecule is the smallest part of any substance which possesses the characteristic properties and qualities of that substance, and which can exist alone in a free state: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is control? control is A duplicate book, register, or account, kept to correct or check another account or register; a counter register: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
logic is the science or art of exact reasoning, or of pure and formal thought, or of the laws according to which the processes of pure thinking should be conducted; the science of the formation and application of general notions; the science of generalization, judgment, classification: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
identity is the state or quality of being identical, or the same; sameness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
operator is the symbol that expresses the operation to be performed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is mechanism? mechanism is the arrangement or relation of the parts of a machine; the parts of a machine, taken collectively; the arrangement or relation of the parts of anything as adapted to produce an effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
trust is assured resting of the mind on the integrity, veracity, justice, friendship, or other sound principle, of another person; confidence; reliance; reliance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
defect is want or absence of something necessary for completeness or perfection; deficiency: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
stability is the state or quality of being stable, or firm; steadiness; firmness; strength to stand without being moved or overthrown: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is correlation? correlation is reciprocal relation; corresponding similarity or parallelism of relation or law; capacity of being converted into, or of giving place to, one another, under certain conditions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
causality is the agency of a cause; the action or power of a cause, in producing its effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is idea? idea is the transcript, image, or picture of a visible object, that is formed by the mind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
existence is the state of existing or being; actual possession of being; continuance in being: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
gravity is the state of having weight; beaviness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
chemistry is that branch of science which treats of the composition of substances, and of the changes which they undergo in consequence of alterations in the constitution of the molecules, which depend upon variations of the number, kind, or mode of arrangement, of the constituent atoms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is ratio? ratio is the relation which one quantity or magnitude has to another of the same kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
surface is A magnitude that has length and breadth without thickness; superficies: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
demonstration is the act of demonstrating; an exhibition; proof: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
alphabet is the letters of a language arranged in the customary order; the series of letters or signs which form the elements of written language: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
comet is A member of the solar system which usually moves in an elongated orbit, approaching very near to the sun in its perihelion, and receding to a very great distance from it at its aphelion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
climate is one of thirty regions or zones, parallel to the equator, into which the surface of the earth from the equator to the pole was divided, according to the successive increase of the length of the midsummer day: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is skin? skin is the external membranous integument of an animal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
seed is A ripened ovule, consisting of an embryo with one or more integuments, or coverings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
economics is the science of household affairs, or of domestic management: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is spectrum? spectrum is an apparition; a specter: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
время — это длительность бытья; пространство в бытии; последовательность существования; продолжение случаев, событий; дни за днями и века за веками; последовательное течение суток за сутками: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
гипотеза — это предположение, делаемое нами для объяснения явлений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Гипотеза, в науках о природе».
архитектура — это искуство располагать, строить и украшать здания; строительное искусство, зодчество: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое философия? философия — это свободное исследование основных проблем бытия, человеческого познания, деятельности и красоты: ЭСБЕ, статья «Философия».
феноменология — это учение о феноменах, явлениях («φαινόμενον» по-греч. значит все являющееся нашим чувствам, явление): ЭСБЕ, статья «Феноменология».
диагноз — это распознавание и определение болезни на основании замечаемых местных изменений, предполагаемых причин, а также особенно выдающихся явлений ее: ЭСБЕ, статья «Диагноз».
орбита — это круговой путь планеты около солнца; круговина: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое свет? свет — это состоянье, противное тьме, темноте, мраку, потемкам, что дает способ видеть; иные свет принимают за сотрясение малейших частиц вещества, другие — за особое, тончайшее вещество, разливаемое всюду солнцем и огнем: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
корень — это корешек, —шечек, коренек умал. корнишка презрительное, корнища увеличительное, подземная часть всякого растения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
зло — это страдания живых существ и нарушения ими нравственного порядка: ЭСБЕ, статья «Зло».
что такое софизм? софизм — это преднамеренно ложный вывод в противоположность паралогизму: ЭСБЕ, статья «Софизм».
сердце — это грудное черево, принимающее в себя кровь из всего тела, очищающее её чрез легкие и рассылающее обновленную кровь по всем частям, для питания, для обращения её в плоть: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
металл — это крушец; а в малом виде, в выплавке: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
винт — это шуруп, округлый гвоздь, нарезанный винтом, спиралью, обвоем, который не забивается, а ввертывается, ввинчивается в нарезную же дыру или гнездо, либо прямо, особ. в дерево, а иногда пропускается насквозь в простую дыру, с наверткой на кончик его гайки: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое гора? гора — это общее название всякой земной возвышенности, противопол. дол, раздол, долина, лог, низменность; (а плоскость, равнина, отсутствие того и другого): Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
куб — это перегонный сосуд, алембик, снаряд для перегонки жидкостей, особ. винных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
случай — это быть или быль, приключение, происшествие, притча, дело, что сталось, случилось, сбылось; обстоятельство, встреча; все нежданное, не предвиденное, внезапное, нечаянное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is remainder? remainder is anything that remains, or is left, after the separation and removal of a part; residue; remnant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
exponent is A number, letter, or any quantity written on the right hand of and above another quantity, and denoting how many times the latter is repeated as a factor to produce the power indicated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is coherence? coherence is A sticking or cleaving together; union of parts of the same body; cohesion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
axiom is A self-evident and necessary truth, or a proposition whose truth is so evident as first sight that no reasoning or demonstration can make it plainer; a proposition which it is necessary to take for granted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is cell? cell is A very small and close apartment: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
system is an assemblage of parts or organs, either in animal or plant, essential to the performance of some particular function or functions which as a rule are of greater complexity than those manifested by a single organ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
category is one of the highest classes to which the objects of knowledge or thought can be reduced, and by which they can be arranged in a system; an ultimate or undecomposable conception; a predicament: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
principle is any original inherent constituent which characterizes a substance, or gives it its essential properties, and which can usually be separated by analysis: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is activity? activity is the state or quality of being active; nimbleness; agility; vigorous action or operation; energy; active force: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
necessity is the negation of freedom in voluntary action; the subjection of all phenomena, whether material or spiritual, to inevitable causation; necessitarianism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
illustration is the act of illustrating; the act of making clear and distinct; education: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
duality is the quality or condition of being two or twofold; dual character or usage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is understanding? understanding is the act of one who understands a thing, in any sense of the verb; knowledge; discernment; comprehension; interpretation; explanation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
duration is the state or quality of lasting; continuance in time; the portion of time during which anything exists: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
death is the cessation of all vital phenomena without capability of resuscitation, either in animals or plants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
knowledge is the act or state of knowing; clear perception of fact, truth, or duty; certain apprehension; familiar cognizance; cognition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
phenomenon is an appearance; anything visible; whatever, in matter or spirit, is apparent to, or is apprehended by, observation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
gravitation is the act of gravitating: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is element? element is one of the simplest or essential parts or principles of which anything consists, or upon which the constitution or fundamental powers of anything are based: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
proportion is the equality or similarity of ratios, especially of geometrical ratios; or a relation among quantities such that the quotient of the first divided by the second is equal to that of the third divided by the fourth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
plane is A surface, real or imaginary, in which, if any two points are taken, the straight line which joins them lies wholly in that surface; or a surface, any section of which by a like surface is a straight line; a surface without curvature: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
order is an assemblage of genera having certain important characters in common: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is letter? letter is A mark or character used as the representative of a sound, or of an articulation of the human organs of speech; a first element of written language: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
orbit is the path described by a heavenly body in its periodical revolution around another body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is river? river is A large stream of water flowing in a bed or channel and emptying into the ocean, a sea, a lake, or another stream; a stream larger than a rivulet or brook: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
eye is aldebaran, a bright star in the eye of Taurus or the Bull: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
insect is one of the Insecta: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is history? history is A learning or knowing by inquiry; the knowledge of facts and events, so obtained: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
свобода — это своя воля, простор, возможность действовать по-своему; отсутствие стеснения, неволи, рабства, подчинения чужой воле: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
сила — это причина, сообщающая ускорение свободной материальной точке, к которой она приложена: ЭСБЕ, статья «Сила, в механике».
теория — это умозрение, умозаключение; заключение, вывод из чего-либо, не по явленью на деле, а по выводам своим; противоположное дело, на деле, опыт, практика: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое механизм? механизм — это совокупность тел, ограничивающих свободу движения друг друга взаимным сопротивлением настолько, что все точки такой системы способны описывать только вполне определенные кривые (траектории) и при данной скорости одной из точек скорости и ускорения всех остальных точек системы являются вполне определенными: ЭСБЕ, статья «Механизм».
ценность — это представление человека о хозяйственном значении предметов внешнего мира: ЭСБЕ, статья «Ценность».
градиент — это разность в показаниях барометров (приведенных к уровню моря) в двух местах, лежащих по тому направлению, по которому в данный момент упругость воздуха убывает всего быстрее: ЭСБЕ, статья «Градиент».
имманентность — это означ. пребывание в чем-нибудь, внутреннюю связь в противоположность внешней: ЭСБЕ, статья «Имманентность, имманентный».
что такое патология? патология — это отдел медицины, изучающий сущность, причины и симптомы болезней: ЭСБЕ, статья «Патология».
звук — это все что слышит ухо, что доходит до слуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
степень — это ступень, ряд, разряд, порядок, от дел по качеству, достоинству; место и самое собрание однородного, равного во всем, где полагается лествичный порядок, восходящий и нисходящий: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
счастье — это рок, судьба, часть и участь, доля: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
символ — это сокращение, перечень, полная картина, сущность в немногих словах или знаках: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
дыхание — это ряд беспрерывно чередующихся во время жизни движений грудной клетки в форме вдоха и выдоха и обусловливающих, с одной стороны, прилив свежого воздуха в легкие, а с другой — выведение из них уже испорченного жизненным обменом воздуха: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дыхание».
золото — это самый дорогой крушец (металл), находимый в самородном виде, то есть не в руде: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое телеграф? телеграф — это устройство, для подачи условных знаков, маяк: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
климат — это состояние воздуха известной местности, относительно жары и стужи, сухости, сырости, длительности времен года ипр., погодье: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
шар — это геометрическое тело, ограниченное сферической или шаровой поверхностью: ЭСБЕ, статья «Шар, геометрическое тело».
формула — это соединение букв или чисел при помощи знаков различных действий: ЭСБЕ, статья «Формула».
quotient is the number resulting from the division of one number by another, and showing how often a less number is contained in a greater; thus, the quotient of twelve divided by four is three: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
triangle is A figure bounded by three lines, and containing three angles: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reflection is the transference of an excitement from one nerve fiber to another by means of the nerve cells: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
proof is A process for testing the accuracy of an operation performed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
nerve is one of the whitish and elastic bundles of fibers, with the accompanying tissues, which transmit nervous impulses between nerve centers and various parts of the animal body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
model is A miniature representation of a thing, with the several parts in due proportion; sometimes, a facsimile of the same size: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
interpretation is the act or process of applying general principles or formulæ to the explanation of the results obtained in special cases: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is analogy? analogy is A resemblance of relations; an agreement or likeness between things in some circumstances or effects, when the things are otherwise entirely different: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
classification is the act of forming into a class or classes; a distibution into groups: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
syntax is connected system or order; union of things; a number of things jointed together; organism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
taxonomy is that division of the natural sciences which treats of the classification of animals and plants; the laws or principles of classification: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is independence? independence is the state or quality of being independent; freedom from dependence; exemption from reliance on, or control by, others; self- subsistence or maintenance; direction of one's own affairs without interference: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
calculus is any solid concretion, formed in any part of the body, but most frequent in the organs that act as reservoirs, and in the passages connected with them: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ethics is the science of human duty; the body of rules of duty drawn from this science; a particular system of principles and rules concerting duty, whether true or false; rules of practice in respect to a single class of human actions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is event? event is that which comes, arrives, or happens; that which falls out; any incident, good or bad: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reason is A thought or a consideration offered in support of a determination or an opinion; a just ground for a conclusion or an action; that which is offered or accepted as an explanation; the efficient cause of an occurrence or a phenomenon: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
metaphysics is the science of real as distinguished from phenomenal being; ontology: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is pressure? pressure is the act of pressing, or the condition of being pressed; compression; a squeezing; a crushing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
compound is A union of two or more ingredients in definite proportions by weight, so combined as to form a distinct substance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fraction is the act of breaking, or state of being broken, especially by violence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
dimension is the degree of manifoldness of a quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is class? class is A group of individuals ranked together as possessing common characteristics: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sentence is sense; meaning; significance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ether is A medium of great elasticity and extreme tenuity, supposed to pervade all space, the interior of solid bodies not excepted, and to be the medium of transmission of light and heat; hence often called luminiferous ether: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ocean is the whole body of salt water which covers more than three fifths of the surface of the globe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ear is the organ of hearing; the external ear: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is fish? fish is A name loosely applied in popular usage to many animals of diverse characteristics, living in the water: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
art is the employment of means to accomplish some desired end; the adaptation of things in the natural world to the uses of life; the application of knowledge or power to practical purposes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
энергия — это способность данной системы тел, находящихся в данных условиях, совершить некоторое, вполне определенное количество работы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Энергия».
масса — это вещество, тело, материя: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое аналогия? аналогия — это как один из факторов, действующих в истории развития языка, была замечена очень давно, но только в новейшее время ученые лингвисты, занимающиеся тщательным анализом всех вообще действующих тут факторов, изучили влияние аналогии поближе: ЭСБЕ, статья «Аналогия, в лингвистике».
объект — это предмет противоп. субъект или самость: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
математика — это наука о величинах и количествах; все, что можно выразить цифрою, принадлежит математике: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
дифференциация — это термин биологического процесса развития, введенный в науку Гербертом Спенсером: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дифференциация».
что такое индикатор? индикатор — это указатель хода или действия машины: ЭСБЕ, статья «Индикатор, в технике».
построение — это графическое изображение какой-либо кривой, фигуры или тела; графическое решение уравнений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Построение».
вещество — это не первоначальная потенция чувственного бытия, а его ближайший реальный субстрат — то, из чего состоят тела, действительная основа и среда всех ощутимых явлений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вещество, в философии».
идея — это понятие о вещи; умопонятие, представление, воображение предмета; умственное изображение: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
инстинкт — это безотчетное побуждение, по которому действуют животные; побудок сев. побудка вост: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
слово — это исключительная способность человека выражать гласно мысли и чувства свои; дар говорить, сообщаться разумно сочетаемыми звуками; словесная речь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
пища — это все, что служит для питанья, что питает; снедь, яство, еда, все седомое, брашно, харч, харчи, корм, сыть, выть, все питательное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое железо? железо — это в животном организме представляет столь важную составную часть крови: ЭСБЕ, статья «Железо, в медицине».
фотография — это искусство снимать предметы на бумагу посредством света; светопись, солнопись: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
ветер — это движение, течение, теча, ток, поток воздуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
окружность — это кривая линия, все точки которой находятся на одинаковом расстоянии от одной внутренней точки, называемой центром: ЭСБЕ, статья «Окружность».
что такое музыка? музыка — это мусикия, искусство стройного и согласного сочетания звуков, как последовательных (мелодия, напев, голос), так и совместных (гармония, соглас, созвучье); равно искусство это в действии: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
multiple is A quantity containing another quantity a number of times without a remainder: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
area is the superficial contents of any figure; the surface included within any given lines; superficial extent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
freedom is the state of being free; exemption from the power and control of another; liberty; independence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is law? law is in general, a rule of being or of conduct, established by an authority able to enforce its will; a controlling regulation; the mode or order according to which an agent or a power acts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
brain is the whitish mass of soft matter (the center of the nervous system, and the seat of consciousness and volition) which is inclosed in the cartilaginous or bony cranium of vertebrate animals: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
hypothesis is A supposition; a proposition or principle which is supposed or taken for granted, in order to draw a conclusion or inference for proof of the point in question; something not proved, but assumed for the purpose of argument: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is nature? nature is the existing system of things; the world of matter, or of matter and mind; the creation; the universe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
composition is the act or art of composing, or forming a whole or integral, by placing together and uniting different things, parts, or ingredients: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conception is the act of conceiving in the womb; the initiation of an embryonic animal life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
tensor is A muscle that stretches a part, or renders it tense: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is channel? channel is the hollow bed where a stream of water runs or may run: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
preservation is the act or process of preserving, or keeping safe; the state of being preserved, or kept from injury, destruction, or decay; security; safety: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
constraint is the act of constraining, or the state of being constrained; that which compels to, or restrains from, action; compulsion; restraint; necessity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
hypnosis is supervention of sleep: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intensity is the amount or degree of energy with which a force operates or a cause acts; effectiveness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
soul is the spiritual, rational, and immortal part in man; that part of man which enables him to think, and which renders him a subject of moral government: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is ontology? ontology is that department of the science of metaphysics which investigates and explains the nature and essential properties and relations of all beings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
density is the ratio of mass, or quantity of matter, to bulk or volume: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reaction is any action in resisting other action or force; counter tendency; movement in a contrary direction; reverse action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
equation is A making equal; equal division; equality; equilibrium: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is coordinate? coordinate is A thing of the same rank with another thing; one two or more persons or things of equal rank, authority, or importance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
genus is A class of objects divided into several subordinate species; a class more extensive than a species; a precisely defined and exactly divided class; one of the five predicable conceptions, or sorts of terms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
grammar is the science which treats of the principles of language; the study of forms of speech, and their relations to one another; the art concerned with the right use aud application of the rules of a language, in speaking or writing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is pendulum? pendulum is A body so suspended from a fixed point as to swing freely to and fro by the alternate action of gravity and momentum: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mountain is A large mass of earth and rock, rising above the common level of the earth or adjacent land; earth and rock forming an isolated peak or a ridge; an eminence higher than a hill; a mount: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
digestion is the conversion of food, in the stomach and intestines, into soluble and diffusible products, capable of being absorbed by the blood: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
bird is A warm-blooded, feathered vertebrate provided with wings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
music is the science and the art of tones, or musical sounds, i.e., sounds of higher or lower pitch, begotten of uniform and synchronous vibrations: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
вероятность — это отношение числа случаев, благоприятствующих событию, к полному числу случаев, допускающих и исключающих ожидаемое событие: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вероятность, в математике».
что такое теплота? теплота — это причину, вызывающую в нас специфические, всем известные тепловые ощущения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Теплота».
анализ — это разбор, раздробка, разрешение, разложение целого на составные части его; общий вывод из частных заключений; противоп. синтез, синтетический способ, переход от общого к частностям: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
различие — это результат умственного процесса, в котором сопоставляются два или большее количество объектов мысли, причем каждый из этих объектов принимается за самостоятельное целое, отличное от всякого другого или только числом, или же и качественно: ЭСБЕ, статья «Различие».
направление — это правой; если же, при тех же условиях, удаляющаяся точка обходит ось по направлению, противоположному направлению движения часовой стрелки, то винт называется левым: ЭСБЕ, статья «Направление».
что такое дуализм? дуализм — это общее название учений, все сводящих к двум противоположным принципам: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дуализм, в религии и философии».
инерция — это покой, недеятельность тел, без внешнего побуждения; косность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
практика — это опыт, самое дело, опыт на деле, дело на опыте, в приложении; исполнение или попытка к тому, испытание: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
движение — это все явления природы состоят в движении вещества или же объясняются движением: ЭСБЕ, статья «Движение».
что такое идеал? идеал — это представление высшего совершенства в каком-нибудь отношении: ЭСБЕ, статья «Идеал».
представление — это воспроизведенное памятью и вызванное в сознании ощущение: ЭСБЕ, статья «Представление».
имя — это названье, наименованье, слово, которым зовут, означают о́собь, личность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое орган? орган — это орудие, снаряд, средство: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
соль — это пятая нота в порядке, ге: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
телескоп — это большая зрительная труба, на сошке, или укрепленная иным образом, более для астрономических наблюдений; есть телескоп стекольный и есть зеркальный: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
дождь — это вода в каплях или струями из облаков: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое диаметр? диаметр — это прямая линия, проходящая через центр кривой фигуры (круга, эллипса, гиперболы, параболы и др.): ЭСБЕ, статья «Диаметр».
поэзия — это изящество в письменности; все художественное, духовно и нравственно прекрасное, выраженное словами, и притом более мерною речью: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
factor is one of the elements or quantities which, when multiplied together, from a product: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is perimeter? perimeter is the outer boundary of a body or figure, or the sum of all the sides: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
energy is capacity for performing work: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
cause is that which produces or effects a result; that from which anything proceeds, and without which it would not exist: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
memory is the faculty of the mind by which it retains the knowledge of previous thoughts, impressions, or events: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is experiment? experiment is atrial or special observation, made to confirm or disprove something doubtful: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
evolution is the formation of an involute by unwrapping a thread from a curve as an evolute: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
construction is the process or art of constructing; the act of building; erection; the act of devising and forming; fabrication; composition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
explanation is the act of explaining, expounding, or interpreting; the act of clearing from obscurity and making intelligible: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is choice? choice is act of choosing; the voluntary act of selecting or separating from two or more things that which is preferred; the determination of the mind in preferring one thing to another; election: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
computation is the act or process of computing; calculation; reckoning: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
universe is all created things viewed as constituting one system or whole; the whole body of things, or of phenomena; the mundus of the Latins; the world; creation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
domain is dominion; empire; authority: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is personality? personality is that which constitutes distinction of person; individuality: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
inversion is the act of inverting, or turning over or backward, or the state of being inverted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is will? will is A species of goatsucker (Antrostomus Carolinensis), of the southern United States: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
aesthetics is the theory or philosophy of taste; the science of the beautiful in nature and art: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
weight is A counterpoise: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
hydrogen is A gaseous element, colorless, tasteless, and odorless, the lightest known substance, being fourteen and a half times lighter than air (hence its use in filling balloons), and over eleven thousand times lighter than water: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is matrix? matrix is the womb: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
arithmetic is the science of numbers; the art of computation by figures: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
universal is the whole; the general system of the universe; the universe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is noun? noun is A word used as the designation or appellation of a creature or thing, existing in fact or in thought; a substantive: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
magnet is A bar or mass of steel or iron to which the peculiar properties of the loadstone have been imparted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
earthquake is A shaking, trembling, or concussion of the earth, due to subterranean causes, often accompanied by a rumbling noise: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is respiration? respiration is the act of respiring or breathing again, or catching one's breath: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mammal is one of the Mammalia: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
poetry is the art of apprehending and interpreting ideas by the faculty of imagination; the art of idealizing in thought and in expression: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое симметрия? симметрия — это соразмер, соразмерность, равноподобие (или разноподобие), равномерие, равнообразие, соответствие, сходность; одинаковость, либо соразмерное подобие расположения частей целого, двух половин; сообразие, сообразность; противоравенство, противоподобие: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
атом — это неделимое; вещество в крайних пределах делимости своей, незримая пылинка, из каких будто бы составлены все тела, всякое вещество, как бы из песчинок: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
динамика — это греч. слово (δύναμις — сила), введено Лейбницем и служит наименованием учения о движении тел под влиянием сил: ЭСБЕ, статья «Динамика».
критерий — это мерило для оценки истинности суждения или факта: ЭСБЕ, статья «Критерий».
что такое область? область — это великая власть, широкая сила, право и мочь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
жизнь — это жись, жизть, простонародное живот; житье, бытье; состояние особи, существование отдельной личности: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
качество — это одна из важнейших категорий, выражающих собою условие мыслимости предмета: ЭСБЕ, статья «Качество».
синтез — это основное свойство сознания, благодаря коему самые разнообразные состояния сознания получают объединение и становятся состояниями этого определенного «я»: ЭСБЕ, статья «Синтез, в психологии и логике».
что такое давление? давление — это совокупность сил, сплошным образом приложенных к поверхности тела и направленных по нормалям ее внутрь тела: ЭСБЕ, статья «Давление».
дух — это бестелесное существо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
фантазия — это воображенье, изобретательная сила ума; творческая сила художника, самобытная сила созиданья: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое грамматика? грамматика — это изображение или описание строения известного языка во всех (или только главнейших) его особенностях: ЭСБЕ, статья «Грамматика».
вид — это одинаково употребляемый в зоологии и в ботанике для обозначения различных форм растительных и животных организмов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вид, в биологии».
газ — это воздушная жидкость, тело или вещество, в виде воздуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
барометр — это снаряд, показывающий тяжесть, вес, гнет или давление воздуха (атмосферы, мироколицы), а потому употребляемый для измерения горных высот, для наблюдения над переменами в тяжести воздуха, предвещающими перемену погоды; буревестник, пагодник: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое снег? снег — это мерзлые пары, падающие, в виде хлопьев, клочьев, с облаков; самый рыхлый лед, заменяющий зимой дождь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
радиус — это полупоперечник круга, полуось шара, луч, нога, которою круг очерчен; черта или мера от остья (средоточия, центра) до обода: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
ритм — это мера, в музыке или в поэзии; мерное ударение, протяжка голосом, распев: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is mean? mean is A quantity having an intermediate value between several others, from which it is derived, and of which it expresses the resultant value; usually, unless otherwise specified, it is the simple average, formed by adding the quantities together and dividing by their number: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pronoun is A word used instead of a noun or name, to avoid the repetition of it. The personal pronouns in English are I, thou or you, he, she, it, we, ye, and they: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is information? information is the act of informing, or communicating knowledge or intelligence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
time is duration, considered independently of any system of measurement or any employment of terms which designate limited portions thereof: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is attention? attention is the act or state of attending or heeding; the application of the mind to any object of sense, representation, or thought; notice; exclusive or special consideration; earnest consideration, thought, or regard; obedient or affectionate heed; the supposed power or faculty of attending: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
measurement is the act or result of measuring; mensuration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
philosophy is literally, the love of, including the search after, wisdom; in actual usage, the knowledge of phenomena as explained by, and resolved into, causes and reasons, powers and laws: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
instinct is specif., the natural, unreasoning, impulse by which an animal is guided to the performance of any action, without of improvement in the method: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is intellect? intellect is the part or faculty of the human soul by which it knows: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
completeness is the state of being complete: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
continuity is the state of being continuous; uninterupted connection or succession; close union of parts; cohesion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
discipline is the treatment suited to a disciple or learner; education; development of the faculties by instruction and exercise; training, whether physical, mental, or moral: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is environment? environment is act of environing; state of being environed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
monism is that doctrine which refers all phenomena to a single ultimate constituent or agent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
manifold is A cylindrical pipe fitting, having a number of lateral outlets, for connecting one pipe with several others: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
habit is the general appearance and manner of life of a living organism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
heredity is hereditary transmission of the physical and psychical qualities of parents to their offspring; the biological law by which living beings tend to repeat their characteristics in their descendants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
light is A West Indian fish of the genus Ephippus, remarkable for its high dorsal fin and brilliant colors: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is carbon? carbon is an elementary substance, not metallic in its nature, which is present in all organic compounds: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
series is any comprehensive group of animals or plants including several subordinate related groups: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
statistics is the science which has to do with the collection and classification of certain facts respecting the condition of the people in a state: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
particular is A separate or distinct member of a class, or part of a whole; an individual fact, point, circumstance, detail, or item, which may be considered separately: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
paradox is A tenet or proposition contrary to received opinion; an assertion or sentiment seemingly contradictory, or opposed to common sense; that which in appearance or terms is absurd, but yet may be true in fact: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thermometer is an instrument for measuring temperature, founded on the principle that changes of temperature in bodies are accompained by proportional changes in their volumes or dimensions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is rainbow? rainbow is A bow or arch exhibiting, in concentric bands, the several colors of the spectrum, and formed in the part of the hemisphere opposite to the sun by the refraction and reflection of the sun's rays in drops of falling rain: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
circulation is the movement of the blood in the blood-vascular system, by which it is brought into close relations with almost every living elementary constituent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
nucleus is the body or the head of a comet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is rhythm? rhythm is in the widest sense, a dividing into short portions by a regular succession of motions, impulses, sounds, accents, etc., producing an agreeable effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
группа — это чета, купа, кучка; связь, сноп, цепь; грезд, грезно; кружок, толпа: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
молекула — это система или группа атомов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Молекула».
проблема — это задача, вопрос, загадка, что предложено на разрешение, на научное решение; задача, для отыскания неизвестного по данному: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое горизонт? горизонт — это граница, отделяющая видимую часть небесного свода от невидимой: ЭСБЕ, статья «Горизонт».
перспектива — это вид вдаль, вперед, на расстояние, с обстановкой по пути разными предметами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
здоровье — это состояние животного тела (или растения), когда все жизненные отправления идут в полном порядке; отсутствие недуга, болезни: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
конус — это тело в виде сахарной головы, круглый клин: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое субъект? субъект — это подлежащее суждения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Субъект, в философии».
электричество — это то, содержащееся в теле, что сообщает этому телу особые свойства, вызывает в нем способность действовать механически на некоторые другие тела, притягивать или при известных условиях отталкивать их, а также вызывает в самом этом теле способность испытывать подобные же механические действия других тел: ЭСБЕ, статья «Электричество».
форма — это понятие, игравшее в философии большую роль и обозначающее некоторую противоположность содержанию и субстанции: ЭСБЕ, статья «Форма, в философии».
что такое сон? сон — это состояние спящего; отдых тела, в забытьи чувств; противоп. бдение, бодрость, явь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
синтаксис — это граммат, словосочинение: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
род — это вторая главная категория, следующая за категорией вид: ЭСБЕ, статья «Род, в систематике животных и растений».
пар — это жидкость, обращенная жаром в летучее и воздушное вещество: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое календарь? календарь — это роспись всех дней в году, с показанием и других, к сему относящ., сведений; месяцеслов: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
туман — это густой пар, водяные пары в нисших слоях воздуха, на поверхности земли; омраченный парами воздух: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
хорда — это отрезок прямой, ограниченный точками, лежащими на данной кривой или на данной поверхности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Хорда, в геометрии».
тень — это сень, стень, затинь, застень, юж. зап. холодок; отсутствие прямого, лучистого света, особ. солнечного, перенятого каким-либо предметом, который застеняет, застит, омрачает: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
median is A median line or point: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
glyph is A sunken channel or groove, usually vertical: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
probability is likelihood of the occurrence of any event in the doctrine of chances, or the ratio of the number of favorable chances to the whole number of chances, favorable and unfavorable: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is space? space is extension, considered independently of anything which it may contain; that which makes extended objects conceivable and possible: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
perception is the faculty of perceiving; the faculty, or peculiar part, of man's constitution by which he has knowledge through the medium or instrumentality of the bodily organs; the act of apperhending material objects or qualities through the senses: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
theory is A doctrine, or scheme of things, which terminates in speculation or contemplation, without a view to practice; hypothesis; speculation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
refinement is the act of refining, or the state of being refined: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is quantum? quantum is quantity; amount: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mechanics is that science, or branch of applied mathematics, which treats of the action of forces on bodies: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
decomposition is the act or process of resolving the constituent parts of a compound body or substance into its elementary parts; separation into constituent part; analysis; the decay or dissolution consequent on the removal or alteration of some of the ingredients of a compound; disintegration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
differential is an increment, usually an indefinitely small one, which is given to a variable quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is influence? influence is A flowing in or upon; influx: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
inference is the act or process of inferring by deduction or induction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reality is the state or quality of being real; actual being or existence of anything, in distinction from mere appearance; fact: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
population is the act or process of populating; multiplication of inhabitants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
induction is the act or process of inducting or bringing in; introduction; entrance; beginning; commencement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
species is A group of individuals agreeing in common attributes, and designated by a common name; a conception subordinated to another conception, called a genus, or generic conception, from which it differs in containing or comprehending more attributes, and extending to fewer individuals: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is frequency? frequency is the condition of returning frequently; occurrence often repeated; common occurence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
crystal is the regular form which a substance tends to assume in solidifying, through the inherent power of cohesive attraction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sequence is the state of being sequent; succession; order of following; arrangement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
average is that service which a tenant owed his lord, to be done by the work beasts of the tenant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is form? form is the shape and structure of anything: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
contradiction is an assertion of the contrary to what has been said or affirmed; denial of the truth of a statement or assertion; contrary declaration; gainsaying: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is barometer? barometer is an instrument for determining the weight or pressure of the atmosphere, and hence for judging of the probable changes of weather, or for ascertaining the height of any ascent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lightning is A discharge of atmospheric electricity, accompanied by a vivid flash of light, commonly from one cloud to another, sometimes from a cloud to the earth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fever is A diseased state of the system, marked by increased heat, acceleration of the pulse, and a general derangement of the functions, including usually, thirst and loss of appetite: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is embryo? embryo is the first rudiments of an organism, whether animal or plant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
harmony is the just adaptation of parts to each other, in any system or combination of things, or in things, or things intended to form a connected whole; such an agreement between the different parts of a design or composition as to produce unity of effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
функция — это обозначенье действий над количествами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
нерв — это беложилье, чувственная или чулая жила в теле; проводник чувства и всякой животной деятельности (движения, питания, усвоения), между средоточием мозговой деятельности и прочими частями тела: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое категория? категория — это логический и метафизический термин, введенный Аристотелем, ныне употребляемый в значении, данном Кантом: ЭСБЕ, статья «Категория».
эволюция — это так же, как и в философии: ЭСБЕ, статья «Эволюция, в биологии».
поток — это одна из наиболее распространенных форм поверхностного залегания новейших изверженных горных пород: ЭСБЕ, статья «Поток».
монада — это единица, как начало исхода счета, силы ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое кривизна? кривизна — это большее или меньшее уклонение ее от прямолинейного вида, и можно сказать, что окружность тем кривее, чем меньшим радиусом она описана; при очень больших радиусах окружность уклоняется от прямолинейного направления весьма постепенно: ЭСБЕ, статья «Кривизна».
схоластика — это философия внешности, основанная на логике или на диалектике; вообще, школярство, школярное направление, сухое, тупое, безжизненое. схоластик, человек схоластического духа; педант, сухой школяр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
магнетизм — это притяжение магнитом кусков железа — известно со времен глубокой древности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Магнетизм».
отношение — это частное, получаемое от деления одной величины на другую: ЭСБЕ, статья «Отношение, в математике».
характер — это нрав человека, нравственные свойства, качества его, свойства души и сердца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
буква — это брюква, известный вид репы; бухма, бушма: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
наследственность — это способность организмов передавать свои свойства и особенности от одного поколения в другое, покуда длится самый процесс размножения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Наследственность».
что такое кристалл? кристалл — это однородное твердое тело, имеющее природную форму многогранника, физические свойства которого по различным направлениям, вообще говоря, различны, но подчинены определенным законам (симметрии); по направлениям же, параллельным между собой, все свойства одинаковы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Кристалл».
солнце — это наше дневное светило; величайшее, самосветное и срединное тело нашей вселенной, господствующее силою тяготения, светом и теплом над всеми земными мирами, планетами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
радуга — это всем известное оптическое явление в атмосфере; наблюдается, когда солнце освещает пелену падающего дождя и наблюдатель находится между солнцем и дождем: ЭСБЕ, статья «Радуга».
парабола — это иносказание, притча: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое зеркало? зеркало — это зеркальной, а тело с такой поверхностью — зеркалом: ЭСБЕ, статья «Зеркало».
progression is the act of moving forward; a proceeding in a course; motion onward: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
медиана — это прямая, соединяющая вершину треугольника с срединой противоположной стороны: ЭСБЕ, статья «Медиана».
symmetry is A due proportion of the several parts of a body to each other; adaptation of the form or dimensions of the several parts of a thing to each other; the union and conformity of the members of a work to the whole: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
force is any action between two bodies which changes, or tends to change, their relative condition as to rest or motion; or, more generally, which changes, or tends to change, any physical relation between them, whether mechanical, thermal, chemical, electrical, magnetic, or of any other kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thought is the act of thinking; the exercise of the mind in any of its higher forms; reflection; cogitation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
dream is the thoughts, or series of thoughts, or imaginary transactions, which occupy the mind during sleep; a sleeping vision: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is integration? integration is the act or process of making whole or entire: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
imagination is the imagine-making power of the mind; the power to create or reproduce ideally an object of sense previously perceived; the power to call up mental imagines: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
relativity is the state of being relative: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
description is the act of describing; a delineation by marks or signs: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is extraction? extraction is the act of extracting, or drawing out: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intelligence is the act or state of knowing; the exercise of the understanding: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
notation is the act or practice of recording anything by marks, figures, or characters: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
relation is the act of relating or telling: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sensation is an impression, or the consciousness of an impression, made upon the central nervous organ, through the medium of a sensory or afferent nerve or one of the organs of sense; a feeling, or state of consciousness, whether agreeable or disagreeable: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
deduction is act or process of deducing or inferring: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is life? life is the state of being which begins with generation, birth, or germination, and ends with death: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
electricity is that branch of science which treats of the development of electricity by the action of magnets: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
solution is the act of separating the parts of any body, or the condition of undergoing a separation of parts; disruption; breach: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
infinity is A quantity greater than any assignable quantity of the same kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is error? error is A wandering; a roving or irregular course: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
structure is manner of organization; the arrangement of the different tissues or parts of animal and vegetable organisms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
negation is description or definition by denial, exclusion, or exception; statement of what a thing is not, or has not, from which may be inferred what it is or has: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
microscope is an optical instrument, consisting of a lens, or combination of lenses, for making an enlarged image of an object which is too minute to be viewed by the naked eye: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
echo is A sound reflected from an opposing surface and repeated to the ear of a listener; repercussion of sound; repetition of a sound: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
disease is lack of ease; uneasiness; trouble; vexation; disquiet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fossil is A substance dug from the earth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
melody is A sweet or agreeable succession of sounds: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
предел — это начало или конец, кон, межа, грань, раздел, край, рубеж или граница; конец одного и начало другого, в смысле вещественном и духовном: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое мозг? мозг — это вещество, наполняющее череп человека и высших животных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
инварианты — это особое обозначение в математике: ЭСБЕ, статья «Инварианты».
природа — это естество, все вещественное, вселенная, все мироздание, все зримое, подлежащее пяти чувствам; но более наш мир, земля, со всем созданным на ней; противополагается Создателю: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
самонаблюдение — это направление внимания на собственные психические процессы, на деятельность нашего мышления, на наши чувствования и волевые импульсы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Самонаблюдение».
что такое норма? норма — это общее правило, коему должно следовать во всех подобных случаях; образец или пример: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
масштаб — это жезл размерный, стар.: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
наука — это совокупность всяких сведений, подвергнутых некоторой умственной проверке или отчету и приведенных в известный систематический порядок, начиная от теологии, метафизики, чистой математики и кончая геральдикой, нумизматикой, учением о копыте кавалерийских лошадей: ЭСБЕ, статья «Наука».
опыт — это как отдельные состояния сознания, испытываемые или испытанные субъектом, так и совокупность таких состояний у единичных людей и у всего человечества: ЭСБЕ, статья «Опыт».
что такое определение? определение — это такая часть предложения, которая содержит в себе указания качества или свойства предмета, имя которого выражено в предложении существительным: ЭСБЕ, статья «Определение, в грамматике».
темперамент — это психологический термин: ЭСБЕ, статья «Темперамент».
азбука — это алфавит, абевега, стар. буквица; собрание в порядке всех письмен, букв, какой либо грамоты; азбука славянская собств. буквица, кирилицаУ Даля написано с одним «л»: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое рост? рост — это таган, решетка, под которою разводится огонь, и на которую ставят сковороду, кастрюлю: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
стекло — это сплав песку (кремнистого) с поташем, со щелочью; химич. кремнекислый натр, иногда калий, свинцовая окись ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
луна — это спутник Земли, ближайшее к нам небесное тело: ЭСБЕ, статья «Луна, спутник Земли».
молния — это электрический разряд между двумя облаками, или между частями одного и того же облака, или между облаком и землею: ЭСБЕ, статья «Молния».
что такое гипербола? гипербола — это кривая линия, которая бы обозначилась на поверхности сахарной головы (конуса), если её рассечь с боку, отвесно вдоль: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
линза — это сферическое выпуклое или вогнутое стекло: ЭСБЕ, статья «Линза».
parity is the quality or condition of being equal or equivalent; A like state or degree; equality; close correspondence; analogy: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое матрица? матрица — это вогнутая часть формы, в которой пластическое тело формуется давлением: ЭСБЕ, статья «Матрица».

freedom is the state of being free; exemption from the power and control of another; liberty; independence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
force is any action between two bodies which changes, or tends to change, their relative condition as to rest or motion; or, more generally, which changes, or tends to change, any physical relation between them, whether mechanical, thermal, chemical, electrical, magnetic, or of any other kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is machine? machine is in general, any combination of bodies so connected that their relative motions are constrained, and by means of which force and motion may be transmitted and modified: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
evolution is the act of unfolding or unrolling: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is physics? physics is the science of nature, or of natural objects; that branch of science which treats of the laws and properties of matter, and the forces acting upon it: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mechanism is the arrangement or relation of the parts of a machine; the parts of a machine, taken collectively; the arrangement or relation of the parts of anything as adapted to produce an effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
computation is the act or process of computing; calculation; reckoning: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intuition is A looking after; a regard to: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is constant? constant is A quantity that does not change its value: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intensity is the state or quality of being intense; intenseness; extreme degree: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is deduction? deduction is act or process of deducing or inferring: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
momentum is the quantity of motion in a moving body, being always proportioned to the quantity of matter multiplied into the velocity; impetus: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
compound is A union of two or more ingredients in definite proportions by weight, so combined as to form a distinct substance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sequence is simple succession, or the coming after in time, without asserting or implying causative energy: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is doubt? doubt is A fluctuation of mind arising from defect of knowledge or evidence; uncertainty of judgment or mind; unsettled state of opinion concerning the reality of an event, or the truth of an assertion, etc.; hesitation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
letter is A mark or character used as the representative of a sound, or of an articulation of the human organs of speech; a first element of written language: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is thermometer? thermometer is an instrument for measuring temperature, founded on the principle that changes of temperature in bodies are accompained by proportional changes in their volumes or dimensions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
heart is A hollow, muscular organ, which, by contracting rhythmically, keeps up the circulation of the blood: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
seed is A ripened ovule, consisting of an embryo with one or more integuments, or coverings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
music is A more or less musical sound made by many of the lower animals: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
интеграл — это конечная, измеримая величина, в отношении к бесконечно малой части её, к дифференциалу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
модель — это подобие какого-либо предмета, сделанное из дерева, пробки, картона, воску, глины, металла или другого вещества, воспроизводящее этот предмет с точностью, но в уменьшенном виде: ЭСБЕ, статья «Модель, понятие».
различие — это результат умственного процесса, в котором сопоставляются два или большее количество объектов мысли, причем каждый из этих объектов принимается за самостоятельное целое, отличное от всякого другого или только числом, или же и качественно: ЭСБЕ, статья «Различие».
что такое самонаблюдение? самонаблюдение — это направление внимания на собственные психические процессы, на деятельность нашего мышления, на наши чувствования и волевые импульсы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Самонаблюдение».
арифметика — это учение о счете, наука о счислении; основа всей математики (науки о величинах, о измеримом); стар. счетная или цыфирная мудрость; счет, счисление, цыфирная сметка, выкладка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
построение — это графическое изображение какой-либо кривой, фигуры или тела; графическое решение уравнений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Построение».
магнетизм — это притяжение магнитом кусков железа — известно со времен глубокой древности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Магнетизм».
что такое силлогизм? силлогизм — это умозаключение, в котором на основании нескольких суждений с необходимостью выводится новое суждение, называемое заключением: ЭСБЕ, статья «Силлогизм».
софизм — это лжеумствование, лжемудрствование, ложный вывод, заключение, суждение, которому придан внешний вид истины: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
вид — это одинаково употребляемый в зоологии и в ботанике для обозначения различных форм растительных и животных организмов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вид, в биологии».
магнит — это магнитный камень, железняк, руда, со свойством притягивать железо и, обращаясь на перевес, указывать на север и на юг, а также передавать свойство это железу; это магнит естественный, природный; намагниченная ж им стальная полоса, или несколько их, соединенных в одной оправе, магнит искусственный: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое река? река — это поток водный, проточная по земляному ложу вода, большего объема, чем речка и ручей; речажина пск. речка, реченька, речушка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
диаметр — это поперечник, говоря о круге или шаре: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
линза — это сферическое выпуклое или вогнутое стекло: ЭСБЕ, статья «Линза».
cube is A regular solid body, with six equal square sides: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is energy? energy is internal or inherent power; capacity of acting, operating, or producing an effect, whether exerted or not: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mass is the quantity of matter which a body contains, irrespective of its bulk or volume: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
control is A duplicate book, register, or account, kept to correct or check another account or register; a counter register: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
philosophy is literally, the love of, including the search after, wisdom; in actual usage, the knowledge of phenomena as explained by, and resolved into, causes and reasons, powers and laws: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
association is the act of associating, or state of being associated; union; connection, whether of persons of things: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
necessity is the quality or state of being necessary, unavoidable, or absolutely requisite; inevitableness; indispensableness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
continuity is the state of being continuous; uninterupted connection or succession; close union of parts; cohesion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is observation? observation is the act or the faculty of observing or taking notice; the act of seeing, or of fixing the mind upon, anything: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
correlation is reciprocal relation; corresponding similarity or parallelism of relation or law; capacity of being converted into, or of giving place to, one another, under certain conditions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
inversion is A change in the order of the terms of a proportion, so that the second takes the place of the first, and the fourth of the third: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
syllogism is the regular logical form of every argument, consisting of three propositions, of which the first two are called the premises, and the last, the conclusion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
inertia is that property of matter by which it tends when at rest to remain so, and when in motion to continue in motion, and in the same straight line or direction, unless acted on by some external force; - - sometimes called vis inertiæ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reaction is the mutual or reciprocal action of chemical agents upon each other, or the action upon such chemical agents of some form of energy: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is infinity? infinity is unlimited extent of time, space, or quantity; eternity; boundlessness; immensity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
belief is assent to a proposition or affirmation, or the acceptance of a fact, opinion, or assertion as real or true, without immediate personal knowledge; reliance upon word or testimony; partial or full assurance without positive knowledge or absolute certainty; persuasion; conviction; confidence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sentence is sense; meaning; significance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
barometer is an instrument for determining the weight or pressure of the atmosphere, and hence for judging of the probable changes of weather, or for ascertaining the height of any ascent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lung is an organ for aërial respiration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fruit is the ripened ovary of a flowering plant, with its contents and whatever parts are consolidated with it.: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is poetry? poetry is the art of apprehending and interpreting ideas by the faculty of imagination; the art of idealizing in thought and in expression: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
аксиома — это общее предложение, истинность которого представляется очевидной нашему уму по самому смыслу и значению слов, его составляющих, очевидным непосредственно, без всякого вывода его из какого-либо другого: ЭСБЕ, статья «Аксиома».
гипотеза — это ипотеза, предположение, догадка, умозрительное положение: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое критерий? критерий — это мерило для оценки истинности суждения или факта: ЭСБЕ, статья «Критерий».
аппарат — это совокупность приборов и приспособлений, служащих для выполнения какой-нибудь работы, сооружения или для применения науки к практическим целям: ЭСБЕ, статья «Аппарат».
аспект — это положение луны или планеты в отношении к солнцу или к другим планетам: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
практика — это опыт, самое дело, опыт на деле, дело на опыте, в приложении; исполнение или попытка к тому, испытание: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое опыт? опыт — это как отдельные состояния сознания, испытываемые или испытанные субъектом, так и совокупность таких состояний у единичных людей и у всего человечества: ЭСБЕ, статья «Опыт».
гармония — это соответствие, созвучье, соразмерность, равновесие, равномерность, равнозвучие, взаимность соотношение, согласие, согласность, соглас, стройность, благостройность; соразмерное отношение частей целого; правильное отношение одновременных или современных звуков, аккорд; самая наука с созвучиях: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
символ — это сокращение, перечень, полная картина, сущность в немногих словах или знаках: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
род — это вторая главная категория, следующая за категорией вид: ЭСБЕ, статья «Род, в систематике животных и растений».
что такое ион? ион — это лад, толк, смысл, пригодность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
гора — это общее название всякой земной возвышенности, противопол. дол, раздол, долина, лог, низменность; (а плоскость, равнина, отсутствие того и другого): Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
радиус — это полупоперечник круга, полуось шара, луч, нога, которою круг очерчен; черта или мера от остья (средоточия, центра) до обода: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
призма — это часть прозрачного для света вещества, ограниченную двумя непараллельными плоскостями: ЭСБЕ, статья «Призма».
exponent is A number, letter, or any quantity written on the right hand of and above another quantity, and denoting how many times the latter is repeated as a factor to produce the power indicated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
information is the act of informing, or communicating knowledge or intelligence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is temperature? temperature is constitution; state; degree of any quality: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
system is an assemblage of objects arranged in regular subordination, or after some distinct method, usually logical or scientific; a complete whole of objects related by some common law, principle, or end; a complete exhibition of essential principles or facts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is refinement? refinement is the act of refining, or the state of being refined: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
elimination is the act of expelling or throwing off; (Physiol.): Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
syntax is connected system or order; union of things; a number of things jointed together; organism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is differential? differential is an increment, usually an indefinitely small one, which is given to a variable quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
process is any marked prominence or projecting part, especially of a bone; anapophysis: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
duration is the state or quality of lasting; continuance in time; the portion of time during which anything exists: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is manifold? manifold is A copy of a writing made by the manifold process: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
proposition is the act of setting or placing before; the act of offering: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
gravity is the tendency of a mass of matter toward a center of attraction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is hydrogen? hydrogen is A gaseous element, colorless, tasteless, and odorless, the lightest known substance, being fourteen and a half times lighter than air (hence its use in filling balloons), and over eleven thousand times lighter than water: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
point is A fixed conventional place for reference, or zero of reckoning, in the heavens, usually the intersection of two or more great circles of the sphere, and named specifically in each case according to the position intended: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
evidence is that which makes evident or manifest; that which furnishes, or tends to furnish, proof; any mode of proof; the ground of belief or judgement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
grammar is the science which treats of the principles of language; the study of forms of speech, and their relations to one another; the art concerned with the right use aud application of the rules of a language, in speaking or writing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
microscope is an optical instrument, consisting of a lens, or combination of lenses, for making an enlarged image of an object which is too minute to be viewed by the naked eye: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
muscle is an organ which, by its contraction, produces motion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is insect? insect is one of the Insecta: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
rhythm is in the widest sense, a dividing into short portions by a regular succession of motions, impulses, sounds, accents, etc., producing an agreeable effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
закон — это предел, постановленный свободе воли или действий; неминучее начало, основание; правило, постановление высшей власти: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое теория? теория — это умозрение, умозаключение; заключение, вывод из чего-либо, не по явленью на деле, а по выводам своим; противоположное дело, на деле, опыт, практика: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
горизонт — это окраина земной поверхности, вкруг наблюдателя, где примыкает небо; небосклон, кругозор, небозём, небоскат, закат неба; глазоём, зреймо; завесь, завесь, закрой касп. озор, овидь арх. оглядь орл. черта, отделяющая видимую нами часть неба и земли от невидимой: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
базис — это основная линия в сети геодезических треугольников, измеряемых для топографической съемки или для определения фигуры земли: ЭСБЕ, статья «Базис».
диагноз — это распознавание и определение болезни на основании замечаемых местных изменений, предполагаемых причин, а также особенно выдающихся явлений ее: ЭСБЕ, статья «Диагноз».
что такое синтез? синтез — это основное свойство сознания, благодаря коему самые разнообразные состояния сознания получают объединение и становятся состояниями этого определенного «я»: ЭСБЕ, статья «Синтез, в психологии и логике».
мера — это способ определенья количества по принятой единице; мера вообще прилагается к протяженью и к пространству, а отвлеченно, вообще предел, ино пора, срок: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
добро — это философский термин, равнозначащий термину благо, но последний обыкновенно понимается шире: ЭСБЕ, статья «Добро, в философии».
слово — это исключительная способность человека выражать гласно мысли и чувства свои; дар говорить, сообщаться разумно сочетаемыми звуками; словесная речь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое наследственность? наследственность — это способность организмов передавать свои свойства и особенности от одного поколения в другое, покуда длится самый процесс размножения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Наследственность».
маятник — это тяжелое тело, совершающее колебания около неподвижной точки: ЭСБЕ, статья «Маятник».
климат — это состояние воздуха известной местности, относительно жары и стужи, сухости, сырости, длительности времен года ипр., погодье: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
хорда — это отрезок прямой, ограниченный точками, лежащими на данной кривой или на данной поверхности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Хорда, в геометрии».
что такое история? история — это слово, принятое от древних почти во все европейских языки, вообще в знач. того, что было или есть, в противоположность сказке, басне; в тесном знач. бытописание, дееписание, бытословие, деи, описание происшествий, повесть о событиях, о быте и жизни народов: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
triangle is A figure bounded by three lines, and containing three angles: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
probability is the quality or state of being probable; appearance of reality or truth; reasonable ground of presumption; likelihood: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
heat is A force in nature which is recognized in various effects, but especially in the phenomena of fusion and evaporation, and which: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
model is A miniature representation of a thing, with the several parts in due proportion; sometimes, a facsimile of the same size: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
integration is the operation of finding the primitive function which has a given function for its differential coefficient: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mathematics is that science, or class of sciences, which treats of the exact relations existing between quantities or magnitudes, and of the methods by which, in accordance with these relations, quantities sought are deducible from other quantities known or supposed; the science of spatial and quantitative relations: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is tensor? tensor is A muscle that stretches a part, or renders it tense: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
extraction is the act of extracting, or drawing out: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
purpose is A counter or opposing purpose: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ethics is the science of human duty; the body of rules of duty drawn from this science; a particular system of principles and rules concerting duty, whether true or false; rules of practice in respect to a single class of human actions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
population is the act or process of populating; multiplication of inhabitants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
quality is the condition of being of such and such a sort as distinguished from others; nature or character relatively considered: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is gravitation? gravitation is the act of gravitating: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
carbon is an elementary substance, not metallic in its nature, which is present in all organic compounds: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
line is linen thread or string; a slender, strong cord: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
demonstration is the exhibition and explanation of a dissection or other anatomical preparation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
noun is A word used as the designation or appellation of a creature or thing, existing in fact or in thought; a substantive: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
telescope is an optical instrument used in viewing distant objects: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is bone? bone is the hard, calcified tissue of the skeleton of vertebrate animals, consisting very largely of calcic carbonate, calcic phosphate, and gelatine: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fish is an oviparous, vertebrate animal usually having fins and a covering scales or plates: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
harmony is the just adaptation of parts to each other, in any system or combination of things, or in things, or things intended to form a connected whole; such an agreement between the different parts of a design or composition as to produce unity of effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое причина? причина — это требуемое логически условие всего бывающего, или то, без чего, по предположению нашего разума, данный факт не может произойти, а при наличности чего он происходит с необходимостью: ЭСБЕ, статья «Причина».
аналогия — это сходство, подобие, близость; соотношение двух сходных предметов; выводы из сравнительных заключений: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
эволюция — это так же, как и в философии: ЭСБЕ, статья «Эволюция, в биологии».
момент — это миг, мгновение, минт: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое имманентность? имманентность — это означ. пребывание в чем-нибудь, внутреннюю связь в противоположность внешней: ЭСБЕ, статья «Имманентность, имманентный».
субъект — это подлежащее суждения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Субъект, в философии».
точка — это значок от укола, от приткнутия к чему острием, кончиком пера, карандаша; мелкая крапина: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
зло — это худое, лихое, худо, лихо; противопол. добро: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое имя? имя — это названье, наименованье, слово, которым зовут, означают о́собь, личность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
рост — это таган, решетка, под которою разводится огонь, и на которую ставят сковороду, кастрюлю: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
рычаг — это одна из так называемых простых машин: ЭСБЕ, статья «Рычаг».
ветер — это движение, течение, теча, ток, поток воздуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое парабола? парабола — это иносказание, притча: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
религия — это вера, духовная вера, исповедание, богопочитание, или основные духовные убеждения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is area? area is any plane surface: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
symmetry is the law of likeness; similarity of structure; regularity in form and arrangement; orderly and similar distribution of parts, such that an animal may be divided into parts which are structurally symmetrical: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
work is artificial and ornamental rockwork in imitation of a grotto: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is hypothesis? hypothesis is A supposition; a proposition or principle which is supposed or taken for granted, in order to draw a conclusion or inference for proof of the point in question; something not proved, but assumed for the purpose of argument: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
phase is A particular appearance or state in a regularly recurring cycle of changes with respect to quantity of illumination or form of enlightened disk: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is operator? operator is the symbol that expresses the operation to be performed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
choice is act of choosing; the voluntary act of selecting or separating from two or more things that which is preferred; the determination of the mind in preferring one thing to another; election: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
neurosis is A functional nervous affection or disease, that is, a disease of the nerves without any appreciable change of nerve structure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
research is diligent inquiry or examination in seeking facts or principles; laborius or continued search after truth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is hypnosis? hypnosis is supervention of sleep: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sensation is an impression, or the consciousness of an impression, made upon the central nervous organ, through the medium of a sensory or afferent nerve or one of the organs of sense; a feeling, or state of consciousness, whether agreeable or disagreeable: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is substance? substance is that which underlies all outward manifestations; substratum; the permanent subject or cause of phenomena, whether material or spiritual; that in which properties inhere; that which is real, in distinction from that which is apparent; the abiding part of any existence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pressure is the action of a force against some obstacle or opposing force; a force in the nature of a thrust, distributed over a surface, often estimated with reference to the upon a unit's area: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
crystal is the regular form which a substance tends to assume in solidifying, through the inherent power of cohesive attraction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
angle is the figure made by. two lines which meet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is order? order is regular arrangement; any methodical or established succession or harmonious relation; method; system: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
paradox is A tenet or proposition contrary to received opinion; an assertion or sentiment seemingly contradictory, or opposed to common sense; that which in appearance or terms is absurd, but yet may be true in fact: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is telegraph? telegraph is an apparatus, or a process, for communicating intelligence rapidly between distant points, especially by means of preconcerted visible or audible signals representing words or ideas, or by means of words and signs, transmitted by electrical action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
skin is the external membranous integument of an animal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
bird is A warm-blooded, feathered vertebrate provided with wings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
melody is A sweet or agreeable succession of sounds: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
материя — это вещество; все весомое, все занимающее пространство или все земное (камень, дерево, воздух ипр.); общее отвлеченное понятие вещественности, телесности, всего, что подлежит чувствам: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
анализ — это логический прием определения данного понятия, когда это понятие разлагают по признаками на составные части, чтобы таким образом сделать познавание его ясным в полном его объеме: ЭСБЕ, статья «Анализ, в философии».
природа — это естество, все вещественное, вселенная, все мироздание, все зримое, подлежащее пяти чувствам; но более наш мир, земля, со всем созданным на ней; противополагается Создателю: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое онтология? онтология — это учение о сущем; в особенности так обозначается основная, формальная часть философии в системе Христиана Вольфа, который, следуя Аристотелю, называет ее также «первой философией»: ЭСБЕ, статья «Онтология».
индикатор — это указатель хода или действия машины: ЭСБЕ, статья «Индикатор, в технике».
схоластика — это философия внешности, основанная на логике или на диалектике; вообще, школярство, школярное направление, сухое, тупое, безжизненое. схоластик, человек схоластического духа; педант, сухой школяр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
линия — это черта; порядок, строй или ряд: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое счастье? счастье — это рок, судьба, часть и участь, доля: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
грамматика — это изображение или описание строения известного языка во всех (или только главнейших) его особенностях: ЭСБЕ, статья «Грамматика».
лечение — это совокупность всех действий, предпринимаемых для улучшения состояния больного: ЭСБЕ, статья «Лечение».
колесо — это плоский круг, обращающийся на оси: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое дождь? дождь — это один из видов атмосферных осадков: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дождь».
гипербола — это кривая линия, которая бы обозначилась на поверхности сахарной головы (конуса), если её рассечь с боку, отвесно вдоль: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
миф — это происшествие или человек баснословный, небывалый, сказочный; иносказанье в лицах, вошедшее в поверье: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
perimeter is the outer boundary of a body or figure, or the sum of all the sides: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is invariant? invariant is an invariable quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
atom is an ultimate indivisible particle of matter: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
experiment is atrial or special observation, made to confirm or disprove something doubtful: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
formula is A rule or principle expressed in algebraic language: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
activity is the state or quality of being active; nimbleness; agility; vigorous action or operation; energy; active force: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
completeness is the state of being complete: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reduction is the act or process of reducing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is stability? stability is the state or quality of being stable, or firm; steadiness; firmness; strength to stand without being moved or overthrown: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
personality is that which constitutes distinction of person; individuality: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is selection? selection is the act of selecting, or the state of being selected; choice, by preference: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
essence is the constituent elementary notions which constitute a complex notion, and must be enumerated to define it; sometimes called the nominal essence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
density is the quality of being dense, close, or thick; compactness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
solution is the act or process by which a body (whether solid, liquid, or gaseous) is absorbed into a liquid, and, remaining or becoming fluid, is diffused throughout the solvent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is circle? circle is A plane figure, bounded by a single curve line called its circumference, every part of which is equally distant from a point within it, called the center: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
class is A group of individuals ranked together as possessing common characteristics: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
contradiction is an assertion of the contrary to what has been said or affirmed; denial of the truth of a statement or assertion; contrary declaration; gainsaying: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
photography is the science which relates to the action of light on sensitive bodies in the production of pictures, the fixation of images, and the like: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
eye is A small circular or oval wooden block without sheaves, having a groove around it and a hole through it, used for connecting rigging: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mammal is one of the Mammalia: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is color? color is A property depending on the relations of light to the eye, by which individual and specific differences in the hues and tints of objects are apprehended in vision: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
время — это длительность бытья; пространство в бытии; последовательность существования; продолжение случаев, событий; дни за днями и века за веками; последовательное течение суток за сутками: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
динамика — это наука о движении тел, о силах двигающих: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое аргумент? аргумент — это основание доказательства или ту часть доказательства и решения, на которой основывается действительность или истина предложения, то есть часть, в которой заключается главная доказательная сила: ЭСБЕ, статья «Аргумент».
тождество — это равенство, имеющее место при всех значениях букв в него входящих: ЭСБЕ, статья «Тождество, в математике».
инерция — это свойство материи, состоящее в стремлении каждой точки материального тела сохранять без изменения величину и направление своей скорости: ЭСБЕ, статья «Инерция».
наука — это учение, выучка, обучение: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое угол? угол — это перелом, излом, колено, локоть, выступ или залом (впадина) об одной грани: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
страсть — это страдание, муки, маета, мучение, телесная боль, душевная скорбь, тоска; особ. в знач. подвига, сознательное принятые на себя тяготы, мученичества: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
синтаксис — это в европ. грамматике этим термином обозначалась та часть ее, которая рассматривает законы сочетания отдельных слов в целые предложения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Синтаксис».
воздух — это невидимая, газообразная оболочка земли; присутствием своим обусловливает животную и растительную жизнь, изменения погоды, распространение звука, выветривание горных пород и т. д: ЭСБЕ, статья «Воздух».
что такое винт? винт — это шуруп, округлый гвоздь, нарезанный винтом, спиралью, обвоем, который не забивается, а ввертывается, ввинчивается в нарезную же дыру или гнездо, либо прямо, особ. в дерево, а иногда пропускается насквозь в простую дыру, с наверткой на кончик его гайки: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
снег — это мерзлые пары, падающие, в виде хлопьев, клочьев, с облаков; самый рыхлый лед, заменяющий зимой дождь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
координаты — это величины, определяющие положение точки: ЭСБЕ, статья «Координаты, в математике».
prime is any number expressing the combining weight or equivalent of any particular element: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pronoun is A word used instead of a noun or name, to avoid the repetition of it. The personal pronouns in English are I, thou or you, he, she, it, we, ye, and they: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
group is A variously limited assemblage of animals or planta, having some resemblance, or common characteristics in form or structure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
cell is A jar of vessel, or a division of a compound vessel, for holding the exciting fluid of a battery: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
measurement is the act or result of measuring; mensuration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is algebra? algebra is that branch of mathematics which treats of the relations and properties of quantity by means of letters and other symbols: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
classification is the act of forming into a class or classes; a distibution into groups: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
decomposition is the act or process of resolving the constituent parts of a compound body or substance into its elementary parts; separation into constituent part; analysis; the decay or dissolution consequent on the removal or alteration of some of the ingredients of a compound; disintegration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is animal? animal is an organized living being endowed with sensation and the power of voluntary motion, and also characterized by taking its food into an internal cavity or stomach for digestion; by giving carbonic acid to the air and taking oxygen in the process of respiration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
understanding is the act of one who understands a thing, in any sense of the verb; knowledge; discernment; comprehension; interpretation; explanation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
monism is that doctrine which refers all phenomena to a single ultimate constituent or agent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
abstraction is the act process of leaving out of consideration one or more properties of a complex object so as to attend to others; analysis: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
existence is the state of existing or being; actual possession of being; continuance in being: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
weight is A counterpoise: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is equilibrium? equilibrium is equality of weight or force; an equipoise or a state of rest produced by the mutual counteraction of two or more forces: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
curve is A line described according to some low, and having no finite portion of it a straight line: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
genus is A class of objects divided into several subordinate species; a class more extensive than a species; a precisely defined and exactly divided class; one of the five predicable conceptions, or sorts of terms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is negation? negation is the act of denying; assertion of the nonreality or untruthfulness of anything; declaration that something is not, or has not been, or will not be; denial: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
calendar is an orderly arrangement of the division of time, adapted to the purposes of civil life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ear is the organ of hearing; the external ear: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is nucleus? nucleus is A kernel: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
shadow is shade within defined limits; obscurity or deprivation of light, apparent on a surface, and representing the form of the body which intercepts the rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
сила — это источник, начало, основная (неведомая) причина всякого действия, движенья, стремленья, понужденья, всякой вещественой перемены в пространстве: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое проблема? проблема — это научный вопрос, могущий быть различно решенным, причем в пользу каждого из возможных решений имеются веские доводы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Проблема».
интуиция — это непосредственное усмотрение чего-либо в качестве истинного, целесообразного, нравственно доброго или прекрасного: ЭСБЕ, статья «Интуиция».
феноменология — это учение о феноменах, явлениях («φαινόμενον» по-греч. значит все являющееся нашим чувствам, явление): ЭСБЕ, статья «Феноменология».
качество — это свойство или принадлежность, все что составляет сущность лица или вещи: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое понятие? понятие — это логический термин, обозначающий известную ступень в развитии интеллектуальной деятельности человека: ЭСБЕ, статья «Понятие».
круг — это окружность, сомкнутая кривая черта, всюду равно удаленная от средоточия: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
инстинкт — это безотчетное побуждение, по которому действуют животные; побудок сев. побудка вост: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
буква — это брюква, известный вид репы; бухма, бушма: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое вода? вода — это стихийная жидкость, ниспадающая в виде дождя и снега, образующая на земле родники, ручьи, реки и озера, а в смеси с солями, — моря: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
телеграф — это устройство, для подачи условных знаков, маяк: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
туман — это такое состояние нижнего слоя атмосферы, когда совершенно прозрачный при обыкновенных условиях воздух теряет свою прозрачность, делается мутным и предметы, даже находящиеся сравнительно близко от наблюдателя, становятся плохо видимыми: ЭСБЕ, статья «Туман».
ряд — это вереница, строй, предметы по одной черте, по порядку, чередом: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
quotient is the number resulting from the division of one number by another, and showing how often a less number is contained in a greater; thus, the quotient of twelve divided by four is three: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
glyph is A sunken channel or groove, usually vertical: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
function is the act of executing or performing any duty, office, or calling; per formance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
nerve is one of the whitish and elastic bundles of fibers, with the accompanying tissues, which transmit nervous impulses between nerve centers and various parts of the animal body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
theory is A doctrine, or scheme of things, which terminates in speculation or contemplation, without a view to practice; hypothesis; speculation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
science is knowledge; knowledge of principles and causes; ascertained truth of facts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conception is the act of conceiving in the womb; the initiation of an embryonic animal life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is description? description is the act of describing; a delineation by marks or signs: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
basis is the foundation of anything; that on which a thing rests: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
calculus is any solid concretion, formed in any part of the body, but most frequent in the organs that act as reservoirs, and in the passages connected with them: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reality is the state or quality of being real; actual being or existence of anything, in distinction from mere appearance; fact: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
judgment is the act of judging; the operation of the mind, involving comparison and discrimination, by which a knowledge of the values and relations of thins, whether of moral qualities, intellectual concepts, logical propositions, or material facts, is obtained: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
phenomenon is an appearance; anything visible; whatever, in matter or spirit, is apparent to, or is apprehended by, observation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is light? light is that agent, force, or action in nature by the operation of which upon the organs of sight, objects are rendered visible or luminous: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thermodynamics is the science which treats of the mechanical action or relations of heat: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
surface is the exterior part of anything that has length and breadth; one of the limits that bound a solid: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
universal is the whole; the general system of the universe; the universe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conjunction is the meeting of two or more stars or planets in the same degree of the zodiac: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
clock is A plant of the genus Mirabilis: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is digestion? digestion is the act or process of digesting; reduction to order; classification; thoughtful consideration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
embryo is the first rudiments of an organism, whether animal or plant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mirror is A looking-glass or a speculum; any glass or polished substance that forms images by the reflection of rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое масса? масса — это вещество, тело, материя: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
категория — это разряд, порядок или отдел предметов: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
монизм — это собой философское направление, признающее только один принцип бытия: ЭСБЕ, статья «Монизм».
градиент — это разность в показаниях барометров (приведенных к уровню моря) в двух местах, лежащих по тому направлению, по которому в данный момент упругость воздуха убывает всего быстрее: ЭСБЕ, статья «Градиент».
что такое конус? конус — это геометрическое тело, образуемое вращением прямоугольного треугольника около одного из катетов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Конус, геометрическое тело».
суждение — это связь (синтез), в которую сознание ставит свои элементы (представления, понятия) с целью объективного познания: ЭСБЕ, статья «Суждение».
корень — это в индоевропейских языках главная часть слова, повторяющаяся неизменно или с незначительными изменениями в целом ряде родственных этимологически (т. е. схожих в звуковом отношении и близких по значению) слов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Корень, часть слова».
представление — это воспроизведенное памятью и вызванное в сознании ощущение: ЭСБЕ, статья «Представление».
что такое азбука? азбука — это алфавит, абевега, стар. буквица; собрание в порядке всех письмен, букв, какой либо грамоты; азбука славянская собств. буквица, кирилицаУ Даля написано с одним «л»: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
земля — это планета, один из миров или несамосветлых шаров, коловращающихся вокруг солнца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
фотография — это искусство снимать предметы на бумагу посредством света; светопись, солнопись: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
радуга — это всем известное оптическое явление в атмосфере; наблюдается, когда солнце освещает пелену падающего дождя и наблюдатель находится между солнцем и дождем: ЭСБЕ, статья «Радуга».
что такое прогрессия? прогрессия — это такой ряд чисел: ЭСБЕ, статья «Прогрессия, в математике».
multiple is A quantity containing another quantity a number of times without a remainder: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое медиана? медиана — это прямая, соединяющая вершину треугольника с срединой противоположной стороны: ЭСБЕ, статья «Медиана».
limit is A determining feature; a distinguishing characteristic a differentia: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
brain is the whitish mass of soft matter (the center of the nervous system, and the seat of consciousness and volition) which is inclosed in the cartilaginous or bony cranium of vertebrate animals: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is dream? dream is the thoughts, or series of thoughts, or imaginary transactions, which occupy the mind during sleep; a sleeping vision: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
identity is an identical equation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is explanation? explanation is the act of explaining, expounding, or interpreting; the act of clearing from obscurity and making intelligible: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
differentiation is the act of distinguishing or describing a thing, by giving its different, or specific difference; exact definition or determination: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conversion is the act of turning or changing from one state or condition to another, or the state of being changed; transmutation; change: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
constraint is the act of constraining, or the state of being constrained; that which compels to, or restrains from, action; compulsion; restraint; necessity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is relation? relation is the act of relating or telling: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
definition is an exact enunciation of the constituents which make up the logical essence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is metaphysics? metaphysics is the science of real as distinguished from phenomenal being; ontology: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
frequency is the condition of returning frequently; occurrence often repeated; common occurence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
measure is A standard of dimension; a fixed unit of quantity or extent; an extent or quantity in the fractions or multiples of which anything is estimated and stated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
plane is A surface, real or imaginary, in which, if any two points are taken, the straight line which joins them lies wholly in that surface; or a surface, any section of which by a like surface is a straight line; a surface without curvature: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is particular? particular is A separate or distinct member of a class, or part of a whole; an individual fact, point, circumstance, detail, or item, which may be considered separately: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
disjunction is the act of disjoining; disunion; separation; a parting: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is climate? climate is one of thirty regions or zones, parallel to the equator, into which the surface of the earth from the equator to the pole was divided, according to the successive increase of the length of the midsummer day: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
respiration is the act of resping or breathing; the act of taking in and giving out air; the aggregate of those processes bu which oxygen is introduced into the system, and carbon dioxide, or carbonic acid, removed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fossil is A substance dug from the earth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lens is A piece of glass, or other transparent substance, ground with two opposite regular surfaces, either both curved, or one curved and the other plane, and commonly used, either singly or combined, in optical instruments, for changing the direction of rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
теплота — это причину, вызывающую в нас специфические, всем известные тепловые ощущения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Теплота».
инварианты — это особое обозначение в математике: ЭСБЕ, статья «Инварианты».
парадокс — это мненье странное, на первый взгляд дикое, озадачливое, противное общему: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое дифференциация? дифференциация — это термин биологического процесса развития, введенный в науку Гербертом Спенсером: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дифференциация».
кривизна — это большее или меньшее уклонение ее от прямолинейного вида, и можно сказать, что окружность тем кривее, чем меньшим радиусом она описана; при очень больших радиусах окружность уклоняется от прямолинейного направления весьма постепенно: ЭСБЕ, статья «Кривизна».
разум — это существенная для человека, как такого, способность мыслить всеобщее в отличие от непосредственно данных единичных фактов, какими исключительно занято мышление прочих животных: ЭСБЕ, статья «Разум».
степень — это ступень, ряд, разряд, порядок, от дел по качеству, достоинству; место и самое собрание однородного, равного во всем, где полагается лествичный порядок, восходящий и нисходящий: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое фантазия? фантазия — это деятельность воображения, отличающаяся наибольшею отрешенностью от условий действительности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Фантазия».
голос — это звук, звон, тягучий шум разного рода; звук или зык из гортани человека или животного: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
камень — это камык, твр. кама ж. общее название всякого твердого ископаемого, кроме чистых металов или крушца, королька: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
телескоп — это большая зрительная труба, на сошке, или укрепленная иным образом, более для астрономических наблюдений; есть телескоп стекольный и есть зеркальный: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое молния? молния — это электрический разряд между двумя облаками, или между частями одного и того же облака, или между облаком и землею: ЭСБЕ, статья «Молния».
пропорция — это соразмерность; величина или количество, отвечающее чему-либо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is factor? factor is one of the elements or quantities which, when multiplied together, from a product: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
матрица — это изложница, льяло, льяк, гнездо, форма для отливки печатальных букв: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
integral is an expression which, being differentiated, will produce a given differential: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is memory? memory is the faculty of the mind by which it retains the knowledge of previous thoughts, impressions, or events: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
psychology is the science of the human soul: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is principle? principle is beginning; commencement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intellect is the part or faculty of the human soul by which it knows: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
emotion is A moving of the mind or soul; excitement of the feelings, whether pleasing or painful; disturbance or agitation of mind caused by a specific exciting cause and manifested by some sensible effect on the body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
defect is want or absence of something necessary for completeness or perfection; deficiency: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is domain? domain is dominion; empire; authority: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
separation is the act of separating, or the state of being separated, or separate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is concept? concept is an abstract general conception; a notion; a universal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ontology is that department of the science of metaphysics which investigates and explains the nature and essential properties and relations of all beings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
electricity is A power in nature, a manifestation of energy, exhibiting itself when in disturbed equilibrium or in activity by a circuit movement, the fact of direction in which involves polarity, or opposition of properties in opposite directions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
unit is the least whole number; one: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is dimension? dimension is measure in a single line: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
form is that assemblage or disposition of qualities which makes a conception, or that internal constitution which makes an existing thing to be what it is: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
implication is the act of implicating, or the state of being implicated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
river is A large stream of water flowing in a bed or channel and emptying into the ocean, a sea, a lake, or another stream; a stream larger than a rivulet or brook: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
circulation is the act of moving in a circle, or in a course which brings the moving body to the place where its motion began: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
biology is that branch of biology which treats of the electrical phenomena of living organisms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is prism? prism is A solid whose bases or ends are any similar, equal, and parallel plane figures, and whose sides are parallelograms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
атом — это неделимое; вещество в крайних пределах делимости своей, незримая пылинка, из каких будто бы составлены все тела, всякое вещество, как бы из песчинок: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
интеграция — это явление в языке, заключающееся в том, что составные морфологические части известного слова (корень, суффикс, префикс) уже не обособляются в нашем сознании, как отдельные части слова, и все слово (или его часть), хотя бы и разложимое путем научного анализа на свои составные части: ЭСБЕ, статья «Интеграция».
что такое физика? физика — это наука о природе, о законах и явлениях её: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
дуализм — это общее название учений, все сводящих к двум противоположным принципам: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дуализм, в религии и философии».
масштаб — это отношение длины линии на плане или вообще чертеже к ее действительной длине: ЭСБЕ, статья «Масштаб».
душа — это бессмертное духовное существо, одаренное разумом и волею; в общем знач. человек, с духом и телом; в более тесном: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое идея? идея — это понятие о вещи; умопонятие, представление, воображение предмета; умственное изображение: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
сон — это состояние спящего; отдых тела, в забытьи чувств; противоп. бдение, бодрость, явь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
слух — это одно из пяти чувств, коим распознаются звуки; орудие его ухо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
металл — это крушец; а в малом виде, в выплавке: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое барометр? барометр — это инструмент, которым измеряют давление воздуха: ЭСБЕ, статья «Барометр».
единица — это один, первый по счету: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
процент — это сотая часть числа: ЭСБЕ, статья «Процент, сотая часть числа».
mean is A quantity having an intermediate value between several others, from which it is derived, and of which it expresses the resultant value; usually, unless otherwise specified, it is the simple average, formed by adding the quantities together and dividing by their number: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
граф — это наследственное дворянское достоинство, местами и доныне владетельское, но у нас только почетное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
theorem is A statement of a principle to be demonstrated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
attention is the act or state of attending or heeding; the application of the mind to any object of sense, representation, or thought; notice; exclusive or special consideration; earnest consideration, thought, or regard; obedient or affectionate heed; the supposed power or faculty of attending: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
context is the part or parts of something written or printed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
analogy is A relation or correspondence in function, between organs or parts which are decidedly different: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mechanics is that science, or branch of applied mathematics, which treats of the action of forces on bodies: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
individual is an independent, or partially independent, zooid of a compound animal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is duality? duality is the quality or condition of being two or twofold; dual character or usage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
environment is act of environing; state of being environed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
signal is A sign made for the purpose of giving notice to a person of some occurence, command, or danger: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
idea is the transcript, image, or picture of a visible object, that is formed by the mind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
aesthetics is the theory or philosophy of taste; the science of the beautiful in nature and art: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
magnetism is the property, quality, or state, of being magnetic; the manifestation of the force in nature which is seen in a magnet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is scale? scale is one of the small, thin, membranous, bony or horny pieces which form the covering of many fishes and reptiles, and some mammals, belonging to the dermal part of the skeleton, or dermoskeleton: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
coordinate is A thing of the same rank with another thing; one two or more persons or things of equal rank, authority, or importance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
structure is the act of building; the practice of erecting buildings; construction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is planet? planet is A celestial body which revolves about the sun in an orbit of a moderate degree of eccentricity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ocean is the whole body of salt water which covers more than three fifths of the surface of the globe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fever is A diseased state of the system, marked by increased heat, acceleration of the pulse, and a general derangement of the functions, including usually, thirst and loss of appetite: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is physiology? physiology is the science which treats of the phenomena of living organisms; the study of the processes incidental to, and characteristic of, life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
свобода — это своя воля, простор, возможность действовать по-своему; отсутствие стеснения, неволи, рабства, подчинения чужой воле: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
молекула — это система или группа атомов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Молекула».
что такое принцип? принцип — это то, чем объединяется в мысли и в действительности известная совокупность фактов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Принцип, в метафизике».
философия — это любомудрие, наука о достижении человеком мудрости, о познании истины и добра: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
жизнь — это такой способ существования, в котором множественность частей и различие форм данного целого связываются целесообразно известным единством, находящимся в самом этом целом, а не полагаемым извне: ЭСБЕ, статья «Жизнь, в философии».
метафизика — это с греч., наука, учение о мире невещественном, о существеном, духовном: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое воля? воля — это данный человеку произвол действия; свобода, простор в поступках; отсутствие неволи, насилования, принуждения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
идеал — это представление высшего совершенства в каком-нибудь отношении: ЭСБЕ, статья «Идеал».
характер — это нрав человека, нравственные свойства, качества его, свойства души и сердца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
глаз — это орудие чувственного зрения, око; глазное яблоко; шары сиб. талы вят. буркала; баньки юж. глядела, гляделки, зенки; мн. глаза, глазы; ол. глазия; собир. глазие; глазина, глазища увелич. глазик, глазок, глазочек. глазенок, глазеночек ипр. умал: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое золото? золото — это самый дорогой крушец (металл), находимый в самородном виде, то есть не в руде: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
календарь — это роспись всех дней в году, с показанием и других, к сему относящ., сведений; месяцеслов: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
вес — это тяготение, тягота, тяга, тягость, тяжесть; стремление всех тел падать на землю; сила, влекущая их к средоточью земли; стремление самой земли и прочих планет к средоточью солнца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
случай — это быть или быль, приключение, происшествие, притча, дело, что сталось, случилось, сбылось; обстоятельство, встреча; все нежданное, не предвиденное, внезапное, нечаянное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
median is A median line or point: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
коэффициент — это число, на которое помножается другая величина; множитель, сомножитель (если их более одного): Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
axiom is A self-evident and necessary truth, or a proposition whose truth is so evident as first sight that no reasoning or demonstration can make it plainer; a proposition which it is necessary to take for granted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
perception is the act of perceiving; cognizance by the senses or intellect; apperhension by the bodily organs, or by the mind, of what is presented to them; discernment; apperhension; cognition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
analysis is A resolution of anything, whether an object of the senses or of the intellect, into its constituent or original elements; an examination of the component parts of a subject, each separately: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
composition is the act or art of composing, or forming a whole or integral, by placing together and uniting different things, parts, or ingredients: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
relativity is the state of being relative: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is pleasure? pleasure is the gratification of the senses or of the mind; agreeable sensations or emotions; the excitement, relish, or happiness produced by the expectation or the enjoyment of something good, delightful, or satisfying: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
independence is the state or quality of being independent; freedom from dependence; exemption from reliance on, or control by, others; self- subsistence or maintenance; direction of one's own affairs without interference: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
inference is the act or process of inferring by deduction or induction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
strategy is the science of military command, or the science of projecting campaigns and directing great military movements; generalship: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
knowledge is the act or state of knowing; clear perception of fact, truth, or duty; certain apprehension; familiar cognizance; cognition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
heredity is hereditary transmission of the physical and psychical qualities of parents to their offspring; the biological law by which living beings tend to repeat their characteristics in their descendants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is current? current is A flowing or passing; onward motion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ratio is the relation which one quantity or magnitude has to another of the same kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
arithmetic is the science of numbers; the art of computation by figures: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
organization is the act of organizing; the act of arranging in a systematic way for use or action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
star is one of the innumerable luminous bodies seen in the heavens; any heavenly body other than the sun, moon, comets, and nebulæ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mountain is A large mass of earth and rock, rising above the common level of the earth or adjacent land; earth and rock forming an isolated peak or a ridge; an eminence higher than a hill; a mount: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is disease? disease is lack of ease; uneasiness; trouble; vexation; disquiet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
anatomy is the art of dissecting, or artificially separating the different parts of any organized body, to discover their situation, structure, and economy; dissection: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
энергия — это способность данной системы тел, находящихся в данных условиях, совершить некоторое, вполне определенное количество работы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Энергия».
что такое нерв? нерв — это беложилье, чувственная или чулая жила в теле; проводник чувства и всякой животной деятельности (движения, питания, усвоения), между средоточием мозговой деятельности и прочими частями тела: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
алгебра — это наука счисления буквами и другими условными знаками, взамен цыфр, которые вставляются только при окончательном выводе; буквосчисление, общая арифметика: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
ценность — это представление человека о хозяйственном значении предметов внешнего мира: ЭСБЕ, статья «Ценность».
здоровье — это состояние животного тела (или растения), когда все жизненные отправления идут в полном порядке; отсутствие недуга, болезни: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое метод? метод — это специальный путь исследования какого-либо предмета: ЭСБЕ, статья «Метод».
свет — это состоянье, противное тьме, темноте, мраку, потемкам, что дает способ видеть; иные свет принимают за сотрясение малейших частиц вещества, другие — за особое, тончайшее вещество, разливаемое всюду солнцем и огнем: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
дух — это бестелесное существо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
темперамент — это природа человека, природное сложение его, сообразное с основными качествами души; главных темпераментов четыре: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое ухо? ухо — это слуховой аппарат позвоночных животных, хотя для низших позвоночных, а именно для рыб, слуховая функция этого аппарата не доказана: ЭСБЕ, статья «Ухо, анатомия».
железо — это залезо, зализо юж. зап. металл, крушец, выплавляемый из руды в виде чугуна, и выковываемый из сего последнего под кричным молотом: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
солнце — это наше дневное светило; величайшее, самосветное и срединное тело нашей вселенной, господствующее силою тяготения, светом и теплом над всеми земными мирами, планетами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
длина — это протяжение вдоль, долина; пск. долица, должина, твр. пск. длинь, прм. доль; за длину пространства, тела или вещи обычно берется направление наибольшего протяжения его; длина, ширина и вышина, или мера по уровню вдоль и поперек и мера по отвесу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое формула? формула — это соединение букв или чисел при помощи знаков различных действий: ЭСБЕ, статья «Формула».
progression is regular or proportional advance in increase or decrease of numbers; continued proportion, arithmetical, geometrical, or harmonic: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое периметр? периметр — это полная длина какой-либо замкнутой кривой линии: ЭСБЕ, статья «Периметр».
what is proof? proof is any effort, process, or operation designed to establish or discover a fact or truth; an act of testing; a test; a trial: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thought is the act of thinking; the exercise of the mind in any of its higher forms; reflection; cogitation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is comparison? comparison is the act of comparing; an examination of two or more objects with the view of discovering the resemblances or differences; relative estimate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
construction is the process or art of constructing; the act of building; erection; the act of devising and forming; fabrication; composition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is learning? learning is the acquisition of knowledge or skill: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reasoning is the act or process of adducing a reason or reasons; manner of presenting one's reasons: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
preservation is the act or process of preserving, or keeping safe; the state of being preserved, or kept from injury, destruction, or decay; security; safety: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
notation is the act or practice of recording anything by marks, figures, or characters: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
suggestion is the act or power of originating or recalling ideas or relations, distinguished as original and relative: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reason is ratio; proportion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is species? species is visible or sensible presentation; appearance; a sensible percept received by the imagination; an image: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
potential is in the theory of gravitation, or of other forces acting in space, a function of the rectangular coordinates which determine the position of a point: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
proportion is the relation or adaptation of one portion to another, or to the whole: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
statistics is the science which has to do with the collection and classification of certain facts respecting the condition of the people in a state: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is lever? lever is A rigid piece which is capable of turning about one point, or axis (the fulcrum), and in which are two or more other points where forces are applied: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
comet is A member of the solar system which usually moves in an elongated orbit, approaching very near to the sun in its perihelion, and receding to a very great distance from it at its aphelion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is earthquake? earthquake is A shaking, trembling, or concussion of the earth, due to subterranean causes, often accompanied by a rumbling noise: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
medicine is the science which relates to the prevention, cure, or alleviation of disease: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
botany is the science which treats of the structure of plants, the functions of their parts, their places of growth, their classification, and the terms which are employed in their description and denomination: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое вероятность? вероятность — это отношение числа случаев, благоприятствующих событию, к полному числу случаев, допускающих и исключающих ожидаемое событие: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вероятность, в математике».
мозг — это вещество, наполняющее череп человека и высших животных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
классификация — это весьма важный логический прием, которым пользуются при изучении предмета и который основан на логическом делении понятий: ЭСБЕ, статья «Классификация, логический прием».
математика — это наука о величинах и количествах; все, что можно выразить цифрою, принадлежит математике: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое монада? монада — это единица, как начало исхода счета, силы ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
механика — это математика, приложенная к законам равновесия и движения тел; наука о силе и сопротивлении ей; искусство применять силу к делу и строить машины; наука выгодного приспособления сил. механический, механичный, к механике относящийся: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
звук — это все что слышит ухо, что доходит до слуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
форма — это фигура, наружный вид, ураз, образ, очерк или стать: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое вера? вера — это признание чего-либо истинным с такою решительностью, которая превышает силу внешних фактических и формально-логических доказательств Это не значит, что истины веры не подлежат никаким доказательствам, а значит только, что сила веры зависит от особого самостоятельного психического акта, не определяемого всецело эмпирическими и логическими основаниями: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вера».
кровь — это красная, жизненная жидкость, которая обращается в животном теле, в жилах, силою сердца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
соль — это огромное количество химических соединений, имеющих определенную химическую функцию, отличающую их от других классов соединений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Соль, в химии».
луна — это спутник земли, небесное тело, которое ходит вкруг земли; месяц: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое площадь? площадь — это часть поверхности, ограниченная каким-либо замкнутым контуром: ЭСБЕ, статья «Площадь».
музыка — это мусикия, искусство стройного и согласного сочетания звуков, как последовательных (мелодия, напев, голос), так и совместных (гармония, соглас, созвучье); равно искусство это в действии: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is parity? parity is the quality or condition of being equal or equivalent; A like state or degree; equality; close correspondence; analogy: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
entropy is A certain property of a body, expressed as a measurable quantity, such that when there is no communication of heat the quantity remains constant, but when heat enters or leaves the body the quantity increases or diminishes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
law is in general, a rule of being or of conduct, established by an authority able to enforce its will; a controlling regulation; the mode or order according to which an agent or a power acts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is thinking? thinking is the act of thinking; mode of thinking; imagination; cogitation; judgment: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
logic is the science or art of exact reasoning, or of pure and formal thought, or of the laws according to which the processes of pure thinking should be conducted; the science of the formation and application of general notions; the science of generalization, judgment, classification: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is instinct? instinct is natural inward impulse; unconscious, involuntary, or unreasoning prompting to any mode of action, whether bodily, or mental, without a distinct apprehension of the end or object to be accomplished: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
prediction is the act of foretelling: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
trust is assured resting of the mind on the integrity, veracity, justice, friendship, or other sound principle, of another person; confidence; reliance; reliance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
universe is all created things viewed as constituting one system or whole; the whole body of things, or of phenomena; the mundus of the Latins; the world; creation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is organism? organism is organic structure; organization: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
capacity is the power of receiving or containing; extent of room or space; passive power: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is soul? soul is the spiritual, rational, and immortal part in man; that part of man which enables him to think, and which renders him a subject of moral government: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
life is the potential principle, or force, by which the organs of animals and plants are started and continued in the performance of their several and coöperative functions; the vital force, whether regarded as physical or spiritual: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
resistance is the act of resisting; opposition, passive or active: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fraction is one or more aliquot parts of a unit or whole number; an expression for a definite portion of a unit or magnitude: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is average? average is that service which a tenant owed his lord, to be done by the work beasts of the tenant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
wheel is the wheel in a clock which regulates the number of strokes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
orbit is the path described by a heavenly body in its periodical revolution around another body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
rainbow is A bow or arch exhibiting, in concentric bands, the several colors of the spectrum, and formed in the part of the hemisphere opposite to the sun by the refraction and reflection of the sun's rays in drops of falling rain: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
plant is an oyster which has been bedded, in distinction from one of natural growth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sociology is that branch of philosophy which treats of the constitution, phenomena, and development of human society; social science: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
симметрия — это соразмер, соразмерность, равноподобие (или разноподобие), равномерие, равнообразие, соответствие, сходность; одинаковость, либо соразмерное подобие расположения частей целого, двух половин; сообразие, сообразность; противоравенство, противоподобие: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
память — это лишь воспроизведение прежде бывших в сознании образов, причем воспроизводящее лицо сознает, что оно имеет дело с вторичными состояниями, имеющими сходство с первичными: ЭСБЕ, статья «Память».
логика — это наука здравомыслия, наука правильно рассуждать; умословие: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое направление? направление — это правой; если же, при тех же условиях, удаляющаяся точка обходит ось по направлению, противоположному направлению движения часовой стрелки, то винт называется левым: ЭСБЕ, статья «Направление».
норма — это общее правило, коему должно следовать во всех подобных случаях; образец или пример: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
мысль — это всякое одиночное действие ума, разума, рассудка; представленье чего в уме; идея; сужденье, мненье, соображенье и заключенье, предположенье, выдумка, думка ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
вещество — это не первоначальная потенция чувственного бытия, а его ближайший реальный субстрат — то, из чего состоят тела, действительная основа и среда всех ощутимых явлений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вещество, в философии».
что такое отношение? отношение — это частное, получаемое от деления одной величины на другую: ЭСБЕ, статья «Отношение, в математике».
скептицизм — это сомненье, доведенное до правила, до учения; искание истин путем сомнения, недоверия, даже к очевидным истинам: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
сердце — это мускулистое, ритмически сокращающееся расширение сосудистой системы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Сердце».
газ — это воздушная жидкость, тело или вещество, в виде воздуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое звезда? звезда — это небесное тело, светящееся собственным светом и представляющееся земным наблюдателям светлой точкой: ЭСБЕ, статья «Звезда, небесное тело».
квадрат — это равносторонний и прямоугольный четырехугольник; народ называет его круглым четырехугольником или клеткою: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
поэзия — это изящество в письменности; все художественное, духовно и нравственно прекрасное, выраженное словами, и притом более мерною речью: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
discriminant is the eliminant of the n partial differentials of any homogenous function of n variables: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is consciousness? consciousness is the state of being conscious; knowledge of one's own existence, condition, sensations, mental operations, acts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
cause is that which produces or effects a result; that from which anything proceeds, and without which it would not exist: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
language is any means of conveying or communicating ideas: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
category is one of the highest classes to which the objects of knowledge or thought can be reduced, and by which they can be arranged in a system; an ultimate or undecomposable conception; a predicament: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
quantum is A definite portion of a manifoldness, limited by a mark or by a boundary: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
regression is the act of passing back or returning; retrogression; retrogradation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
illustration is the act of illustrating; the act of making clear and distinct; education: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is discipline? discipline is the treatment suited to a disciple or learner; education; development of the faculties by instruction and exercise; training, whether physical, mental, or moral: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
transformation is the act of transforming, or the state of being transformed; change of form or condition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
causality is the agency of a cause; the action or power of a cause, in producing its effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
will is A species of goatsucker (Antrostomus Carolinensis), of the southern United States: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
growth is the process of growing; the gradual increase of an animal or a vegetable body; the development from a seed, germ, or root, to full size or maturity; increase in size, number, frequency, strength, etc.; augmentation; advancement; production; prevalence or influence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conductor is A substance or body capable of being a medium for the transmission of certain forces: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is equation? equation is A making equal; equal division; equality; equilibrium: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
error is the difference between the approximate result and the true result: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
code is A body of law, sanctioned by legislation, in which the rules of law to be specifically applied by the courts are set forth in systematic form; a compilation of laws by public authority; a digest: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is ether? ether is A medium of great elasticity and extreme tenuity, supposed to pervade all space, the interior of solid bodies not excepted, and to be the medium of transmission of light and heat; hence often called luminiferous ether: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lightning is A discharge of atmospheric electricity, accompanied by a vivid flash of light, commonly from one cloud to another, sometimes from a cloud to the earth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
root is the underground portion of a plant, whether a true root or a tuber, a bulb or rootstock: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is economics? economics is the science of household affairs, or of domestic management: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
группа — это чета, купа, кучка; связь, сноп, цепь; грезд, грезно; кружок, толпа: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
язык — это у позвоночных представляет собой непарный выступ нижней поверхности ротовой полости: ЭСБЕ, статья «Язык, в анатомии».
что такое архитектура? архитектура — это искуство располагать, строить и украшать здания; строительное искусство, зодчество: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
область — это великая власть, широкая сила, право и мочь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
экология — это часть зоологии, обнимающая собой сведения касательно жилищ животных: ЭСБЕ, статья «Экология».
начало — это чем начинается бытье или действие; один из двух пределов, между коими заключено бытье, вещественное либо духовное; почин, зачин, искон, зачало, источник, корень, рождение, исход; противоп. конец: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое движение? движение — это все явления природы состоят в движении вещества или же объясняются движением: ЭСБЕ, статья «Движение».
определение — это такая часть предложения, которая содержит в себе указания качества или свойства предмета, имя которого выражено в предложении существительным: ЭСБЕ, статья «Определение, в грамматике».
догматизм — это философский термин, обозначающий определенное отношение к содержанию системы, а не самую систему: ЭСБЕ, статья «Догматизм».
дыхание — это ряд беспрерывно чередующихся во время жизни движений грудной клетки в форме вдоха и выдоха и обусловливающих, с одной стороны, прилив свежого воздуха в легкие, а с другой — выведение из них уже испорченного жизненным обменом воздуха: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дыхание».
что такое пар? пар — это лишь газообразное состояние тела при температурах ниже критической, называя это состояние при температурах выше критической — газом этого тела: ЭСБЕ, статья «Пар, в физике и химии».
планета — это небесное темное тело, земля, один из земных шаров вселенной, обтекающих солнце: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
куб — это перегонный сосуд, алембик, снаряд для перегонки жидкостей, особ. винных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
ритм — это мера, в музыке или в поэзии; мерное ударение, протяжка голосом, распев: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
rotation is the act of turning: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
coherence is A sticking or cleaving together; union of parts of the same body; cohesion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is time? time is duration, considered independently of any system of measurement or any employment of terms which designate limited portions thereof: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
number is that which admits of being counted or reckoned; a unit, or an aggregate of units; a numerable aggregate or collection of individuals; an assemblage made up of distinct things expressible by figures: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is interpretation? interpretation is the act of interpreting; explanation of what is obscure; translation; version; construction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
imagination is the imagine-making power of the mind; the power to create or reproduce ideally an object of sense previously perceived; the power to call up mental imagines: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
resolution is the act or process of solving; solution: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is taxonomy? taxonomy is that division of the natural sciences which treats of the classification of animals and plants; the laws or principles of classification: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
influence is A flowing in or upon; influx: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
unity is the state of being one; oneness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is death? death is the cessation of all vital phenomena without capability of resuscitation, either in animals or plants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
habit is the usual condition or state of a person or thing, either natural or acquired, regarded as something had, possessed, and firmly retained: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
motion is the act, process, or state of changing place or position; movement; the passing of a body from one place or position to another, whether voluntary or involuntary: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is chemistry? chemistry is that branch of science which treats of the composition of substances, and of the changes which they undergo in consequence of alterations in the constitution of the molecules, which depend upon variations of the number, kind, or mode of arrangement, of the constituent atoms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
matrix is the womb: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
chance is A supposed material or psychical agent or mode of activity other than a force, law, or purpose; fortune; fate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
symbol is any character used to represent a quantity, an operation, a relation, or an abbreviation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pendulum is A body so suspended from a fixed point as to swing freely to and fro by the alternate action of gravity and momentum: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
echo is A sound reflected from an opposing surface and repeated to the ear of a listener; repercussion of sound; repetition of a sound: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is leaf? leaf is A colored, usually green, expansion growing from the side of a stem or rootstock, in which the sap for the use of the plant is elaborated under the influence of light; one of the parts of a plant which collectively constitute its foliage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
history is A learning or knowing by inquiry; the knowledge of facts and events, so obtained: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
функция — это обозначенье действий над количествами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое знак? знак — это признак, примета, отличие; предзнаменование; предвестие; чувственое доказательство, свидетельство; чувственое изъявление, обнаружение чего-либо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
механизм — это совокупность тел, ограничивающих свободу движения друг друга взаимным сопротивлением настолько, что все точки такой системы способны описывать только вполне определенные кривые (траектории) и при данной скорости одной из точек скорости и ускорения всех остальных точек системы являются вполне определенными: ЭСБЕ, статья «Механизм».
перспектива — это картинной плоскостью; место глаза наблюдателя — точкой зрения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Перспектива».
этимология — это грамматический термин (от греч. ἔτυμος — истинный, верный и λογία — учение, наука), имеющий два значения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Этимология».
что такое орбита? орбита — это путь небесного светила в пространстве: ЭСБЕ, статья «Орбита, в астрономии».
давление — это совокупность сил, сплошным образом приложенных к поверхности тела и направленных по нормалям ее внутрь тела: ЭСБЕ, статья «Давление».
индукция — это слово «индукция» употребляется в физике для обозначения явлений возбуждения в телах магнитного или электрического состояния, а также возникновения в них электрических токов — под влиянием других тел, находящихся на расстоянии от первых и представляющих собой намагниченные или наэлектризованные тела или, наконец, проводники: ЭСБЕ, статья «Индукция, в физике».
критика — это розыск и суждение о достоинствах и недостатках какого-либо труда, особ. сочинения; разбор, оценка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое пища? пища — это все, что служит для питанья, что питает; снедь, яство, еда, все седомое, брашно, харч, харчи, корм, сыть, выть, все питательное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
кристалл — это ископаемое, образующее от природы правильное геометрическое тело; гранка, гранник, самогранник; переиначено в хрусталь, самородное, горное стекло, или белое, граненое стекло: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
комета — это небесное тело, сравнительно с прочими, огромной величины, но редкое или жидкое, сквозящее; иногда в ней заметно ядро, а окружная среда образует как бы хвост, бороду или космы; звезда с хвостом, косматая: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
шар — это геометрическое тело, ограниченное сферической или шаровой поверхностью: ЭСБЕ, статья «Шар, геометрическое тело».
что такое тень? тень — это сень, стень, затинь, застень, юж. зап. холодок; отсутствие прямого, лучистого света, особ. солнечного, перенятого каким-либо предметом, который застеняет, застит, омрачает: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
coefficient is A number, commonly used in computation as a factor, expressing the amount of some change or effect under certain fixed conditions as to temperature, length, volume: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reflection is the act of reflecting, or turning or sending back, or the state of being reflected: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
space is extension, considered independently of anything which it may contain; that which makes extended objects conceivable and possible: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
algorithm is the art of calculating by nine figures and zero: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
nature is the existing system of things; the world of matter, or of matter and mind; the creation; the universe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pattern is anything proposed for imitation; an archetype; an exemplar; that which is to be, or is worthy to be, copied or imitated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is extension? extension is the act of extending or the state of being extended; a stretching out; enlargement in breadth or continuation of length; increase; augmentation; expansion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
channel is the hollow bed where a stream of water runs or may run: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intelligence is the act or state of knowing; the exercise of the understanding: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
circuit is the act of moving or revolving around, or as in a circle or orbit; a revolution: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
event is that which comes, arrives, or happens; that which falls out; any incident, good or bad: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
induction is the act or process of reasoning from a part to a whole, from particulars to generals, or from the individual to the universal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is acceleration? acceleration is the act of accelerating, or the state of being accelerated; increase of motion or action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
element is one of the simplest essential parts, more commonly called cells, of which animal and vegetable organisms, or their tissues and organs, are composed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
series is A number of things or events standing or succeeding in order, and connected by a like relation; sequence; order; course; a succession of things: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
certainty is the quality, state, or condition, of being certain: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is alphabet? alphabet is the letters of a language arranged in the customary order; the series of letters or signs which form the elements of written language: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
magnet is A bar or mass of steel or iron to which the peculiar properties of the loadstone have been imparted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is blood? blood is the fluid which circulates in the principal vascular system of animals, carrying nourishment to all parts of the body, and bringing away waste products to be excreted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
flower is that part of a plant destined to produce seed, and hence including one or both of the sexual organs; an organ or combination of the organs of reproduction, whether inclosed by a circle of foliar parts or not: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
art is the employment of means to accomplish some desired end; the adaptation of things in the natural world to the uses of life; the application of knowledge or power to practical purposes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое предел? предел — это начало или конец, кон, межа, грань, раздел, край, рубеж или граница; конец одного и начало другого, в смысле вещественном и духовном: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
система — это план, порядок расположения частей целого, предначертанное устройство, ход чего-либо, в последовательном, связном порядке: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
объект — это соотносительно с понятием субъекта (подлежащее) означает вообще то, что дано в познании, или на что направлена познавательная деятельность: ЭСБЕ, статья «Объект, в философии».
поток — это одна из наиболее распространенных форм поверхностного залегания новейших изверженных горных пород: ЭСБЕ, статья «Поток».
что такое агент? агент — это латинское слово, означает «действующее», и в физике и химии употребляется в том же смысле, как «сила»: ЭСБЕ, статья «Агент, в физике и химии».
патология — это наука о болезнях, свойстве, причинах и признаках их. патологический, патологичный, к сему относящ: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
электричество — это то, содержащееся в теле, что сообщает этому телу особые свойства, вызывает в нем способность действовать механически на некоторые другие тела, притягивать или при известных условиях отталкивать их, а также вызывает в самом этом теле способность испытывать подобные же механические действия других тел: ЭСБЕ, статья «Электричество».
дедукция — это термин современной логики, обозначающий выведение одной мысли из другой, делаемое на основании логических законов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дедукция».
что такое диалектика? диалектика — это искусство вести беседу: ЭСБЕ, статья «Диалектика».
орган — это орудие, снаряд, средство: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
стекло — это сплав песку (кремнистого) с поташем, со щелочью; химич. кремнекислый натр, иногда калий, свинцовая окись ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
океан — это окиян, киян; всемирное море; солоногорькие воды, окружающие весь материк земной, сушу, и занимающие более двух третей земной поверхности: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое окружность? окружность — это кривая линия, все точки которой находятся на одинаковом расстоянии от одной внутренней точки, называемой центром: ЭСБЕ, статья «Окружность».
зеркало — это весьма гладкая, металлическая или стеклянная доска, отражающая предметы: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is square? square is the corner, or angle, of a figure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.

what is limit? limit is that which terminates, circumscribes, restrains, or confines; the bound, border, or edge; the utmost extent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
memory is the faculty of the mind by which it retains the knowledge of previous thoughts, impressions, or events: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is analysis? analysis is A resolution of anything, whether an object of the senses or of the intellect, into its constituent or original elements; an examination of the component parts of a subject, each separately: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
composition is the act or art of composing, or forming a whole or integral, by placing together and uniting different things, parts, or ingredients: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
prediction is the act of foretelling: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
taxonomy is that division of the natural sciences which treats of the classification of animals and plants; the laws or principles of classification: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is intuition? intuition is A looking after; a regard to: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
duration is the state or quality of lasting; continuance in time; the portion of time during which anything exists: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is sensation? sensation is an impression, or the consciousness of an impression, made upon the central nervous organ, through the medium of a sensory or afferent nerve or one of the organs of sense; a feeling, or state of consciousness, whether agreeable or disagreeable: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
existence is the state of existing or being; actual possession of being; continuance in being: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
frequency is the condition of returning frequently; occurrence often repeated; common occurence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
scale is the sign or constellation Libra: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is statistics? statistics is the science which has to do with the collection and classification of certain facts respecting the condition of the people in a state: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
code is A body of law, sanctioned by legislation, in which the rules of law to be specifically applied by the courts are set forth in systematic form; a compilation of laws by public authority; a digest: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
magnet is A bar or mass of steel or iron to which the peculiar properties of the loadstone have been imparted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lung is an organ for aërial respiration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
bird is A warm-blooded, feathered vertebrate provided with wings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
shadow is shade within defined limits; obscurity or deprivation of light, apparent on a surface, and representing the form of the body which intercepts the rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
масса — это вещество, тело, материя: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое интеграция? интеграция — это явление в языке, заключающееся в том, что составные морфологические части известного слова (корень, суффикс, префикс) уже не обособляются в нашем сознании, как отдельные части слова, и все слово (или его часть), хотя бы и разложимое путем научного анализа на свои составные части: ЭСБЕ, статья «Интеграция».
ценность — это представление человека о хозяйственном значении предметов внешнего мира: ЭСБЕ, статья «Ценность».
норма — это общее правило, коему должно следовать во всех подобных случаях; образец или пример: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
орбита — это круговой путь планеты около солнца; круговина: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое магнетизм? магнетизм — это притяжение магнитом кусков железа — известно со времен глубокой древности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Магнетизм».
добро — это философский термин, равнозначащий термину благо, но последний обыкновенно понимается шире: ЭСБЕ, статья «Добро, в философии».
грамматика — это изображение или описание строения известного языка во всех (или только главнейших) его особенностях: ЭСБЕ, статья «Грамматика».
вода — это стихийная жидкость, ниспадающая в виде дождя и снега, образующая на земле родники, ручьи, реки и озера, а в смеси с солями, — моря: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое телескоп? телескоп — это большая зрительная труба, на сошке, или укрепленная иным образом, более для астрономических наблюдений; есть телескоп стекольный и есть зеркальный: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
вес — это тяготение, тягота, тяга, тягость, тяжесть; стремление всех тел падать на землю; сила, влекущая их к средоточью земли; стремление самой земли и прочих планет к средоточью солнца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
музыка — это мусикия, искусство стройного и согласного сочетания звуков, как последовательных (мелодия, напев, голос), так и совместных (гармония, соглас, созвучье); равно искусство это в действии: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
discriminant is the eliminant of the n partial differentials of any homogenous function of n variables: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reflection is the transference of an excitement from one nerve fiber to another by means of the nerve cells: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is mass? mass is A quantity of matter cohering together so as to make one body, or an aggregation of particles or things which collectively make one body or quantity, usually of considerable size: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
system is an assemblage of parts or organs, either in animal or plant, essential to the performance of some particular function or functions which as a rule are of greater complexity than those manifested by a single organ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
integration is the act or process of making whole or entire: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
operator is the symbol that expresses the operation to be performed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is decomposition? decomposition is the act or process of resolving the constituent parts of a compound body or substance into its elementary parts; separation into constituent part; analysis; the decay or dissolution consequent on the removal or alteration of some of the ingredients of a compound; disintegration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conversion is the act of interchanging the terms of a proposition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
environment is act of environing; state of being environed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
suggestion is the act of suggesting; presentation of an idea: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
will is A species of goatsucker (Antrostomus Carolinensis), of the southern United States: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
acceleration is the act of accelerating, or the state of being accelerated; increase of motion or action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is reaction? reaction is any action in resisting other action or force; counter tendency; movement in a contrary direction; reverse action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
line is that which has length, but not breadth or thickness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
class is A group of individuals ranked together as possessing common characteristics: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
conjunction is the act of conjoining, or the state of being conjoined, united, or associated; union; association; league: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
river is A large stream of water flowing in a bed or channel and emptying into the ocean, a sea, a lake, or another stream; a stream larger than a rivulet or brook: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
disease is lack of ease; uneasiness; trouble; vexation; disquiet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
economics is the science of household affairs, or of domestic management: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое функция? функция — это обозначенье действий над количествами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
модель — это подобие какого-либо предмета, сделанное из дерева, пробки, картона, воску, глины, металла или другого вещества, воспроизводящее этот предмет с точностью, но в уменьшенном виде: ЭСБЕ, статья «Модель, понятие».
горизонт — это граница, отделяющая видимую часть небесного свода от невидимой: ЭСБЕ, статья «Горизонт».
онтология — это учение о сущем; в особенности так обозначается основная, формальная часть философии в системе Христиана Вольфа, который, следуя Аристотелю, называет ее также «первой философией»: ЭСБЕ, статья «Онтология».
что такое качество? качество — это одна из важнейших категорий, выражающих собою условие мыслимости предмета: ЭСБЕ, статья «Качество».
разум — это духовная сила, могущая помнить (постигать, познавать), сулить (соображать, применять, сравнивать) и заключать (решать, выводить следствие); способность верного, последовательного сцепления мыслей, от причины, следствий её и до цели, конца, особенно в приложении к делу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
идеал — это представление высшего совершенства в каком-нибудь отношении: ЭСБЕ, статья «Идеал».
вера — это уверенность, убеждение, твердое сознание, понятие о чем-либо, особенно о предметах высших, невещественных, духовных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое дыхание? дыхание — это ряд беспрерывно чередующихся во время жизни движений грудной клетки в форме вдоха и выдоха и обусловливающих, с одной стороны, прилив свежого воздуха в легкие, а с другой — выведение из них уже испорченного жизненным обменом воздуха: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дыхание».
стекло — это сплав песку (кремнистого) с поташем, со щелочью; химич. кремнекислый натр, иногда калий, свинцовая окись ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
гора — это общее название всякой земной возвышенности, противопол. дол, раздол, долина, лог, низменность; (а плоскость, равнина, отсутствие того и другого): Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
парабола — это иносказание, притча: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is prime? prime is the first part; the earliest stage; the beginning or opening: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is glyph? glyph is A sunken channel or groove, usually vertical: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
integral is A whole; an entire thing; a whole number; an individual: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
attention is the act or state of attending or heeding; the application of the mind to any object of sense, representation, or thought; notice; exclusive or special consideration; earnest consideration, thought, or regard; obedient or affectionate heed; the supposed power or faculty of attending: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
comparison is the act of comparing; an examination of two or more objects with the view of discovering the resemblances or differences; relative estimate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is construction? construction is the process or art of constructing; the act of building; erection; the act of devising and forming; fabrication; composition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
regression is the act of passing back or returning; retrogression; retrogradation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
channel is the hollow bed where a stream of water runs or may run: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
observation is the act or the faculty of observing or taking notice; the act of seeing, or of fixing the mind upon, anything: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is ethics? ethics is the science of human duty; the body of rules of duty drawn from this science; a particular system of principles and rules concerting duty, whether true or false; rules of practice in respect to a single class of human actions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
selection is the act of selecting, or the state of being selected; choice, by preference: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is phenomenon? phenomenon is an appearance; anything visible; whatever, in matter or spirit, is apparent to, or is apprehended by, observation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
electricity is that branch of science which treats of the development of electricity by the action of magnets: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ratio is the relation which one quantity or magnitude has to another of the same kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
average is that service which a tenant owed his lord, to be done by the work beasts of the tenant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is symbol? symbol is A visible sign or representation of an idea; anything which suggests an idea or quality, or another thing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thermometer is an instrument for measuring temperature, founded on the principle that changes of temperature in bodies are accompained by proportional changes in their volumes or dimensions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is muscle? muscle is an organ which, by its contraction, produces motion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is mammal? mammal is one of the Mammalia: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mirror is A looking-glass or a speculum; any glass or polished substance that forms images by the reflection of rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
теплота — это причину, вызывающую в нас специфические, всем известные тепловые ощущения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Теплота».
принцип — это научное или нравственное начало, основание, правило, основа, от которой не отступают: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое математика? математика — это наука о величинах и количествах; все, что можно выразить цифрою, принадлежит математике: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
экология — это часть зоологии, обнимающая собой сведения касательно жилищ животных: ЭСБЕ, статья «Экология».
патология — это отдел медицины, изучающий сущность, причины и симптомы болезней: ЭСБЕ, статья «Патология».
опыт — это как отдельные состояния сознания, испытываемые или испытанные субъектом, так и совокупность таких состояний у единичных людей и у всего человечества: ЭСБЕ, статья «Опыт».
что такое зло? зло — это страдания живых существ и нарушения ими нравственного порядка: ЭСБЕ, статья «Зло».
синтаксис — это граммат, словосочинение: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
земля — это планета, один из миров или несамосветлых шаров, коловращающихся вокруг солнца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
барометр — это снаряд, показывающий тяжесть, вес, гнет или давление воздуха (атмосферы, мироколицы), а потому употребляемый для измерения горных высот, для наблюдения над переменами в тяжести воздуха, предвещающими перемену погоды; буревестник, пагодник: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое длина? длина — это протяжение вдоль, долина; пск. долица, должина, твр. пск. длинь, прм. доль; за длину пространства, тела или вещи обычно берется направление наибольшего протяжения его; длина, ширина и вышина, или мера по уровню вдоль и поперек и мера по отвесу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
поэзия — это изящество в письменности; все художественное, духовно и нравственно прекрасное, выраженное словами, и притом более мерною речью: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
rotation is the act of turning: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is freedom? freedom is the state of being free; exemption from the power and control of another; liberty; independence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
temperature is condition with respect to heat or cold, especially as indicated by the sensation produced, or by the thermometer or pyrometer; degree of heat or cold: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is model? model is A miniature representation of a thing, with the several parts in due proportion; sometimes, a facsimile of the same size: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
phase is A particular appearance or state in a regularly recurring cycle of changes with respect to quantity of illumination or form of enlightened disk: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
activity is the state or quality of being active; nimbleness; agility; vigorous action or operation; energy; active force: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
description is the act of describing; a delineation by marks or signs: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is defect? defect is want or absence of something necessary for completeness or perfection; deficiency: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
inference is the act or process of inferring by deduction or induction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
capacity is the power of receiving or containing; extent of room or space; passive power: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
habit is the general appearance and manner of life of a living organism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
momentum is the quantity of motion in a moving body, being always proportioned to the quantity of matter multiplied into the velocity; impetus: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
hydrogen is A gaseous element, colorless, tasteless, and odorless, the lightest known substance, being fourteen and a half times lighter than air (hence its use in filling balloons), and over eleven thousand times lighter than water: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is angle? angle is the inclosed space near the point where two lines; a corner; a nook: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
genus is A class of objects divided into several subordinate species; a class more extensive than a species; a precisely defined and exactly divided class; one of the five predicable conceptions, or sorts of terms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
disjunction is the act of disjoining; disunion; separation; a parting: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ocean is the whole body of salt water which covers more than three fifths of the surface of the globe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
medicine is the science which relates to the prevention, cure, or alleviation of disease: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
history is A learning or knowing by inquiry; the knowledge of facts and events, so obtained: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
предел — это начало или конец, кон, межа, грань, раздел, край, рубеж или граница; конец одного и начало другого, в смысле вещественном и духовном: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое гипотеза? гипотеза — это предположение, делаемое нами для объяснения явлений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Гипотеза, в науках о природе».
эволюция — это так же, как и в философии: ЭСБЕ, статья «Эволюция, в биологии».
тождество — это равенство, имеющее место при всех значениях букв в него входящих: ЭСБЕ, статья «Тождество, в математике».
конус — это тело в виде сахарной головы, круглый клин: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое душа? душа — это бессмертное духовное существо, одаренное разумом и волею; в общем знач. человек, с духом и телом; в более тесном: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
дух — это бестелесное существо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
скептицизм — это одно из основных философских направлений, противоположное догматической философии и отрицающее возможность построения философской системы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Скептицизм».
пища — это все, что служит для питанья, что питает; снедь, яство, еда, все седомое, брашно, харч, харчи, корм, сыть, выть, все питательное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое магнит? магнит — это тело, способное притягивать железо и некоторые другие металлы и вещества, или, общнее, тело, создающее в окружающем его пространстве магнитное поле: ЭСБЕ, статья «Магнит».
климат — это состояние воздуха известной местности, относительно жары и стужи, сухости, сырости, длительности времен года ипр., погодье: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
гипербола — это кривая линия, которая бы обозначилась на поверхности сахарной головы (конуса), если её рассечь с боку, отвесно вдоль: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
remainder is anything that remains, or is left, after the separation and removal of a part; residue; remnant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
медиана — это прямая, соединяющая вершину треугольника с срединой противоположной стороны: ЭСБЕ, статья «Медиана».
theorem is A statement of a principle to be demonstrated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
perception is the faculty of perceiving; the faculty, or peculiar part, of man's constitution by which he has knowledge through the medium or instrumentality of the bodily organs; the act of apperhending material objects or qualities through the senses: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
problem is A question proposed for solution; a matter stated for examination or proof: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
instinct is specif., the natural, unreasoning, impulse by which an animal is guided to the performance of any action, without of improvement in the method: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is resolution? resolution is the act, operation, or process of resolving: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
computation is the act or process of computing; calculation; reckoning: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
process is the act of proceeding; continued forward movement; procedure; progress; advance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
hypnosis is supervention of sleep: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
abstraction is the act of abstracting, separating, or withdrawing, or the state of being withdrawn; withdrawal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
metaphysics is the science of real as distinguished from phenomenal being; ontology: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is magnetism? magnetism is the property, quality, or state, of being magnetic; the manifestation of the force in nature which is seen in a magnet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
proportion is the equality or similarity of ratios, especially of geometrical ratios; or a relation among quantities such that the quotient of the first divided by the second is equal to that of the third divided by the fourth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
error is A wandering; a roving or irregular course: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
alphabet is the letters of a language arranged in the customary order; the series of letters or signs which form the elements of written language: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
barometer is an instrument for determining the weight or pressure of the atmosphere, and hence for judging of the probable changes of weather, or for ascertaining the height of any ascent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
bone is the hard, calcified tissue of the skeleton of vertebrate animals, consisting very largely of calcic carbonate, calcic phosphate, and gelatine: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
nucleus is the body or the head of a comet: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is lens? lens is A piece of glass, or other transparent substance, ground with two opposite regular surfaces, either both curved, or one curved and the other plane, and commonly used, either singly or combined, in optical instruments, for changing the direction of rays of light: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
атом — это неделимое; вещество в крайних пределах делимости своей, незримая пылинка, из каких будто бы составлены все тела, всякое вещество, как бы из песчинок: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
алгебра — это наука о числах и через посредство чисел — о величинах вообще: ЭСБЕ, статья «Алгебра».
направление — это правой; если же, при тех же условиях, удаляющаяся точка обходит ось по направлению, противоположному направлению движения часовой стрелки, то винт называется левым: ЭСБЕ, статья «Направление».
что такое этимология? этимология — это грамматический термин (от греч. ἔτυμος — истинный, верный и λογία — учение, наука), имеющий два значения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Этимология».
построение — это графическое изображение какой-либо кривой, фигуры или тела; графическое решение уравнений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Построение».
мера — это способ определенья количества по принятой единице; мера вообще прилагается к протяженью и к пространству, а отвлеченно, вообще предел, ино пора, срок: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
счастье — это рок, судьба, часть и участь, доля: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое буква? буква — это брюква, известный вид репы; бухма, бушма: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
камень — это камык, твр. кама ж. общее название всякого твердого ископаемого, кроме чистых металов или крушца, королька: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
календарь — это роспись всех дней в году, с показанием и других, к сему относящ., сведений; месяцеслов: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
площадь — это часть поверхности, ограниченная каким-либо замкнутым контуром: ЭСБЕ, статья «Площадь».
что такое ритм? ритм — это мера, в музыке или в поэзии; мерное ударение, протяжка голосом, распев: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is coefficient? coefficient is that which unites in action with something else to produce the same effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
energy is capacity for performing work: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
heat is A force in nature which is recognized in various effects, but especially in the phenomena of fusion and evaporation, and which: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
hypothesis is A supposition; a proposition or principle which is supposed or taken for granted, in order to draw a conclusion or inference for proof of the point in question; something not proved, but assumed for the purpose of argument: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is formula? formula is A prescribed or set form; an established rule; a fixed or conventional method in which anything is to be done, arranged, or said: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
classification is the act of forming into a class or classes; a distibution into groups: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
differentiation is the act of differentiating: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
duality is the quality or condition of being two or twofold; dual character or usage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is notation? notation is the act or practice of recording anything by marks, figures, or characters: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is causality? causality is the agency of a cause; the action or power of a cause, in producing its effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is induction? induction is the act or process of inducting or bringing in; introduction; entrance; beginning; commencement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
inertia is that property of matter by which it tends when at rest to remain so, and when in motion to continue in motion, and in the same straight line or direction, unless acted on by some external force; - - sometimes called vis inertiæ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
carbon is an elementary substance, not metallic in its nature, which is present in all organic compounds: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
circle is an instrument of observation, the graduated limb of which consists of an entire circle: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is universal? universal is the whole; the general system of the universe; the universe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is implication? implication is the act of implicating, or the state of being implicated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is mountain? mountain is A large mass of earth and rock, rising above the common level of the earth or adjacent land; earth and rock forming an isolated peak or a ridge; an eminence higher than a hill; a mount: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
plant is an oyster which has been bedded, in distinction from one of natural growth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
art is the employment of means to accomplish some desired end; the adaptation of things in the natural world to the uses of life; the application of knowledge or power to practical purposes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
интеграл — это конечная, измеримая величина, в отношении к бесконечно малой части её, к дифференциалу: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
теория — это умозрение, умозаключение; заключение, вывод из чего-либо, не по явленью на деле, а по выводам своим; противоположное дело, на деле, опыт, практика: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое природа? природа — это естество, все вещественное, вселенная, все мироздание, все зримое, подлежащее пяти чувствам; но более наш мир, земля, со всем созданным на ней; противополагается Создателю: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
феноменология — это учение о феноменах, явлениях («φαινόμενον» по-греч. значит все являющееся нашим чувствам, явление): ЭСБЕ, статья «Феноменология».
кривизна — это большее или меньшее уклонение ее от прямолинейного вида, и можно сказать, что окружность тем кривее, чем меньшим радиусом она описана; при очень больших радиусах окружность уклоняется от прямолинейного направления весьма постепенно: ЭСБЕ, статья «Кривизна».
воля — это данный человеку произвол действия; свобода, простор в поступках; отсутствие неволи, насилования, принуждения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое форма? форма — это понятие, игравшее в философии большую роль и обозначающее некоторую противоположность содержанию и субстанции: ЭСБЕ, статья «Форма, в философии».
догматизм — это философский термин, обозначающий определенное отношение к содержанию системы, а не самую систему: ЭСБЕ, статья «Догматизм».
орган — это орудие, снаряд, средство: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
ион — это лад, толк, смысл, пригодность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое ветер? ветер — это движение, течение, теча, ток, поток воздуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
координаты — это величины, определяющие положение точки: ЭСБЕ, статья «Координаты, в математике».
quotient is the number resulting from the division of one number by another, and showing how often a less number is contained in a greater; thus, the quotient of twelve divided by four is three: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
матрица — это вогнутая часть формы, в которой пластическое тело формуется давлением: ЭСБЕ, статья «Матрица».
what is axiom? axiom is A self-evident and necessary truth, or a proposition whose truth is so evident as first sight that no reasoning or demonstration can make it plainer; a proposition which it is necessary to take for granted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is thought? thought is the act of thinking; the exercise of the mind in any of its higher forms; reflection; cogitation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
logic is the science or art of exact reasoning, or of pure and formal thought, or of the laws according to which the processes of pure thinking should be conducted; the science of the formation and application of general notions; the science of generalization, judgment, classification: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
quantum is quantity; amount: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
extension is that property of a body by which it occupies a portion of space: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is continuity? continuity is the state of being continuous; uninterupted connection or succession; close union of parts; cohesion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
purpose is A counter or opposing purpose: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
personality is that which constitutes distinction of person; individuality: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
judgment is that act of the mind by which two notions or ideas which are apprehended as distinct are compared for the purpose of ascertaining their agreement or disagreement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ontology is that department of the science of metaphysics which investigates and explains the nature and essential properties and relations of all beings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
current is A flowing or passing; onward motion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is fraction? fraction is the act of breaking, or state of being broken, especially by violence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
chance is A supposed material or psychical agent or mode of activity other than a force, law, or purpose; fortune; fate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
letter is A mark or character used as the representative of a sound, or of an articulation of the human organs of speech; a first element of written language: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
microscope is an optical instrument, consisting of a lens, or combination of lenses, for making an enlarged image of an object which is too minute to be viewed by the naked eye: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
skin is the external membranous integument of an animal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
embryo is the first rudiments of an organism, whether animal or plant: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
prism is A solid whose bases or ends are any similar, equal, and parallel plane figures, and whose sides are parallelograms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое молекула? молекула — это система или группа атомов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Молекула».
классификация — это весьма важный логический прием, которым пользуются при изучении предмета и который основан на логическом делении понятий: ЭСБЕ, статья «Классификация, логический прием».
область — это великая власть, широкая сила, право и мочь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
агент — это лицо, которому поручено дело от лица же, общины, товарищества или от правительства; нисшая степень поверенного одного государства при другом; частное доверенное лицо по делам, уполномоченный, делец, ходатай, ходок, старатель, стряпчий, поверенный, прикащик: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое практика? практика — это опыт, самое дело, опыт на деле, дело на опыте, в приложении; исполнение или попытка к тому, испытание: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
точка — это значок от укола, от приткнутия к чему острием, кончиком пера, карандаша; мелкая крапина: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
страсть — это страдание, муки, маета, мучение, телесная боль, душевная скорбь, тоска; особ. в знач. подвига, сознательное принятые на себя тяготы, мученичества: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
азбука — это алфавит, абевега, стар. буквица; собрание в порядке всех письмен, букв, какой либо грамоты; азбука славянская собств. буквица, кирилицаУ Даля написано с одним «л»: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое металл? металл — это крушец; а в малом виде, в выплавке: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
солнце — это наше дневное светило; величайшее, самосветное и срединное тело нашей вселенной, господствующее силою тяготения, светом и теплом над всеми земными мирами, планетами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
квадрат — это четырехугольник, все стороны которого равны, а все углы прямые: ЭСБЕ, статья «Квадрат, геометрическая фигура».
тень — это сень, стень, затинь, застень, юж. зап. холодок; отсутствие прямого, лучистого света, особ. солнечного, перенятого каким-либо предметом, который застеняет, застит, омрачает: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
square is the corner, or angle, of a figure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
information is the act of informing, or communicating knowledge or intelligence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
work is artificial and ornamental rockwork in imitation of a grotto: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
experiment is atrial or special observation, made to confirm or disprove something doubtful: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
algebra is that branch of mathematics which treats of the relations and properties of quantity by means of letters and other symbols: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is conception? conception is the act of conceiving in the womb; the initiation of an embryonic animal life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
emotion is A moving of the mind or soul; excitement of the feelings, whether pleasing or painful; disturbance or agitation of mind caused by a specific exciting cause and manifested by some sensible effect on the body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
independence is the state or quality of being independent; freedom from dependence; exemption from reliance on, or control by, others; self- subsistence or maintenance; direction of one's own affairs without interference: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
organism is an organized being; a living body, either vegetable or animal, compozed of different organs or parts with functions which are separate, but mutually dependent, and essential to the life of the individual: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
death is the cessation of all vital phenomena without capability of resuscitation, either in animals or plants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
deduction is act or process of deducing or inferring: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is gravity? gravity is the state of having weight; beaviness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
crystal is the regular form which a substance tends to assume in solidifying, through the inherent power of cohesive attraction: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
curve is A bending without angles; that wcich is bent; a flexure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
particular is A separate or distinct member of a class, or part of a whole; an individual fact, point, circumstance, detail, or item, which may be considered separately: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
planet is A celestial body which revolves about the sun in an orbit of a moderate degree of eccentricity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
earthquake is A shaking, trembling, or concussion of the earth, due to subterranean causes, often accompanied by a rumbling noise: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is root? root is the underground portion of a plant, whether a true root or a tuber, a bulb or rootstock: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is music? music is the science and the art of tones, or musical sounds, i.e., sounds of higher or lower pitch, begotten of uniform and synchronous vibrations: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
аксиома — это очевидность, ясная по себе и бесспорная истина, не требующая доказательств: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
аналогия — это как один из факторов, действующих в истории развития языка, была замечена очень давно, но только в новейшее время ученые лингвисты, занимающиеся тщательным анализом всех вообще действующих тут факторов, изучили влияние аналогии поближе: ЭСБЕ, статья «Аналогия, в лингвистике».
аргумент — это причина, доказательство, убеждение, довод: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое градиент? градиент — это разность в показаниях барометров (приведенных к уровню моря) в двух местах, лежащих по тому направлению, по которому в данный момент упругость воздуха убывает всего быстрее: ЭСБЕ, статья «Градиент».
масштаб — это жезл размерный, стар.: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
свет — это состоянье, противное тьме, темноте, мраку, потемкам, что дает способ видеть; иные свет принимают за сотрясение малейших частиц вещества, другие — за особое, тончайшее вещество, разливаемое всюду солнцем и огнем: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
отношение — это частное, получаемое от деления одной величины на другую: ЭСБЕ, статья «Отношение, в математике».
что такое критика? критика — это розыск и суждение о достоинствах и недостатках какого-либо труда, особ. сочинения; разбор, оценка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
вид — это одинаково употребляемый в зоологии и в ботанике для обозначения различных форм растительных и животных организмов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вид, в биологии».
маятник — это тяжелое тело, совершающее колебания около неподвижной точки: ЭСБЕ, статья «Маятник».
дождь — это вода в каплях или струями из облаков: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое ряд? ряд — это вереница, строй, предметы по одной черте, по порядку, чередом: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is multiple? multiple is A quantity containing another quantity a number of times without a remainder: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
граф — это наследственное дворянское достоинство, местами и доныне владетельское, но у нас только почетное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
proof is A process for testing the accuracy of an operation performed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thinking is the act of thinking; mode of thinking; imagination; cogitation; judgment: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is category? category is one of the highest classes to which the objects of knowledge or thought can be reduced, and by which they can be arranged in a system; an ultimate or undecomposable conception; a predicament: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
imagination is the imagine-making power of the mind; the power to create or reproduce ideally an object of sense previously perceived; the power to call up mental imagines: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mechanism is the arrangement or relation of the parts of a machine; the parts of a machine, taken collectively; the arrangement or relation of the parts of anything as adapted to produce an effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
differential is an increment, usually an indefinitely small one, which is given to a variable quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is research? research is diligent inquiry or examination in seeking facts or principles; laborius or continued search after truth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
monism is that doctrine which refers all phenomena to a single ultimate constituent or agent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is definition? definition is the act of defining; determination of the limits: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
aesthetics is the theory or philosophy of taste; the science of the beautiful in nature and art: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
potential is anything that may be possible; a possibility; potentially: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
equation is A making equal; equal division; equality; equilibrium: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is certainty? certainty is the quality, state, or condition, of being certain: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
sentence is sense; meaning; significance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is telescope? telescope is an optical instrument used in viewing distant objects: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
eye is aldebaran, a bright star in the eye of Taurus or the Bull: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fossil is A substance dug from the earth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
spectrum is an apparition; a specter: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
нерв — это беложилье, чувственная или чулая жила в теле; проводник чувства и всякой животной деятельности (движения, питания, усвоения), между средоточием мозговой деятельности и прочими частями тела: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое логика? логика — это по мнению одних, наука о доказательстве, по мнению других, наука о законах и формах мышления: ЭСБЕ, статья «Логика».
перспектива — это вид вдаль, вперед, на расстояние, с обстановкой по пути разными предметами: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
арифметика — это учение о счете, наука о счислении; основа всей математики (науки о величинах, о измеримом); стар. счетная или цыфирная мудрость; счет, счисление, цыфирная сметка, выкладка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
синтез — это основное свойство сознания, благодаря коему самые разнообразные состояния сознания получают объединение и становятся состояниями этого определенного «я»: ЭСБЕ, статья «Синтез, в психологии и логике».
что такое линия? линия — это граница поверхности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Линия».
инстинкт — это безотчетное побуждение, по которому действуют животные; побудок сев. побудка вост: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
голос — это тоны, произвольно или непроизвольно издаваемые животными организмами при прохождении более или менее сильной струи воздуха через гортань: ЭСБЕ, статья «Голос, в физиологическом смысле».
золото — это самый дорогой крушец (металл), находимый в самородном виде, то есть не в руде: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое луна? луна — это спутник Земли, ближайшее к нам небесное тело: ЭСБЕ, статья «Луна, спутник Земли».
куб — это перегонный сосуд, алембик, снаряд для перегонки жидкостей, особ. винных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
зеркало — это зеркальной, а тело с такой поверхностью — зеркалом: ЭСБЕ, статья «Зеркало».
cube is A regular solid body, with six equal square sides: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
probability is likelihood of the occurrence of any event in the doctrine of chances, or the ratio of the number of favorable chances to the whole number of chances, favorable and unfavorable: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is atom? atom is an ultimate indivisible particle of matter: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
measurement is the act or result of measuring; mensuration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
science is knowledge; knowledge of principles and causes; ascertained truth of facts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
explanation is the act of explaining, expounding, or interpreting; the act of clearing from obscurity and making intelligible: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is individual? individual is A single person, animal, or thing of any kind; a thing or being incapable of separation or division, without losing its identity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
preservation is the act or process of preserving, or keeping safe; the state of being preserved, or kept from injury, destruction, or decay; security; safety: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
transformation is the act of transforming, or the state of being transformed; change of form or condition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
event is that which comes, arrives, or happens; that which falls out; any incident, good or bad: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
syllogism is the regular logical form of every argument, consisting of three propositions, of which the first two are called the premises, and the last, the conclusion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
gravitation is the act of gravitating: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is solution? solution is the act of separating the parts of any body, or the condition of undergoing a separation of parts; disruption; breach: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
surface is A magnitude that has length and breadth without thickness; superficies: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
form is the shape and structure of anything: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
star is one of the innumerable luminous bodies seen in the heavens; any heavenly body other than the sun, moon, comets, and nebulæ: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
rainbow is A bow or arch exhibiting, in concentric bands, the several colors of the spectrum, and formed in the part of the hemisphere opposite to the sun by the refraction and reflection of the sun's rays in drops of falling rain: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
leaf is A colored, usually green, expansion growing from the side of a stem or rootstock, in which the sap for the use of the plant is elaborated under the influence of light; one of the parts of a plant which collectively constitute its foliage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
poetry is the art of apprehending and interpreting ideas by the faculty of imagination; the art of idealizing in thought and in expression: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое закон? закон — это предел, постановленный свободе воли или действий; неминучее начало, основание; правило, постановление высшей власти: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
анализ — это разбор, раздробка, разрешение, разложение целого на составные части его; общий вывод из частных заключений; противоп. синтез, синтетический способ, переход от общого к частностям: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
интуиция — это непосредственное усмотрение чего-либо в качестве истинного, целесообразного, нравственно доброго или прекрасного: ЭСБЕ, статья «Интуиция».
дифференциация — это термин биологического процесса развития, введенный в науку Гербертом Спенсером: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дифференциация».
что такое метафизика? метафизика — это умозрительное учение о первоначальных основах всякого бытия или о сущности мира: ЭСБЕ, статья «Метафизика».
звук — это все что слышит ухо, что доходит до слуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
определение — это такая часть предложения, которая содержит в себе указания качества или свойства предмета, имя которого выражено в предложении существительным: ЭСБЕ, статья «Определение, в грамматике».
диалектика — это умосложение, логика на деле, в прении, наука правильного рассуждения; по злоупотреблению, искусство убедительного пустословие, ловкого спора, словопрения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое род? род — это вторая главная категория, следующая за категорией вид: ЭСБЕ, статья «Род, в систематике животных и растений».
рычаг — это жердь, шесть, для подъема тяжести, на упорной точке; подъем: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
снег — это мерзлые пары, падающие, в виде хлопьев, клочьев, с облаков; самый рыхлый лед, заменяющий зимой дождь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
прогрессия — это лествица; ряд чисел, из которых каждое на столько же или во столько же раз более или менее предыдущего; первая прогрессия арифметическая, вторая геометрическая: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
factor is one of the elements or quantities which, when multiplied together, from a product: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое коэффициент? коэффициент — это постоянное количество, показывающее сколько раз некоторая буква или целое алгебраическое выражение должно быть взято слагаемым: ЭСБЕ, статья «Коэффициент, в алгебре».
law is in general, a rule of being or of conduct, established by an authority able to enforce its will; a controlling regulation; the mode or order according to which an agent or a power acts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
language is any means of conveying or communicating ideas: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
interpretation is the act or process of applying general principles or formulæ to the explanation of the results obtained in special cases: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is pattern? pattern is anything proposed for imitation; an archetype; an exemplar; that which is to be, or is worthy to be, copied or imitated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
necessity is the negation of freedom in voluntary action; the subjection of all phenomena, whether material or spiritual, to inevitable causation; necessitarianism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
extraction is the act of extracting, or drawing out: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
stability is the state or quality of being stable, or firm; steadiness; firmness; strength to stand without being moved or overthrown: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is reality? reality is the state or quality of being real; actual being or existence of anything, in distinction from mere appearance; fact: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
concept is an abstract general conception; a notion; a universal: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is heredity? heredity is hereditary transmission of the physical and psychical qualities of parents to their offspring; the biological law by which living beings tend to repeat their characteristics in their descendants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
resistance is the quality of not yielding to force or external pressure; that power of a body which acts in opposition to the impulse or pressure of another, or which prevents the effect of another power: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
matrix is the womb: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
doubt is A fluctuation of mind arising from defect of knowledge or evidence; uncertainty of judgment or mind; unsettled state of opinion concerning the reality of an event, or the truth of an assertion, etc.; hesitation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is grammar? grammar is the science which treats of the principles of language; the study of forms of speech, and their relations to one another; the art concerned with the right use aud application of the rules of a language, in speaking or writing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
telegraph is an apparatus, or a process, for communicating intelligence rapidly between distant points, especially by means of preconcerted visible or audible signals representing words or ideas, or by means of words and signs, transmitted by electrical action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is ear? ear is the organ of hearing; the external ear: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is biology? biology is that branch of biology which treats of the electrical phenomena of living organisms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
свобода — это своя воля, простор, возможность действовать по-своему; отсутствие стеснения, неволи, рабства, подчинения чужой воле: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
мозг — это вещество, наполняющее череп человека и высших животных: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
архитектура — это искуство располагать, строить и украшать здания; строительное искусство, зодчество: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое поток? поток — это одна из наиболее распространенных форм поверхностного залегания новейших изверженных горных пород: ЭСБЕ, статья «Поток».
аспект — это положение луны или планеты в отношении к солнцу или к другим планетам: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
субъект — это подлежащее суждения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Субъект, в философии».
угол — это перелом, излом, колено, локоть, выступ или залом (впадина) об одной грани: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое представление? представление — это воспроизведенное памятью и вызванное в сознании ощущение: ЭСБЕ, статья «Представление».
слух — это одно из пяти чувств, коим распознаются звуки; орудие его ухо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
железо — это в животном организме представляет столь важную составную часть крови: ЭСБЕ, статья «Железо, в медицине».
звезда — это одно из светящих (самосветных) небесных тел, видимых в безоблачную ночь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое шар? шар — это геометрическое тело, ограниченное сферической или шаровой поверхностью: ЭСБЕ, статья «Шар, геометрическое тело».
линза — это сферическое выпуклое или вогнутое стекло: ЭСБЕ, статья «Линза».
exponent is A number, letter, or any quantity written on the right hand of and above another quantity, and denoting how many times the latter is repeated as a factor to produce the power indicated: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is symmetry? symmetry is A due proportion of the several parts of a body to each other; adaptation of the form or dimensions of the several parts of a thing to each other; the union and conformity of the members of a work to the whole: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
molecule is the smallest part of any substance which possesses the characteristic properties and qualities of that substance, and which can exist alone in a free state: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is theory? theory is A doctrine, or scheme of things, which terminates in speculation or contemplation, without a view to practice; hypothesis; speculation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
development is the series of changes which animal and vegetable organisms undergo in their passage from the embryonic state to maturity, from a lower to a higher state of organization: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intellect is the part or faculty of the human soul by which it knows: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pleasure is the gratification of the senses or of the mind; agreeable sensations or emotions; the excitement, relish, or happiness produced by the expectation or the enjoyment of something good, delightful, or satisfying: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is universe? universe is all created things viewed as constituting one system or whole; the whole body of things, or of phenomena; the mundus of the Latins; the world; creation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
unity is the state of being one; oneness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intensity is the amount or degree of energy with which a force operates or a cause acts; effectiveness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
proposition is A complete sentence, or part of a sentence consisting of a subject and predicate united by a copula; a thought expressed or propounded in language; a from of speech in which a predicate is affirmed or denied of a subject: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pressure is the act of pressing, or the condition of being pressed; compression; a squeezing; a crushing: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
equilibrium is equality of weight or force; an equipoise or a state of rest produced by the mutual counteraction of two or more forces: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is plane? plane is A surface, real or imaginary, in which, if any two points are taken, the straight line which joins them lies wholly in that surface; or a surface, any section of which by a like surface is a straight line; a surface without curvature: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
structure is manner of organization; the arrangement of the different tissues or parts of animal and vegetable organisms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
comet is A member of the solar system which usually moves in an elongated orbit, approaching very near to the sun in its perihelion, and receding to a very great distance from it at its aphelion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lightning is A discharge of atmospheric electricity, accompanied by a vivid flash of light, commonly from one cloud to another, sometimes from a cloud to the earth: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
flower is in the popular sense, the bloom or blossom of a plant; the showy portion, usually of a different color, shape, and texture from the foliage: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
rhythm is in the widest sense, a dividing into short portions by a regular succession of motions, impulses, sounds, accents, etc., producing an agreeable effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
причина — это требуемое логически условие всего бывающего, или то, без чего, по предположению нашего разума, данный факт не может произойти, а при наличности чего он происходит с необходимостью: ЭСБЕ, статья «Причина».
что такое динамика? динамика — это греч. слово (δύναμις — сила), введено Лейбницем и служит наименованием учения о движении тел под влиянием сил: ЭСБЕ, статья «Динамика».
монизм — это собой философское направление, признающее только один принцип бытия: ЭСБЕ, статья «Монизм».
дуализм — это общее название учений, все сводящих к двум противоположным принципам: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дуализм, в религии и философии».
метод — это и метода ж. способ, порядок, основания; принятый путь для хода, достижения чего-либо, в виде общих правил: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое вещество? вещество — это не первоначальная потенция чувственного бытия, а его ближайший реальный субстрат — то, из чего состоят тела, действительная основа и среда всех ощутимых явлений: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вещество, в философии».
индукция — это слово «индукция» употребляется в физике для обозначения явлений возбуждения в телах магнитного или электрического состояния, а также возникновения в них электрических токов — под влиянием других тел, находящихся на расстоянии от первых и представляющих собой намагниченные или наэлектризованные тела или, наконец, проводники: ЭСБЕ, статья «Индукция, в физике».
софизм — это преднамеренно ложный вывод в противоположность паралогизму: ЭСБЕ, статья «Софизм».
наследственность — это способность организмов передавать свои свойства и особенности от одного поколения в другое, покуда длится самый процесс размножения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Наследственность».
что такое колесо? колесо — это плоский круг, обращающийся на оси: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
туман — это густой пар, водяные пары в нисших слоях воздуха, на поверхности земли; омраченный парами воздух: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
пропорция — это соразмерность; величина или количество, отвечающее чему-либо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
mean is A quantity having an intermediate value between several others, from which it is derived, and of which it expresses the resultant value; usually, unless otherwise specified, it is the simple average, formed by adding the quantities together and dividing by their number: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
периметр — это полная длина какой-либо замкнутой кривой линии: ЭСБЕ, статья «Периметр».
cause is that which produces or effects a result; that from which anything proceeds, and without which it would not exist: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
number is the measure of the relation between quantities or things of the same kind; that abstract species of quantity which is capable of being expressed by figures; numerical value: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
nature is the existing system of things; the world of matter, or of matter and mind; the creation; the universe: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
physics is the science of nature, or of natural objects; that branch of science which treats of the laws and properties of matter, and the forces acting upon it: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is syntax? syntax is connected system or order; union of things; a number of things jointed together; organism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
neurosis is A functional nervous affection or disease, that is, a disease of the nerves without any appreciable change of nerve structure: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
understanding is the act of one who understands a thing, in any sense of the verb; knowledge; discernment; comprehension; interpretation; explanation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
relation is the act of relating or telling: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
idea is the transcript, image, or picture of a visible object, that is formed by the mind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
species is A group of individuals agreeing in common attributes, and designated by a common name; a conception subordinated to another conception, called a genus, or generic conception, from which it differs in containing or comprehending more attributes, and extending to fewer individuals: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is conductor? conductor is A substance or body capable of being a medium for the transmission of certain forces: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
series is any comprehensive group of animals or plants including several subordinate related groups: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
belief is assent to a proposition or affirmation, or the acceptance of a fact, opinion, or assertion as real or true, without immediate personal knowledge; reliance upon word or testimony; partial or full assurance without positive knowledge or absolute certainty; persuasion; conviction; confidence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
noun is A word used as the designation or appellation of a creature or thing, existing in fact or in thought; a substantive: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
photography is the science which relates to the action of light on sensitive bodies in the production of pictures, the fixation of images, and the like: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
digestion is the conversion of food, in the stomach and intestines, into soluble and diffusible products, capable of being absorbed by the blood: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
physiology is the science which treats of the phenomena of living organisms; the study of the processes incidental to, and characteristic of, life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое энергия? энергия — это способность данной системы тел, находящихся в данных условиях, совершить некоторое, вполне определенное количество работы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Энергия».
память — это способность помнить, не забывать прошлого; свойство души хранить, помнить сознание о былом: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
механизм — это совокупность тел, ограничивающих свободу движения друг друга взаимным сопротивлением настолько, что все точки такой системы способны описывать только вполне определенные кривые (траектории) и при данной скорости одной из точек скорости и ускорения всех остальных точек системы являются вполне определенными: ЭСБЕ, статья «Механизм».
самонаблюдение — это направление внимания на собственные психические процессы, на деятельность нашего мышления, на наши чувствования и волевые импульсы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Самонаблюдение».
что такое диагноз? диагноз — это распознавание и определение болезни на основании замечаемых местных изменений, предполагаемых причин, а также особенно выдающихся явлений ее: ЭСБЕ, статья «Диагноз».
схоластика — это философия внешности, основанная на логике или на диалектике; вообще, школярство, школярное направление, сухое, тупое, безжизненое. схоластик, человек схоластического духа; педант, сухой школяр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
круг — это окружность, сомкнутая кривая черта, всюду равно удаленная от средоточия: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
фантазия — это воображенье, изобретательная сила ума; творческая сила художника, самобытная сила созиданья: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое глаз? глаз — это орган зрения: ЭСБЕ, статья «Глаз».
соль — это пятая нота в порядке, ге: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
планета — это небесное темное тело, земля, один из земных шаров вселенной, обтекающих солнце: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
окружность — это кривая линия, все точки которой находятся на одинаковом расстоянии от одной внутренней точки, называемой центром: ЭСБЕ, статья «Окружность».
что такое призма? призма — это часть прозрачного для света вещества, ограниченную двумя непараллельными плоскостями: ЭСБЕ, статья «Призма».
what is triangle? triangle is A figure bounded by three lines, and containing three angles: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
invariant is an invariable quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
cell is A very small and close apartment: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
dream is the thoughts, or series of thoughts, or imaginary transactions, which occupy the mind during sleep; a sleeping vision: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is identity? identity is the state or quality of being identical, or the same; sameness: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
mechanics is that science, or branch of applied mathematics, which treats of the action of forces on bodies: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
reasoning is the act or process of adducing a reason or reasons; manner of presenting one's reasons: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
discipline is the treatment suited to a disciple or learner; education; development of the faculties by instruction and exercise; training, whether physical, mental, or moral: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is circuit? circuit is the act of moving or revolving around, or as in a circle or orbit; a revolution: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is inversion? inversion is the act of inverting, or turning over or backward, or the state of being inverted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is quality? quality is the condition of being of such and such a sort as distinguished from others; nature or character relatively considered: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
density is the ratio of mass, or quantity of matter, to bulk or volume: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
thermodynamics is the science which treats of the mechanical action or relations of heat: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
dimension is the degree of manifoldness of a quantity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is organization? organization is the act of organizing; the act of arranging in a systematic way for use or action: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is orbit? orbit is the path described by a heavenly body in its periodical revolution around another body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is echo? echo is A sound reflected from an opposing surface and repeated to the ear of a listener; repercussion of sound; repetition of a sound: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
seed is A ripened ovule, consisting of an embryo with one or more integuments, or coverings: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
harmony is the just adaptation of parts to each other, in any system or combination of things, or in things, or things intended to form a connected whole; such an agreement between the different parts of a design or composition as to produce unity of effect: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
материя — это то, из чего состоит и из чего происходит данный предмет: ЭСБЕ, статья «Материя, материальное начало, материальная причина».
проблема — это задача, вопрос, загадка, что предложено на разрешение, на научное решение; задача, для отыскания неизвестного по данному: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое парадокс? парадокс — это мнение, расходящееся с общепринятым: ЭСБЕ, статья «Парадокс».
жизнь — это жись, жизть, простонародное живот; житье, бытье; состояние особи, существование отдельной личности: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
механика — это наука о движении: ЭСБЕ, статья «Механика».
движение — это все явления природы состоят в движении вещества или же объясняются движением: ЭСБЕ, статья «Движение».
что такое дедукция? дедукция — это термин современной логики, обозначающий выведение одной мысли из другой, делаемое на основании логических законов: ЭСБЕ, статья «Дедукция».
символ — это сокращение, перечень, полная картина, сущность в немногих словах или знаках: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
рост — это таган, решетка, под которою разводится огонь, и на которую ставят сковороду, кастрюлю: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
винт — это шуруп, округлый гвоздь, нарезанный винтом, спиралью, обвоем, который не забивается, а ввертывается, ввинчивается в нарезную же дыру или гнездо, либо прямо, особ. в дерево, а иногда пропускается насквозь в простую дыру, с наверткой на кончик его гайки: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое радуга? радуга — это всем известное оптическое явление в атмосфере; наблюдается, когда солнце освещает пелену падающего дождя и наблюдатель находится между солнцем и дождем: ЭСБЕ, статья «Радуга».
процент — это или проценты мн. счет или цифра, означающая доход или плату с сотни; рез, резы, настав (стар.), соста, рост, росты, верхи, вершки, свершки, лихва: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
median is A median line or point: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is entropy? entropy is A certain property of a body, expressed as a measurable quantity, such that when there is no communication of heat the quantity remains constant, but when heat enters or leaves the body the quantity increases or diminishes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
time is duration, considered independently of any system of measurement or any employment of terms which designate limited portions thereof: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is algorithm? algorithm is the art of calculating by nine figures and zero: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
evolution is the formation of an involute by unwrapping a thread from a curve as an evolute: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
association is the act of associating, or state of being associated; union; connection, whether of persons of things: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
tensor is A muscle that stretches a part, or renders it tense: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is reduction? reduction is the act of reducing, or state of being reduced; conversion to a given state or condition; diminution; conquest: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
calculus is any solid concretion, formed in any part of the body, but most frequent in the organs that act as reservoirs, and in the passages connected with them: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
separation is the act of separating, or the state of being separated, or separate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
knowledge is the act or state of knowing; clear perception of fact, truth, or duty; certain apprehension; familiar cognizance; cognition: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
life is the state of being which begins with generation, birth, or germination, and ends with death: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
chemistry is that branch of science which treats of the composition of substances, and of the changes which they undergo in consequence of alterations in the constitution of the molecules, which depend upon variations of the number, kind, or mode of arrangement, of the constituent atoms: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is sequence? sequence is the state of being sequent; succession; order of following; arrangement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
evidence is that which makes evident or manifest; that which furnishes, or tends to furnish, proof; any mode of proof; the ground of belief or judgement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
paradox is A tenet or proposition contrary to received opinion; an assertion or sentiment seemingly contradictory, or opposed to common sense; that which in appearance or terms is absurd, but yet may be true in fact: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
calendar is an orderly arrangement of the division of time, adapted to the purposes of civil life: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
respiration is the act of respiring or breathing again, or catching one's breath: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
anatomy is the art of dissecting, or artificially separating the different parts of any organized body, to discover their situation, structure, and economy; dissection: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
вероятность — это отношение числа случаев, благоприятствующих событию, к полному числу случаев, допускающих и исключающих ожидаемое событие: ЭСБЕ, статья «Вероятность, в математике».
что такое язык? язык — это у позвоночных представляет собой непарный выступ нижней поверхности ротовой полости: ЭСБЕ, статья «Язык, в анатомии».
объект — это предмет противоп. субъект или самость: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
аппарат — это совокупность приборов и приспособлений, служащих для выполнения какой-нибудь работы, сооружения или для применения науки к практическим целям: ЭСБЕ, статья «Аппарат».
имманентность — это означ. пребывание в чем-нибудь, внутреннюю связь в противоположность внешней: ЭСБЕ, статья «Имманентность, имманентный».
что такое наука? наука — это совокупность всяких сведений, подвергнутых некоторой умственной проверке или отчету и приведенных в известный систематический порядок, начиная от теологии, метафизики, чистой математики и кончая геральдикой, нумизматикой, учением о копыте кавалерийских лошадей: ЭСБЕ, статья «Наука».
корень — это корешек, —шечек, коренек умал. корнишка презрительное, корнища увеличительное, подземная часть всякого растения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
сон — это состояние спящего; отдых тела, в забытьи чувств; противоп. бдение, бодрость, явь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
ухо — это снаряд или орудие слуха; внутреннее устройство в височной кости, коим человк. и животн. слышат; в нем различают: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое газ? газ — это воздушная жидкость, тело или вещество, в виде воздуха: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
комета — это небесное тело, сравнительно с прочими, огромной величины, но редкое или жидкое, сквозящее; иногда в ней заметно ядро, а окружная среда образует как бы хвост, бороду или космы; звезда с хвостом, косматая: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
диаметр — это прямая линия, проходящая через центр кривой фигуры (круга, эллипса, гиперболы, параболы и др.): ЭСБЕ, статья «Диаметр».
история — это слово, принятое от древних почти во все европейских языки, вообще в знач. того, что было или есть, в противоположность сказке, басне; в тесном знач. бытописание, дееписание, бытословие, деи, описание происшествий, повесть о событиях, о быте и жизни народов: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
area is the superficial contents of any figure; the surface included within any given lines; superficial extent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
group is A cluster, crowd, or throng; an assemblage, either of persons or things, collected without any regular form or arrangement: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
nerve is one of the whitish and elastic bundles of fibers, with the accompanying tissues, which transmit nervous impulses between nerve centers and various parts of the animal body: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
psychology is the science of the human soul: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
principle is any original inherent constituent which characterizes a substance, or gives it its essential properties, and which can usually be separated by analysis: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is relativity? relativity is the state of being relative: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
trust is assured resting of the mind on the integrity, veracity, justice, friendship, or other sound principle, of another person; confidence; reliance; reliance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
influence is A flowing in or upon; influx: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
constant is A quantity that does not change its value: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
manifold is A cylindrical pipe fitting, having a number of lateral outlets, for connecting one pipe with several others: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
substance is that which underlies all outward manifestations; substratum; the permanent subject or cause of phenomena, whether material or spiritual; that in which properties inhere; that which is real, in distinction from that which is apparent; the abiding part of any existence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is weight? weight is A counterpoise: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
measure is A number which is contained in a given number a number of times without a remainder: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
coordinate is A thing of the same rank with another thing; one two or more persons or things of equal rank, authority, or importance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
lever is A rigid piece which is capable of turning about one point, or axis (the fulcrum), and in which are two or more other points where forces are applied: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
ether is A medium of great elasticity and extreme tenuity, supposed to pervade all space, the interior of solid bodies not excepted, and to be the medium of transmission of light and heat; hence often called luminiferous ether: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
blood is the fluid which circulates in the principal vascular system of animals, carrying nourishment to all parts of the body, and bringing away waste products to be excreted: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
insect is one of the Insecta: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is melody? melody is A sweet or agreeable succession of sounds: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
время — это длительность бытья; пространство в бытии; последовательность существования; продолжение случаев, событий; дни за днями и века за веками; последовательное течение суток за сутками: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
категория — это логический и метафизический термин, введенный Аристотелем, ныне употребляемый в значении, данном Кантом: ЭСБЕ, статья «Категория».
физика — это наука о природе, о законах и явлениях её: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое здоровье? здоровье — это состояние животного тела (или растения), когда все жизненные отправления идут в полном порядке; отсутствие недуга, болезни: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
мысль — это всякое одиночное действие ума, разума, рассудка; представленье чего в уме; идея; сужденье, мненье, соображенье и заключенье, предположенье, выдумка, думка ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
давление — это совокупность сил, сплошным образом приложенных к поверхности тела и направленных по нормалям ее внутрь тела: ЭСБЕ, статья «Давление».
силлогизм — это умствование, рассуждение, из трех предложений: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое слово? слово — это исключительная способность человека выражать гласно мысли и чувства свои; дар говорить, сообщаться разумно сочетаемыми звуками; словесная речь: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
лечение — это совокупность всех действий, предпринимаемых для улучшения состояния больного: ЭСБЕ, статья «Лечение».
телеграф — это устройство, для подачи условных знаков, маяк: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
молния — это электрический разряд между двумя облаками, или между частями одного и того же облака, или между облаком и землею: ЭСБЕ, статья «Молния».
что такое случай? случай — это быть или быль, приключение, происшествие, притча, дело, что сталось, случилось, сбылось; обстоятельство, встреча; все нежданное, не предвиденное, внезапное, нечаянное: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
what is progression? progression is the act of moving forward; a proceeding in a course; motion onward: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
consciousness is the state of being conscious; knowledge of one's own existence, condition, sensations, mental operations, acts: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
space is extension, considered independently of anything which it may contain; that which makes extended objects conceivable and possible: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
machine is in general, any combination of bodies so connected that their relative motions are constrained, and by means of which force and motion may be transmitted and modified: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is philosophy? philosophy is literally, the love of, including the search after, wisdom; in actual usage, the knowledge of phenomena as explained by, and resolved into, causes and reasons, powers and laws: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
elimination is act of causing a quantity to disappear from an equation: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
choice is act of choosing; the voluntary act of selecting or separating from two or more things that which is preferred; the determination of the mind in preferring one thing to another; election: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
animal is an organized living being endowed with sensation and the power of voluntary motion, and also characterized by taking its food into an internal cavity or stomach for digestion; by giving carbonic acid to the air and taking oxygen in the process of respiration: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is constraint? constraint is the act of constraining, or the state of being constrained; that which compels to, or restrains from, action; compulsion; restraint; necessity: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
signal is A sign made for the purpose of giving notice to a person of some occurence, command, or danger: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is reason? reason is A thought or a consideration offered in support of a determination or an opinion; a just ground for a conclusion or an action; that which is offered or accepted as an explanation; the efficient cause of an occurrence or a phenomenon: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
growth is the process of growing; the gradual increase of an animal or a vegetable body; the development from a seed, germ, or root, to full size or maturity; increase in size, number, frequency, strength, etc.; augmentation; advancement; production; prevalence or influence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
element is one of the simplest or essential parts or principles of which anything consists, or upon which the constitution or fundamental powers of anything are based: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
infinity is A quantity greater than any assignable quantity of the same kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is demonstration? demonstration is the act of demonstrating; an exhibition; proof: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is contradiction? contradiction is an assertion of the contrary to what has been said or affirmed; denial of the truth of a statement or assertion; contrary declaration; gainsaying: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is clock? clock is A machine for measuring time, indicating the hour and other divisions by means of hands moving on a dial plate: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
circulation is the movement of the blood in the blood-vascular system, by which it is brought into close relations with almost every living elementary constituent: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
botany is the science which treats of the structure of plants, the functions of their parts, their places of growth, their classification, and the terms which are employed in their description and denomination: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
симметрия — это соразмер, соразмерность, равноподобие (или разноподобие), равномерие, равнообразие, соответствие, сходность; одинаковость, либо соразмерное подобие расположения частей целого, двух половин; сообразие, сообразность; противоравенство, противоподобие: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
знак — это признак, примета, отличие; предзнаменование; предвестие; чувственое доказательство, свидетельство; чувственое изъявление, обнаружение чего-либо: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое различие? различие — это результат умственного процесса, в котором сопоставляются два или большее количество объектов мысли, причем каждый из этих объектов принимается за самостоятельное целое, отличное от всякого другого или только числом, или же и качественно: ЭСБЕ, статья «Различие».
базис — это основная линия в сети геодезических треугольников, измеряемых для топографической съемки или для определения фигуры земли: ЭСБЕ, статья «Базис».
индикатор — это указатель хода или действия машины: ЭСБЕ, статья «Индикатор, в технике».
понятие — это логический термин, обозначающий известную ступень в развитии интеллектуальной деятельности человека: ЭСБЕ, статья «Понятие».
что такое степень? степень — это ступень, ряд, разряд, порядок, от дел по качеству, достоинству; место и самое собрание однородного, равного во всем, где полагается лествичный порядок, восходящий и нисходящий: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
характер — это нрав человека, нравственные свойства, качества его, свойства души и сердца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
кровь — это красная, жизненная жидкость, которая обращается в животном теле, в жилах, силою сердца: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
пар — это жидкость, обращенная жаром в летучее и воздушное вещество: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое океан? океан — это окиян, киян; всемирное море; солоногорькие воды, окружающие весь материк земной, сушу, и занимающие более двух третей земной поверхности: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
радиус — это полупоперечник круга, полуось шара, луч, нога, которою круг очерчен; черта или мера от остья (средоточия, центра) до обода: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
религия — это вера, духовная вера, исповедание, богопочитание, или основные духовные убеждения: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
perimeter is the outer boundary of a body or figure, or the sum of all the sides: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
function is the appropriate action of any special organ or part of an animal or vegetable organism: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is brain? brain is the whitish mass of soft matter (the center of the nervous system, and the seat of consciousness and volition) which is inclosed in the cartilaginous or bony cranium of vertebrate animals: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
context is the part or parts of something written or printed: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
analogy is A resemblance of relations; an agreement or likeness between things in some circumstances or effects, when the things are otherwise entirely different: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
learning is the acquisition of knowledge or skill: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is illustration? illustration is the act of illustrating; the act of making clear and distinct; education: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
intelligence is the act or state of knowing; the exercise of the understanding: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
correlation is reciprocal relation; corresponding similarity or parallelism of relation or law; capacity of being converted into, or of giving place to, one another, under certain conditions: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
population is the act or process of populating; multiplication of inhabitants: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
essence is the constituent elementary notions which constitute a complex notion, and must be enumerated to define it; sometimes called the nominal essence: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
light is A West Indian fish of the genus Ephippus, remarkable for its high dorsal fin and brilliant colors: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is unit? unit is A single thing or person: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
arithmetic is the science of numbers; the art of computation by figures: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
wheel is the wheel in a clock which regulates the number of strokes: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
pendulum is A body so suspended from a fixed point as to swing freely to and fro by the alternate action of gravity and momentum: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
heart is A hollow, muscular organ, which, by contracting rhythmically, keeps up the circulation of the blood: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
fish is A name loosely applied in popular usage to many animals of diverse characteristics, living in the water: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
color is A property depending on the relations of light to the eye, by which individual and specific differences in the hues and tints of objects are apprehended in vision: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
что такое сила? сила — это причина, сообщающая ускорение свободной материальной точке, к которой она приложена: ЭСБЕ, статья «Сила, в механике».
инварианты — это особое обозначение в математике: ЭСБЕ, статья «Инварианты».
философия — это свободное исследование основных проблем бытия, человеческого познания, деятельности и красоты: ЭСБЕ, статья «Философия».
монада — это единица, как начало исхода счета, силы ипр: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое начало? начало — это чем начинается бытье или действие; один из двух пределов, между коими заключено бытье, вещественное либо духовное; почин, зачин, искон, зачало, источник, корень, рождение, исход; противоп. конец: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
электричество — это то, содержащееся в теле, что сообщает этому телу особые свойства, вызывает в нем способность действовать механически на некоторые другие тела, притягивать или при известных условиях отталкивать их, а также вызывает в самом этом теле способность испытывать подобные же механические действия других тел: ЭСБЕ, статья «Электричество».
гармония — это соответствие, созвучье, соразмерность, равновесие, равномерность, равнозвучие, взаимность соотношение, согласие, согласность, соглас, стройность, благостройность; соразмерное отношение частей целого; правильное отношение одновременных или современных звуков, аккорд; самая наука с созвучиях: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
имя — это названье, наименованье, слово, которым зовут, означают о́собь, личность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое воздух? воздух — это невидимая, газообразная оболочка земли; присутствием своим обусловливает животную и растительную жизнь, изменения погоды, распространение звука, выветривание горных пород и т. д: ЭСБЕ, статья «Воздух».
фотография — это искусство снимать предметы на бумагу посредством света; светопись, солнопись: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
единица — это один, первый по счету: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
формула — это соединение букв или чисел при помощи знаков различных действий: ЭСБЕ, статья «Формула».
parity is the quality or condition of being equal or equivalent; A like state or degree; equality; close correspondence; analogy: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
coherence is A sticking or cleaving together; union of parts of the same body; cohesion: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
force is any action between two bodies which changes, or tends to change, their relative condition as to rest or motion; or, more generally, which changes, or tends to change, any physical relation between them, whether mechanical, thermal, chemical, electrical, magnetic, or of any other kind: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
control is A duplicate book, register, or account, kept to correct or check another account or register; a counter register: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
refinement is the act of refining, or the state of being refined: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is mathematics? mathematics is that science, or class of sciences, which treats of the exact relations existing between quantities or magnitudes, and of the methods by which, in accordance with these relations, quantities sought are deducible from other quantities known or supposed; the science of spatial and quantitative relations: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
completeness is the state of being complete: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
basis is the foundation of anything; that on which a thing rests: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
domain is dominion; empire; authority: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is strategy? strategy is the science of military command, or the science of projecting campaigns and directing great military movements; generalship: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
soul is the spiritual, rational, and immortal part in man; that part of man which enables him to think, and which renders him a subject of moral government: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is motion? motion is the act, process, or state of changing place or position; movement; the passing of a body from one place or position to another, whether voluntary or involuntary: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
compound is A union of two or more ingredients in definite proportions by weight, so combined as to form a distinct substance: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
point is that which pricks or pierces; the sharp end of anything: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
order is an assemblage of genera having certain important characters in common: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
negation is description or definition by denial, exclusion, or exception; statement of what a thing is not, or has not, from which may be inferred what it is or has: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
climate is one of thirty regions or zones, parallel to the equator, into which the surface of the earth from the equator to the pole was divided, according to the successive increase of the length of the midsummer day: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is fever? fever is A diseased state of the system, marked by increased heat, acceleration of the pulse, and a general derangement of the functions, including usually, thirst and loss of appetite: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
what is sociology? sociology is that branch of philosophy which treats of the constitution, phenomena, and development of human society; social science: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
группа — это чета, купа, кучка; связь, сноп, цепь; грезд, грезно; кружок, толпа: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
система — это план, порядок расположения частей целого, предначертанное устройство, ход чего-либо, в последовательном, связном порядке: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
критерий — это мерило для оценки истинности суждения или факта: ЭСБЕ, статья «Критерий».
что такое момент? момент — это миг, мгновение, минт: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
инерция — это покой, недеятельность тел, без внешнего побуждения; косность: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
суждение — это связь (синтез), в которую сознание ставит свои элементы (представления, понятия) с целью объективного познания: ЭСБЕ, статья «Суждение».
идея — это понятие о вещи; умопонятие, представление, воображение предмета; умственное изображение: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое темперамент? темперамент — это психологический термин: ЭСБЕ, статья «Темперамент».
сердце — это грудное черево, принимающее в себя кровь из всего тела, очищающее её чрез легкие и рассылающее обновленную кровь по всем частям, для питания, для обращения её в плоть: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
кристалл — это однородное твердое тело, имеющее природную форму многогранника, физические свойства которого по различным направлениям, вообще говоря, различны, но подчинены определенным законам (симметрии); по направлениям же, параллельным между собой, все свойства одинаковы: ЭСБЕ, статья «Кристалл».
река — это поток водный, проточная по земляному ложу вода, большего объема, чем речка и ручей; речажина пск. речка, реченька, речушка: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
что такое хорда? хорда — это отрезок прямой, ограниченный точками, лежащими на данной кривой или на данной поверхности: ЭСБЕ, статья «Хорда, в геометрии».
миф — это происшествие или человек баснословный, небывалый, сказочный; иносказанье в лицах, вошедшее в поверье: Толковый словарь Даля, 1882.
pronoun is A word used instead of a noun or name, to avoid the repetition of it. The personal pronouns in English are I, thou or you, he, she, it, we, ye, and they: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1913.
