tom bought 3 books and 5 pencils at the shop. how many things did tom buy? tom bought 8 things in all: 3 + 5 = 8.
peter bought 5 pencils and 5 cups at the station; peter bought 10 things in all: 5 + 5 = 10.
маша купила 6 карт и 2 игрушки в библиотеке. сколько предметов купила маша? всего маша купила 8 предметов: 6 + 2 = 8.
аня купила 8 коробок и 2 книги в парке; всего аня купила 10 предметов: 8 + 2 = 10.
ann bought 2 apples and 2 books at the market. how many things did ann buy? ann bought 4 things in all: 2 + 2 = 4.
ira bought 4 pens and 2 coins at the store; ira bought 6 things in all: 4 + 2 = 6.
пётр купил 5 карандашей и 5 чашек на вокзале. сколько предметов купил пётр? всего пётр купил 10 предметов: 5 + 5 = 10.
иван купил 7 монет и 5 шариков в школе; всего иван купил 12 предметов: 7 + 5 = 12.
tom bought 2 cups and 5 pencils at the market. how many things did tom buy? tom bought 7 things in all: 2 + 5 = 7.
tom bought 3 books and 5 pencils at the shop; tom bought 8 things in all: 3 + 5 = 8.
ира купила 4 ручки и 2 монеты в магазине. сколько предметов купила ира? всего ира купила 6 предметов: 4 + 2 = 6.
маша купила 6 карт и 2 игрушки в библиотеке; всего маша купила 8 предметов: 6 + 2 = 8.
ann bought 8 boxes and 2 books at the park. how many things did ann buy? ann bought 10 things in all: 8 + 2 = 10.
ann bought 2 apples and 2 books at the market; ann bought 4 things in all: 2 + 2 = 4.
том купил 3 книги и 5 карандашей в лавке. сколько предметов купил том? всего том купил 8 предметов: 3 + 5 = 8.
пётр купил 5 карандашей и 5 чашек на вокзале; всего пётр купил 10 предметов: 5 + 5 = 10.
ivan bought 7 coins and 5 balls at the school. how many things did ivan buy? ivan bought 12 things in all: 7 + 5 = 12.
tom bought 2 cups and 5 pencils at the market; tom bought 7 things in all: 2 + 5 = 7.
аня купила 2 яблока и 2 книги на рынке. сколько предметов купила аня? всего аня купила 4 предмета: 2 + 2 = 4.
ира купила 4 ручки и 2 монеты в магазине; всего ира купила 6 предметов: 4 + 2 = 6.
mary bought 6 cards and 2 toys at the library. how many things did mary buy? mary bought 8 things in all: 6 + 2 = 8.
ann bought 8 boxes and 2 books at the park; ann bought 10 things in all: 8 + 2 = 10.
том купил 2 чашки и 5 карандашей на рынке. сколько предметов купил том? всего том купил 7 предметов: 2 + 5 = 7.
том купил 3 книги и 5 карандашей в лавке; всего том купил 8 предметов: 3 + 5 = 8.
peter bought 5 pencils and 5 cups at the station. how many things did peter buy? peter bought 10 things in all: 5 + 5 = 10.
ivan bought 7 coins and 5 balls at the school; ivan bought 12 things in all: 7 + 5 = 12.
аня купила 8 коробок и 2 книги в парке. сколько предметов купила аня? всего аня купила 10 предметов: 8 + 2 = 10.
аня купила 2 яблока и 2 книги на рынке; всего аня купила 4 предмета: 2 + 2 = 4.
ira bought 4 pens and 2 coins at the store. how many things did ira buy? ira bought 6 things in all: 4 + 2 = 6.
mary bought 6 cards and 2 toys at the library; mary bought 8 things in all: 6 + 2 = 8.
иван купил 7 монет и 5 шариков в школе. сколько предметов купил иван? всего иван купил 12 предметов: 7 + 5 = 12.
том купил 2 чашки и 5 карандашей на рынке; всего том купил 7 предметов: 2 + 5 = 7.

сумка на стуле, а стул в комнате; значит сумка в комнате.
книга на столе, а стол в кухне. где книга? книга в кухне.
машина не в коробке: коробка не на пути от машины до городка.
the field is on the farm.
the garden is in the house, and the house is on the street; so the garden is on the street.
the key is in the box, and the box is on the shelf. where is the key? the key is on the shelf.
the letter is not in the yard: the yard is not on the path from the letter to the town.
тарелка на полке.
школа на улице, а улица в городке; значит школа в городке.
лавка на улице, а улица в городке. где лавка? лавка в городке.
магазин не в реке: река не на пути от магазина до города.
the window is on the wall.
the bag is on the chair, and the chair is in the room; so the bag is in the room.
the book is on the table, and the table is in the kitchen. where is the book? the book is in the kitchen.
the car is not in the box: the box is not on the path from the car to the town.
монета в коробке.
поле на ферме, а ферма в деревне; значит поле в деревне.
сад в доме, а дом на улице. где сад? сад на улице.
ключ не на рынке: рынок не на пути от ключа до городка.
the plate is on the shelf.
the school is on the street, and the street is in the town; so the school is in the town.
the shop is on the street, and the street is in the town. where is the shop? the shop is in the town.
the store is not in the river: the river is not on the path from the store to the city.
игрушка в корзине.
окно на стене, а стена в комнате; значит окно в комнате.
сумка на стуле, а стул в комнате. где сумка? сумка в комнате.
книга не на полу: пол не на пути от книги до городка.
the coin is in the box.
the field is on the farm, and the farm is in the village; so the field is in the village.
the garden is in the house, and the house is on the street. where is the garden? the garden is on the street.
the key is not at the market: the market is not on the path from the key to the town.
письмо на столе.
тарелка на полке, а полка в кухне; значит тарелка в кухне.
школа на улице, а улица в городке. где школа? школа в городке.
лавка не в поле: поле не на пути от лавки до городка.
the toy is in the basket.
the window is on the wall, and the wall is in the room; so the window is in the room.
the bag is on the chair, and the chair is in the room. where is the bag? the bag is in the room.
the book is not on the floor: the floor is not on the path from the book to the town.
машина на парковке.
монета в коробке, а коробка на полке; значит монета на полке.
поле на ферме, а ферма в деревне. где поле? поле в деревне.
сад не в конторе: контора не на пути от сада до городка.
the letter is on the table.
the plate is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen; so the plate is in the kitchen.
the school is on the street, and the street is in the town. where is the school? the school is in the town.
the shop is not in the field: the field is not on the path from the shop to the town.
магазин на дороге.
игрушка в корзине, а корзина на полу; значит игрушка на полу.
окно на стене, а стена в комнате. где окно? окно в комнате.
сумка не на полке: полка не на пути от сумки до городка.
the car is in the parking lot.
the coin is in the box, and the box is on the shelf; so the coin is on the shelf.
the field is on the farm, and the farm is in the village. where is the field? the field is in the village.
the garden is not in the office: the office is not on the path from the garden to the town.
ключ в коробке.
письмо на столе, а стол в кухне; значит письмо в кухне.
тарелка на полке, а полка в кухне. где тарелка? тарелка в кухне.
школа не в городе: город не на пути от школы до городка.
the store is on the road.
the toy is in the basket, and the basket is on the floor; so the toy is on the floor.
the window is on the wall, and the wall is in the room. where is the window? the window is in the room.
the bag is not on the shelf: the shelf is not on the path from the bag to the town.
книга на столе.
машина на парковке, а парковка на улице; значит машина на улице.
монета в коробке, а коробка на полке. где монета? монета на полке.
поле не в кухне: кухня не на пути от поля до деревни.
the key is in the box.
the letter is on the table, and the table is in the kitchen; so the letter is in the kitchen.
the plate is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen. where is the plate? the plate is in the kitchen.
the school is not in the city: the city is not on the path from the school to the town.
лавка на улице.
магазин на дороге, а дорога в городе; значит магазин в городе.
игрушка в корзине, а корзина на полу. где игрушка? игрушка на полу.
окно не в письме: письмо не на пути от окна до городка.
the book is on the table.
the car is in the parking lot, and the parking lot is on the street; so the car is on the street.
the coin is in the box, and the box is on the shelf. where is the coin? the coin is on the shelf.
the field is not in the kitchen: the kitchen is not on the path from the field to the village.
сад в доме.
ключ в коробке, а коробка на полке; значит ключ на полке.
письмо на столе, а стол в кухне. где письмо? письмо в кухне.
тарелка не в городе: город не на пути от тарелки до городка.
the shop is on the street.
the store is on the road, and the road is in the city; so the store is in the city.
the toy is in the basket, and the basket is on the floor. where is the toy? the toy is on the floor.
the window is not in the letter: the letter is not on the path from the window to the town.
сумка на стуле.
книга на столе, а стол в кухне; значит книга в кухне.
машина на парковке, а парковка на улице. где машина? машина на улице.
монета не на тарелке: тарелка не на пути от монеты до городка.
the garden is in the house.
the key is in the box, and the box is on the shelf; so the key is on the shelf.
the letter is on the table, and the table is in the kitchen. where is the letter? the letter is in the kitchen.
the plate is not in the city: the city is not on the path from the plate to the town.
школа на улице.
лавка на улице, а улица в городке; значит лавка в городке.
магазин на дороге, а дорога в городе. где магазин? магазин в городе.
игрушка не на лампе: лампа не на пути от игрушки до городка.
the bag is on the chair.
the book is on the table, and the table is in the kitchen; so the book is in the kitchen.
the car is in the parking lot, and the parking lot is on the street. where is the car? the car is on the street.
the coin is not on the plate: the plate is not on the path from the coin to the town.
поле на ферме.
сад в доме, а дом на улице; значит сад на улице.
ключ в коробке, а коробка на полке. где ключ? ключ на полке.
письмо не в дворе: двор не на пути от письма до городка.
the school is on the street.
the shop is on the street, and the street is in the town; so the shop is in the town.
the store is on the road, and the road is in the city. where is the store? the store is in the city.
the toy is not on the lamp: the lamp is not on the path from the toy to the town.
окно на стене.

том работал утром, а отдыхал днём; значит том работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
the morning comes before the night.
the evening comes after the day.
mary worked in the day and rested in the night; mary worked before mary rested.
вечер раньше ночи.
what comes before the evening? the day comes before the evening.
yesterday comes before today.
ann worked in the morning and tom rested in the morning; ann worked while tom rested.
ира ушла из дома днём, а пришла на рынке вечером; значит ира ушла раньше, чем пришла.
ann works now and rests later; ann works before ann rests.
the morning comes before the day.
the evening comes after the morning.
peter worked during the morning and rested during the night; peter worked before peter rested.
день раньше вечера.
ночь позже дня.
иван работал вечером, а отдыхал ночью; значит иван работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
the night comes next after the evening.
вчера раньше, чем сегодня.
аня ушла из дома утром, а пришла в школе днём; значит аня ушла раньше, чем пришла.
mary works now and rests later; mary works before mary rests.
ann left home in the morning and arrived at the station in the day; ann left home before ann arrived at the station.
tom worked during the morning and rested during the day; tom worked before tom rested.
утро раньше вечера.
ночь позже утра.
пётр работал днём, а отдыхал вечером; значит пётр работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
the evening comes before the night.
what comes before the day? the morning comes before the day.
что раньше ночи? вечер раньше ночи.
tomorrow comes after today.
ira works now and rests later; ira works before ira rests.
mary left home in the evening and arrived at the office in the night; mary left home before mary arrived at the office.
аня работала утром, а том отдыхал утром; они делали это в одно время.
день позже утра.
ира работала утром, а отдыхала вечером; значит ира работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
the day comes before the evening.
the night comes after the day.
ivan worked during the evening and rested during the night; ivan worked before ivan rested.
the evening comes next after the day.
the morning comes early and the night comes late.
ann works now and rests later; ann works before ann rests.
ira left home in the day and arrived at the market in the evening; ira left home before ira arrived at the market.
маша работала вечером, а иван отдыхал вечером; они делали это в одно время.
в неделе 7 дней, а в выходных 2 дня; в неделе на 5 дней больше.
the morning comes before the evening.
the night comes after the morning.
peter worked during the day and rested during the evening; peter worked before peter rested.
день раньше ночи.
ночь позже вечера.
что раньше вечера? день раньше вечера.
today comes after yesterday.
ann left home in the morning and arrived at the school in the day; ann left home before ann arrived at the school.
ира работала днём, а пётр отдыхал днём; они делали это в одно время.
ann worked in the morning and tom rested in the morning; ann worked while tom rested.
the day comes after the morning.
ira worked in the morning and rested in the evening; ira worked before ira rested.
утро раньше ночи.
вечер позже дня.
маша работала днём, а отдыхала ночью; значит маша работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
the day comes next after the morning.
what comes before the night? the evening comes before the night.
today comes before tomorrow.
аня работала утром, а том отдыхал утром; они делали это в одно время.
mary worked in the evening and ivan rested in the evening; mary worked while ivan rested.
аня ушла из дома утром, а пришла на вокзале днём; значит аня ушла раньше, чем пришла.
утро раньше дня.
вечер позже утра.
пётр работал утром, а отдыхал ночью; значит пётр работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
the day comes before the night.
the night comes after the evening.
что раньше дня? утро раньше дня.
the morning comes first and the night comes last.
сегодня раньше, чем завтра.
ira worked in the day and peter rested in the day; ira worked while peter rested.
маша ушла из дома вечером, а пришла в конторе ночью; значит маша ушла раньше, чем пришла.
the week has 7 days and the weekend has 2 days; the week has 5 days more than the weekend.

today ira and peter give coins; yesterday ira and peter gave coins.
the past of find is found.
today mary runs to the park. what is the past of run? the past of run is ran.
today mary waits at the station; yesterday mary waited at the station.
today ira and peter empty baskets; yesterday ira and peter emptied baskets.
the past of pay is paid.
today mary knows the answer. what is the past of know? the past of know is knew.
today mary sees the door; yesterday mary saw the door.
today ira and peter decide the answer; yesterday ira and peter decided the answer.
the past of return is returned.
today mary stops at the door. what is the past of stop? the past of stop is stopped.
сегодня ира считает яблоки; вчера ира считала яблоки.
глагол «рассказывать» в прошедшем даёт «рассказывал».
сегодня ира играет во дворе; вчера ира играла во дворе.
глагол «уходить» в прошедшем даёт «уходил».
today ann buys a book; yesterday ann bought a book.
today mary and ivan write letters; yesterday mary and ivan wrote letters.
the past of count is counted.
today ann eats an apple. what is the past of eat? the past of eat is ate.
today ann finishes a note; yesterday ann finished a note.
today mary and ivan spend coins; yesterday mary and ivan spent coins.
the past of need is needed.
today ann says the answer. what is the past of say? the past of say is said.
today ann hears the answer; yesterday ann heard the answer.
today mary and ivan leave the house; yesterday mary and ivan left the house.
the past of carry is carried.
глагол «давать» в прошедшем даёт «давал».
сегодня аня ждёт на вокзале; вчера аня ждала на вокзале.
глагол «слышать» в прошедшем даёт «слышал».
сегодня аня хранит рубашку; вчера аня хранила рубашку.
глагол «копить» в прошедшем даёт «копил».
today ira gives a coin; yesterday ira gave a coin.
today ann and tom find keys; yesterday ann and tom found keys.
the past of run is ran.
today ira works in the office. what is the past of work? the past of work is worked.
today ira empties a basket; yesterday ira emptied a basket.
today ann and tom pay coins; yesterday ann and tom paid coins.
the past of know is knew.
today ira asks a question. what is the past of ask? the past of ask is asked.
today ira decides the answer; yesterday ira decided the answer.
today ann and tom return to the village; yesterday ann and tom returned to the village.
the past of stop is stopped.
глагол «находить» в прошедшем даёт «находил».
сегодня маша рассказывает историю; вчера маша рассказывала историю.
глагол «начинать» в прошедшем даёт «начинал».
сегодня маша уходит из дома; вчера маша уходила из дома.
глагол «понимать» в прошедшем даёт «понимал».
today mary writes a letter; yesterday mary wrote a letter.
today ira and peter count the apples; yesterday ira and peter counted the apples.
the past of eat is ate.
today mary waits at the station. what is the past of wait? the past of wait is waited.
today mary spends a coin; yesterday mary spent a coin.
today ira and peter need keys; yesterday ira and peter needed keys.
the past of say is said.
today mary sees the door. what is the past of see? the past of see is saw.
today mary leaves the house; yesterday mary left the house.
today ira and peter carry baskets; yesterday ira and peter carried baskets.
сегодня ира даёт монету; вчера ира давала монету.
глагол «читать» в прошедшем даёт «читал».
сегодня ира слышит ответ; вчера ира слышала ответ.
глагол «есть» в прошедшем даёт «ел».
сегодня ира копит монеты; вчера ира копила монеты.
today ann buys a book. what is the past of buy? the past of buy is bought.
today ann finds a key; yesterday ann found a key.
today mary and ivan run to the park; yesterday mary and ivan ran to the park.
the past of work is worked.
today ann finishes a note. what is the past of finish? the past of finish is finished.
today ann pays a coin; yesterday ann paid a coin.
today mary and ivan know the answer; yesterday mary and ivan knew the answer.
the past of ask is asked.
today ann hears the answer. what is the past of hear? the past of hear is heard.
today ann returns to the village; yesterday ann returned to the village.
today mary and ivan stop at the door; yesterday mary and ivan stopped at the door.
сегодня аня находит ключ; вчера аня находила ключ.
глагол «отвечать» в прошедшем даёт «отвечал».
сегодня аня начинает список; вчера аня начинала список.
глагол «носить» в прошедшем даёт «носил».
сегодня аня понимает ответ; вчера аня понимала ответ.
today ira gives a coin. what is the past of give? the past of give is gave.
today ira counts the apples; yesterday ira counted the apples.
today ann and tom eat apples; yesterday ann and tom ate apples.
the past of wait is waited.
today ira empties a basket. what is the past of empty? the past of empty is emptied.
today ira needs a key; yesterday ira needed a key.
today ann and tom say the answer; yesterday ann and tom said the answer.
the past of see is saw.
today ira decides the answer. what is the past of decide? the past of decide is decided.
today ira carries a basket; yesterday ira carried a basket.
глагол «покупать» в прошедшем даёт «покупал».
сегодня маша читает страницу; вчера маша читала страницу.
глагол «знать» в прошедшем даёт «знал».
сегодня маша ест яблоко; вчера маша ела яблоко.
глагол «опустошать» в прошедшем даёт «опустошал».
the past of buy is bought.
today mary writes a letter. what is the past of write? the past of write is wrote.
today mary runs to the park; yesterday mary ran to the park.
today ira and peter work in the office; yesterday ira and peter worked in the office.
the past of finish is finished.
today mary spends a coin. what is the past of spend? the past of spend is spent.
today mary knows the answer; yesterday mary knew the answer.
today ira and peter ask questions; yesterday ira and peter asked questions.
the past of hear is heard.
today mary leaves the house. what is the past of leave? the past of leave is left.
today mary stops at the door; yesterday mary stopped at the door.
глагол «писать» в прошедшем даёт «писал».
сегодня ира отвечает на вопрос; вчера ира отвечала на вопрос.
глагол «решать» в прошедшем даёт «решал».
сегодня ира носит корзину; вчера ира носила корзину.
глагол «зарабатывать» в прошедшем даёт «зарабатывал».
the past of give is gave.
today ann finds a key. what is the past of find? the past of find is found.
today ann eats an apple; yesterday ann ate an apple.
today mary and ivan wait at the station; yesterday mary and ivan waited at the station.
the past of empty is emptied.
today ann pays a coin. what is the past of pay? the past of pay is paid.
today ann says the answer; yesterday ann said the answer.
today mary and ivan see the door; yesterday mary and ivan saw the door.
the past of decide is decided.
today ann returns to the village. what is the past of return? the past of return is returned.
сегодня аня покупает книгу; вчера аня покупала книгу.
глагол «считать» в прошедшем даёт «считал».
сегодня аня знает ответ; вчера аня знала ответ.
глагол «играть» в прошедшем даёт «играл».
сегодня аня опустошает корзину; вчера аня опустошала корзину.
today ann and tom buy books; yesterday ann and tom bought books.
the past of write is wrote.
today ira counts the apples. what is the past of count? the past of count is counted.
today ira works in the office; yesterday ira worked in the office.
today ann and tom finish notes; yesterday ann and tom finished notes.
the past of spend is spent.
today ira needs a key. what is the past of need? the past of need is needed.
today ira asks a question; yesterday ira asked a question.
today ann and tom hear the answer; yesterday ann and tom heard the answer.
the past of leave is left.
today ira carries a basket. what is the past of carry? the past of carry is carried.
сегодня маша пишет письмо; вчера маша писала письмо.
глагол «ждать» в прошедшем даёт «ждал».
сегодня маша решает задачу; вчера маша решала задачу.
глагол «хранить» в прошедшем даёт «хранил».
сегодня маша зарабатывает рубли; вчера маша зарабатывала рубли.

ann has 4 apples, and tom has 2 apples; ann has twice as many apples as tom.
ann bought 3 apples, but tom bought just 2 apples; 2 apples are fewer than 3 apples, and tom bought less than ann.
tom has 5 books, and ira has 3 books; tom has 2 more books than ira.
tom has 6 books, and ira has 3 books; ira has half the books of tom.
у иры 3 книги, а у тома 5 книг; у иры на 2 книги меньше, чем у тома.
ira has 7 pens, and peter has 4 pens. how many more pens does ira have than peter? ira has 3 more pens than peter.
ira has 7 pens, and peter has 4 pens; together they have 11 pens, and apart they have 7 pens and 4 pens.
у иры 7 ручек, а у петра 4 ручки. на сколько ручек больше у иры? у иры на 3 ручки больше, чем у петра.
peter has 10 pencils, and mary has 5 pencils; peter has double the pencils of mary.
peter and mary gave 5 pencils to each other; peter gave 5 pencils to mary, and mary gave 5 pencils to peter.
ivan has 6 cards, and mary has 11 cards; ivan has 5 fewer cards than mary.
mary has 11 cards, and ivan has 11 cards; the two counts are equal.
у маши 11 карт, и у ивана 11 карт; у них поровну карт.
ivan has 13 coins, ann has 7 coins and tom has 1 coin; ivan has the most coins and tom has the least coins.
ivan has 13 coins, and ann has 7 coins; the total comes to 20 coins altogether.
у ивана 14 монет, а у ани 7 монет; у ивана вдвое больше, чем у ани.
ann has 6 boxes, and tom has 2 boxes; ann has triple the boxes of tom.
у ани 9 коробок, а у тома 2 коробки; у ани на 7 коробок больше, чем у тома.
tom bought 5 cups of coffee, and mary bought 2 cups of coffee; mary bought less coffee than tom.
ivan bought 4 bags of sugar, and ira bought 1 bag of sugar; ira bought less sugar than ivan.
ann has 3 apples, tom has 2 apples and ira has 1 apple; ann has the most apples and ira has the least apples.
ann has 3 apples, and tom has 2 apples; the total comes to 5 apples altogether.
у ани 4 яблока, а у тома 2 яблока; у ани вдвое больше, чем у тома.
tom has 9 books, and ira has 3 books; tom has triple the books of ira.
у тома 5 книг, а у иры 3 книги; у тома на 2 книги больше, чем у иры.
ira has 7 pens, and peter has 7 pens; ira has the same number of pens as peter.
ira has 7 pens, and peter has 4 pens; the two counts are different.
у иры 7 ручек, а у петра 4 ручки; вместе у них 11 ручек.
peter has 10 pencils, and mary has 5 pencils; peter has twice as many pencils as mary.
peter bought 9 pencils, but mary bought just 5 pencils; 5 pencils are fewer than 9 pencils, and mary bought less than peter.
mary has 11 cards, and ivan has 6 cards; mary has 5 more cards than ivan.
mary has 12 cards, and ivan has 6 cards; ivan has half the cards of mary.
у ивана 6 карт, а у маши 11 карт; у ивана на 5 карт меньше, чем у маши.
ivan has 13 coins, and ann has 7 coins. how many more coins does ivan have than ann? ivan has 6 more coins than ann.
ivan has 13 coins, and ann has 7 coins; together they have 20 coins, and apart they have 13 coins and 7 coins.
у ивана 13 монет, а у ани 7 монет. на сколько монет больше у ивана? у ивана на 6 монет больше, чем у ани.
ann has 4 boxes, and tom has 2 boxes; ann has double the boxes of tom.
ann and tom gave 2 boxes to each other; ann gave 2 boxes to tom, and tom gave 2 boxes to ann.
аня купила 2 чашки чая, а пётр купил 1 чашка чая; у петра чая меньше, чем у ани.
маша купила 6 коробок хлеба, а том купил 5 коробок хлеба; у тома хлеба меньше, чем у маши.
ann has 3 apples, and tom has 2 apples. how many more apples does ann have than tom? ann has 1 more apple than tom.
ann has 3 apples, and tom has 2 apples; together they have 5 apples, and apart they have 3 apples and 2 apples.
у ани 3 яблока, а у тома 2 яблока. на сколько яблок больше у ани? у ани на 1 яблоко больше, чем у тома.
tom has 6 books, and ira has 3 books; tom has double the books of ira.
tom and ira gave 3 books to each other; tom gave 3 books to ira, and ira gave 3 books to tom.
peter has 4 pens, and ira has 7 pens; peter has 3 fewer pens than ira.
ira has 7 pens, and peter has 7 pens; the two counts are equal.
у иры 7 ручек, и у петра 7 ручек; у них поровну ручек.
peter has 9 pencils, mary has 5 pencils and ivan has 1 pencil; peter has the most pencils and ivan has the least pencils.
peter has 9 pencils, and mary has 5 pencils; the total comes to 14 pencils altogether.
у петра 10 карандашей, а у маши 5 карандашей; у петра вдвое больше, чем у маши.
mary has 18 cards, and ivan has 6 cards; mary has triple the cards of ivan.
у маши 11 карт, а у ивана 6 карт; у маши на 5 карт больше, чем у ивана.
ivan has 13 coins, and ann has 13 coins; ivan has the same number of coins as ann.
ivan has 13 coins, and ann has 7 coins; the two counts are different.
у ивана 13 монет, а у ани 7 монет; вместе у них 20 монет.
ann has 4 boxes, and tom has 2 boxes; ann has twice as many boxes as tom.
ann bought 9 boxes, but tom bought just 2 boxes; 2 boxes are fewer than 9 boxes, and tom bought less than ann.
ann bought 2 cups of tea, and peter bought 1 cup of tea; peter bought less tea than ann.
mary bought 6 loaves of bread, and tom bought 5 loaves of bread; tom bought less bread than mary.
ann has 3 apples, and tom has 3 apples; ann has the same number of apples as tom.
ann has 3 apples, and tom has 2 apples; the two counts are different.
у ани 3 яблока, а у тома 2 яблока; вместе у них 5 яблок.
tom has 6 books, and ira has 3 books; tom has twice as many books as ira.
tom bought 5 books, but ira bought just 3 books; 3 books are fewer than 5 books, and ira bought less than tom.
ira has 7 pens, and peter has 4 pens; ira has 3 more pens than peter.
ira has 8 pens, and peter has 4 pens; peter has half the pens of ira.
у петра 4 ручки, а у иры 7 ручек; у петра на 3 ручки меньше, чем у иры.
peter has 9 pencils, and mary has 5 pencils. how many more pencils does peter have than mary? peter has 4 more pencils than mary.
peter has 9 pencils, and mary has 5 pencils; together they have 14 pencils, and apart they have 9 pencils and 5 pencils.
у петра 9 карандашей, а у маши 5 карандашей. на сколько карандашей больше у петра? у петра на 4 карандаша больше, чем у маши.
mary has 12 cards, and ivan has 6 cards; mary has double the cards of ivan.
mary and ivan gave 6 cards to each other; mary gave 6 cards to ivan, and ivan gave 6 cards to mary.
ann has 7 coins, and ivan has 13 coins; ann has 6 fewer coins than ivan.
ivan has 13 coins, and ann has 13 coins; the two counts are equal.
у ивана 13 монет, и у ани 13 монет; у них поровну монет.
ann has 9 boxes, tom has 2 boxes and ira has 1 box; ann has the most boxes and ira has the least boxes.
ann has 9 boxes, and tom has 2 boxes; the total comes to 11 boxes altogether.
у ани 4 коробки, а у тома 2 коробки; у ани вдвое больше, чем у тома.
пётр купил 7 чашек воды, а аня купила 4 чашки воды; у ани воды меньше, чем у петра.
tom has 2 apples, and ann has 3 apples; tom has 1 fewer apple than ann.
ann has 3 apples, and tom has 3 apples; the two counts are equal.
у ани 3 яблока, и у тома 3 яблока; у них поровну яблок.
tom has 5 books, ira has 3 books and peter has 1 book; tom has the most books and peter has the least books.
tom has 5 books, and ira has 3 books; the total comes to 8 books altogether.
у тома 6 книг, а у иры 3 книги; у тома вдвое больше, чем у иры.
ira has 12 pens, and peter has 4 pens; ira has triple the pens of peter.
у иры 7 ручек, а у петра 4 ручки; у иры на 3 ручки больше, чем у петра.
peter has 9 pencils, and mary has 9 pencils; peter has the same number of pencils as mary.
peter has 9 pencils, and mary has 5 pencils; the two counts are different.
у петра 9 карандашей, а у маши 5 карандашей; вместе у них 14 карандашей.
mary has 12 cards, and ivan has 6 cards; mary has twice as many cards as ivan.
mary bought 11 cards, but ivan bought just 6 cards; 6 cards are fewer than 11 cards, and ivan bought less than mary.
ivan has 13 coins, and ann has 7 coins; ivan has 6 more coins than ann.
ivan has 14 coins, and ann has 7 coins; ann has half the coins of ivan.
у ани 7 монет, а у ивана 13 монет; у ани на 6 монет меньше, чем у ивана.
ann has 9 boxes, and tom has 2 boxes. how many more boxes does ann have than tom? ann has 7 more boxes than tom.
ann has 9 boxes, and tom has 2 boxes; together they have 11 boxes, and apart they have 9 boxes and 2 boxes.
у ани 9 коробок, а у тома 2 коробки. на сколько коробок больше у ани? у ани на 7 коробок больше, чем у тома.
peter bought 7 bottles of water, and ann bought 4 bottles of water; ann bought less water than peter.
ann has 3 apples, and tom has 2 apples; ann has 1 more apple than tom.
ann has 4 apples, and tom has 2 apples; tom has half the apples of ann.
у тома 2 яблока, а у ани 3 яблока; у тома на 1 яблоко меньше, чем у ани.
tom has 5 books, and ira has 3 books. how many more books does tom have than ira? tom has 2 more books than ira.
tom has 5 books, and ira has 3 books; together they have 8 books, and apart they have 5 books and 3 books.
у тома 5 книг, а у иры 3 книги. на сколько книг больше у тома? у тома на 2 книги больше, чем у иры.
ira has 8 pens, and peter has 4 pens; ira has double the pens of peter.
ira and peter gave 4 pens to each other; ira gave 4 pens to peter, and peter gave 4 pens to ira.
mary has 5 pencils, and peter has 9 pencils; mary has 4 fewer pencils than peter.
peter has 9 pencils, and mary has 9 pencils; the two counts are equal.
у петра 9 карандашей, и у маши 9 карандашей; у них поровну карандашей.
mary has 11 cards, ivan has 6 cards and ann has 1 card; mary has the most cards and ann has the least cards.
mary has 11 cards, and ivan has 6 cards; the total comes to 17 cards altogether.
у маши 12 карт, а у ивана 6 карт; у маши вдвое больше, чем у ивана.
ivan has 21 coins, and ann has 7 coins; ivan has triple the coins of ann.
у ивана 13 монет, а у ани 7 монет; у ивана на 6 монет больше, чем у ани.
ann has 9 boxes, and tom has 9 boxes; ann has the same number of boxes as tom.
ann has 9 boxes, and tom has 2 boxes; the two counts are different.
у ани 9 коробок, а у тома 2 коробки; вместе у них 11 коробок.
ира купила 4 чашки молока, а иван купил 3 чашки молока; у ивана молока меньше, чем у иры.
аня купила 3 коробки соли, а пётр купил 2 коробки соли; у петра соли меньше, чем у ани.
ann has 6 apples, and tom has 2 apples; ann has triple the apples of tom.
у ани 3 яблока, а у тома 2 яблока; у ани на 1 яблоко больше, чем у тома.
tom has 5 books, and ira has 5 books; tom has the same number of books as ira.
tom has 5 books, and ira has 3 books; the two counts are different.
у тома 5 книг, а у иры 3 книги; вместе у них 8 книг.
ira has 8 pens, and peter has 4 pens; ira has twice as many pens as peter.
ira bought 7 pens, but peter bought just 4 pens; 4 pens are fewer than 7 pens, and peter bought less than ira.
peter has 9 pencils, and mary has 5 pencils; peter has 4 more pencils than mary.
peter has 10 pencils, and mary has 5 pencils; mary has half the pencils of peter.
у маши 5 карандашей, а у петра 9 карандашей; у маши на 4 карандаша меньше, чем у петра.
mary has 11 cards, and ivan has 6 cards. how many more cards does mary have than ivan? mary has 5 more cards than ivan.
mary has 11 cards, and ivan has 6 cards; together they have 17 cards, and apart they have 11 cards and 6 cards.
у маши 11 карт, а у ивана 6 карт. на сколько карт больше у маши? у маши на 5 карт больше, чем у ивана.
ivan has 14 coins, and ann has 7 coins; ivan has double the coins of ann.
ivan and ann gave 7 coins to each other; ivan gave 7 coins to ann, and ann gave 7 coins to ivan.
tom has 2 boxes, and ann has 9 boxes; tom has 7 fewer boxes than ann.
ann has 9 boxes, and tom has 9 boxes; the two counts are equal.
у ани 9 коробок, и у тома 9 коробок; у них поровну коробок.
ira bought 4 bottles of milk, and ivan bought 3 bottles of milk; ivan bought less milk than ira.
ann bought 3 bags of salt, and peter bought 2 bags of salt; peter bought less salt than ann.
ann has 4 apples, and tom has 2 apples; ann has double the apples of tom.
ann and tom gave 2 apples to each other; ann gave 2 apples to tom, and tom gave 2 apples to ann.
ira has 3 books, and tom has 5 books; ira has 2 fewer books than tom.
tom has 5 books, and ira has 5 books; the two counts are equal.
у тома 5 книг, и у иры 5 книг; у них поровну книг.
ira has 7 pens, peter has 4 pens and mary has 1 pen; ira has the most pens and mary has the least pens.
ira has 7 pens, and peter has 4 pens; the total comes to 11 pens altogether.
у иры 8 ручек, а у петра 4 ручки; у иры вдвое больше, чем у петра.
peter has 15 pencils, and mary has 5 pencils; peter has triple the pencils of mary.
у петра 9 карандашей, а у маши 5 карандашей; у петра на 4 карандаша больше, чем у маши.
mary has 11 cards, and ivan has 11 cards; mary has the same number of cards as ivan.
mary has 11 cards, and ivan has 6 cards; the two counts are different.
у маши 11 карт, а у ивана 6 карт; вместе у них 17 карт.
ivan has 14 coins, and ann has 7 coins; ivan has twice as many coins as ann.
ivan bought 13 coins, but ann bought just 7 coins; 7 coins are fewer than 13 coins, and ann bought less than ivan.
ann has 9 boxes, and tom has 2 boxes; ann has 7 more boxes than tom.
ann has 4 boxes, and tom has 2 boxes; tom has half the boxes of ann.
у тома 2 коробки, а у ани 9 коробок; у тома на 7 коробок меньше, чем у ани.
том купил 5 чашек кофе, а маша купила 2 чашки кофе; у маши кофе меньше, чем у тома.
иван купил 4 коробки сахара, а ира купила 1 коробка сахара; у иры сахара меньше, чем у ивана.

у ани было 8 яблок, аня израсходовала 1 яблоко; осталось 7 яблок.
у тома было 13 карандашей, том израсходовал 3 карандаша. сколько карандашей осталось? осталось 10 карандашей.
peter had 23 toys and used 7 toys; 16 toys remain.
mary had 8 apples and used 2 apples; the rest are 6 apples.
ivan had 13 pencils and used 4 pencils; 9 pencils are left over.
ann had 18 boxes and used 6 boxes; ann keeps the remaining 12 boxes.
ann had 8 apples and used 1 apple. how many apples remain? 7 apples remain.
у тома было 13 карандашей, том израсходовал 3 карандаша; осталось 10 карандашей.
у иры было 18 коробок, ира израсходовала 5 коробок. сколько коробок осталось? осталось 13 коробок.
mary had 8 apples and used 2 apples; 6 apples remain.
ivan had 13 pencils and used 4 pencils; the rest are 9 pencils.
ann had 18 boxes and used 6 boxes; 12 boxes are left over.
ann had 8 apples and used 1 apple; ann keeps the remaining 7 apples.
tom had 13 pencils and used 3 pencils. how many pencils remain? 10 pencils remain.
у иры было 18 коробок, ира израсходовала 5 коробок; осталось 13 коробок.
у петра было 23 игрушки, пётр израсходовал 7 игрушек. сколько игрушек осталось? осталось 16 игрушек.
ivan had 13 pencils and used 4 pencils; 9 pencils remain.
ann had 18 boxes and used 6 boxes; the rest are 12 boxes.
ann had 8 apples and used 1 apple; 7 apples are left over.
tom had 13 pencils and used 3 pencils; tom keeps the remaining 10 pencils.
ira had 18 boxes and used 5 boxes. how many boxes remain? 13 boxes remain.
у петра было 23 игрушки, пётр израсходовал 7 игрушек; осталось 16 игрушек.
у маши было 8 яблок, маша израсходовала 2 яблока. сколько яблок осталось? осталось 6 яблок.
ann had 18 boxes and used 6 boxes; 12 boxes remain.
ann had 8 apples and used 1 apple; the rest are 7 apples.
tom had 13 pencils and used 3 pencils; 10 pencils are left over.
ira had 18 boxes and used 5 boxes; ira keeps the remaining 13 boxes.
peter had 23 toys and used 7 toys. how many toys remain? 16 toys remain.
у маши было 8 яблок, маша израсходовала 2 яблока; осталось 6 яблок.
у ивана было 13 карандашей, иван израсходовал 4 карандаша. сколько карандашей осталось? осталось 9 карандашей.
ann had 8 apples and used 1 apple; 7 apples remain.
tom had 13 pencils and used 3 pencils; the rest are 10 pencils.
ira had 18 boxes and used 5 boxes; 13 boxes are left over.
peter had 23 toys and used 7 toys; peter keeps the remaining 16 toys.
mary had 8 apples and used 2 apples. how many apples remain? 6 apples remain.
у ивана было 13 карандашей, иван израсходовал 4 карандаша; осталось 9 карандашей.
у ани было 18 коробок, аня израсходовала 6 коробок. сколько коробок осталось? осталось 12 коробок.
tom had 13 pencils and used 3 pencils; 10 pencils remain.
ira had 18 boxes and used 5 boxes; the rest are 13 boxes.
peter had 23 toys and used 7 toys; 16 toys are left over.
mary had 8 apples and used 2 apples; mary keeps the remaining 6 apples.
ivan had 13 pencils and used 4 pencils. how many pencils remain? 9 pencils remain.
у ани было 18 коробок, аня израсходовала 6 коробок; осталось 12 коробок.
у ани было 8 яблок, аня израсходовала 1 яблоко. сколько яблок осталось? осталось 7 яблок.
ira had 18 boxes and used 5 boxes; 13 boxes remain.
peter had 23 toys and used 7 toys; the rest are 16 toys.
mary had 8 apples and used 2 apples; 6 apples are left over.
ivan had 13 pencils and used 4 pencils; ivan keeps the remaining 9 pencils.
ann had 18 boxes and used 6 boxes. how many boxes remain? 12 boxes remain.

коробка вмещает 6 яблок; аня положила туда 1 яблоко; не хватает ещё 5 яблок.
the bag holds 12 flowers and ira filled the bag with 3 flowers. how many flowers does the bag need? the bag needs 9 flowers more.
пётр освободил чашка: было 4 яблока, теперь там 0 яблок.
ivan emptied the basket of 1 flower; the basket keeps 0 flowers now.
the basket holds 9 cards; tom filled the basket with 2 cards; the basket needs 7 cards more.
ira empties the bag of 3 flowers; the bag keeps 0 flowers then.
the box holds 18 cards; mary fills the box with 5 cards and needs 13 cards more.
корзина вмещает 7 цветков; иван положил туда 1 цветок; не хватает ещё 6 цветков.
the basket holds 9 cards and tom filled the basket with 2 cards. how many cards does the basket need? the basket needs 7 cards more.
ира освободила сумка: было 3 цветка, теперь там 0 цветков.
mary emptied the box of 5 cards; the box keeps 0 cards now.
the box holds 6 apples; ann filled the box with 1 apple; the box needs 5 apples more.
tom empties the basket of 2 cards; the basket keeps 0 cards then.
the cup holds 15 apples; peter fills the cup with 4 apples and needs 11 apples more.
коробка вмещает 18 карт; маша положила туда 5 карт; не хватает ещё 13 карт.
the box holds 6 apples and ann filled the box with 1 apple. how many apples does the box need? the box needs 5 apples more.
том освободил корзина: было 2 карты, теперь там 0 карт.
peter emptied the cup of 4 apples; the cup keeps 0 apples now.
the basket holds 7 flowers; ivan filled the basket with 1 flower; the basket needs 6 flowers more.
ann empties the box of 1 apple; the box keeps 0 apples then.
the bag holds 12 flowers; ira fills the bag with 3 flowers and needs 9 flowers more.
чашка вмещает 15 яблок; пётр положил туда 4 яблока; не хватает ещё 11 яблок.
the basket holds 7 flowers and ivan filled the basket with 1 flower. how many flowers does the basket need? the basket needs 6 flowers more.
аня освободила коробка: было 1 яблоко, теперь там 0 яблок.
ira emptied the bag of 3 flowers; the bag keeps 0 flowers now.
the box holds 18 cards; mary filled the box with 5 cards; the box needs 13 cards more.
ivan empties the basket of 1 flower; the basket keeps 0 flowers then.
the basket holds 9 cards; tom fills the basket with 2 cards and needs 7 cards more.
сумка вмещает 12 цветков; ира положила туда 3 цветка; не хватает ещё 9 цветков.
the box holds 18 cards and mary filled the box with 5 cards. how many cards does the box need? the box needs 13 cards more.
иван освободил корзина: было 1 цветок, теперь там 0 цветков.
tom emptied the basket of 2 cards; the basket keeps 0 cards now.
the cup holds 15 apples; peter filled the cup with 4 apples; the cup needs 11 apples more.
mary empties the box of 5 cards; the box keeps 0 cards then.
the box holds 6 apples; ann fills the box with 1 apple and needs 5 apples more.
корзина вмещает 9 карт; том положил туда 2 карты; не хватает ещё 7 карт.
the cup holds 15 apples and peter filled the cup with 4 apples. how many apples does the cup need? the cup needs 11 apples more.
маша освободила коробка: было 5 карт, теперь там 0 карт.
ann emptied the box of 1 apple; the box keeps 0 apples now.
the bag holds 12 flowers; ira filled the bag with 3 flowers; the bag needs 9 flowers more.
peter empties the cup of 4 apples; the cup keeps 0 apples then.
the basket holds 7 flowers; ivan fills the basket with 1 flower and needs 6 flowers more.

tom shares 15 books among 3 friends; every friend gets 5 books.
peter shared 30 pencils among 5 friends; each friend got 6 pencils.
маша разделила 8 карт между 2 друзьями; каждому досталось по 4 карты.
ann shared 4 apples among 2 friends. how many apples did each friend get? each friend got 2 apples.
ira shares 12 pens among 4 friends; every friend gets 3 pens.
mary shared 8 cards among 2 friends; each friend got 4 cards.
иван разделил 6 монет между 3 друзьями; каждому досталось по 2 монеты.
tom shared 15 books among 3 friends. how many books did each friend get? each friend got 5 books.
peter shares 30 pencils among 5 friends; every friend gets 6 pencils.
ivan shared 6 coins among 3 friends; each friend got 2 coins.
аня разделила 4 яблока между 2 друзьями; каждому досталось по 2 яблока.
ira shared 12 pens among 4 friends. how many pens did each friend get? each friend got 3 pens.
mary shares 8 cards among 2 friends; every friend gets 4 cards.
ann shared 4 apples among 2 friends; each friend got 2 apples.
том разделил 15 книг между 3 друзьями; каждому досталось по 5 книг.
peter shared 30 pencils among 5 friends. how many pencils did each friend get? each friend got 6 pencils.
ivan shares 6 coins among 3 friends; every friend gets 2 coins.
tom shared 15 books among 3 friends; each friend got 5 books.
ира разделила 12 ручек между 4 друзьями; каждому досталось по 3 ручки.
mary shared 8 cards among 2 friends. how many cards did each friend get? each friend got 4 cards.
ann shares 4 apples among 2 friends; every friend gets 2 apples.
ira shared 12 pens among 4 friends; each friend got 3 pens.
пётр разделил 30 карандашей между 5 друзьями; каждому досталось по 6 карандашей.
ivan shared 6 coins among 3 friends. how many coins did each friend get? each friend got 2 coins.

tom earns 10 coins and pays 3 coins for a ticket; tom saves 7 coins.
peter earned 18 coins and paid 2 coins for a ticket; peter saved 16 coins.
маша заработала 22 рубля и заплатила 4 рубля за билет; маша отложила 18 рублей.
ann earned 6 coins and paid 1 coin for a ticket. how many coins did ann save? ann saved 5 coins.
ira earns 14 coins and pays 5 coins for a ticket; ira saves 9 coins.
mary earned 22 coins and paid 4 coins for a ticket; mary saved 18 coins.
иван заработал 26 рублей и заплатил 1 рубль за билет; иван отложил 25 рублей.
tom earned 10 coins and paid 3 coins for a ticket. how many coins did tom save? tom saved 7 coins.
peter earns 18 coins and pays 2 coins for a ticket; peter saves 16 coins.
ivan earned 26 coins and paid 1 coin for a ticket; ivan saved 25 coins.
аня заработала 6 рублей и заплатила 1 рубль за билет; аня отложила 5 рублей.
ira earned 14 coins and paid 5 coins for a ticket. how many coins did ira save? ira saved 9 coins.
mary earns 22 coins and pays 4 coins for a ticket; mary saves 18 coins.
ann earned 6 coins and paid 1 coin for a ticket; ann saved 5 coins.
том заработал 10 рублей и заплатил 3 рубля за билет; том отложил 7 рублей.
peter earned 18 coins and paid 2 coins for a ticket. how many coins did peter save? peter saved 16 coins.
ivan earns 26 coins and pays 1 coin for a ticket; ivan saves 25 coins.
tom earned 10 coins and paid 3 coins for a ticket; tom saved 7 coins.
ира заработала 14 рублей и заплатила 5 рублей за билет; ира отложила 9 рублей.
mary earned 22 coins and paid 4 coins for a ticket. how many coins did mary save? mary saved 18 coins.
ann earns 6 coins and pays 1 coin for a ticket; ann saves 5 coins.
ira earned 14 coins and paid 5 coins for a ticket; ira saved 9 coins.
пётр заработал 18 рублей и заплатил 2 рубля за билет; пётр отложил 16 рублей.
ivan earned 26 coins and paid 1 coin for a ticket. how many coins did ivan save? ivan saved 25 coins.

у ани 2 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
ann has 2 apples; ann ate 1 apple and keeps the other apple.
3 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
3 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 6 books.
4 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
4 students are in the class, and every student has 3 books; the class has 12 books.
у петра 5 книг, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
5 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books; the class has 20 books.
6 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у маши 6 книг, и 6 книг прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
2 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
2 students are in the class, and 2 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
у ивана 2 коробки, и в каждой коробке 2 книги; всего 4 книги.
2 students are in the class, and 2 students have a key; both students have a key.
ann has 1 apple and bought another apple; ann has 2 apples.
у тома 3 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
tom has 2 coins; tom picked 1 coin and keeps the other coin.
4 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
4 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 12 books.
5 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
5 students are in the class, and every student has 4 books; the class has 20 books.
у маши 6 книг, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
6 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book; the class has 6 books.
2 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у ивана 2 книги, и 2 книги прочитаны; обе книги прочитаны.
2 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
2 students are in the class, and 2 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
у ани 2 коробки, и в каждой коробке 1 яблоко; всего 2 яблока.
3 students are in the class, and 3 students have a key; all students have a key.
tom has 1 coin and bought another coin; tom has 2 coins.
у иры 4 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
ira has 2 pages; ira read 1 page and keeps the other page.
5 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
5 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 20 books.
6 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
6 students are in the class, and every student has 1 book; the class has 6 books.
у ивана 2 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
2 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books; the class has 4 books.
2 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у ани 2 книги, и 2 книги прочитаны; обе книги прочитаны.
3 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
3 students are in the class, and 3 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
у тома 3 коробки, и в каждой коробке 2 монеты; всего 6 монет.
4 students are in the class, and 4 students have a key; all students have a key.
ira has 1 page and bought another page; ira has 2 pages.
у петра 5 книг, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
peter has 2 pencils; peter picked 1 pencil and keeps the other pencil.
6 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
6 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book. how many books does the class have? the class has 6 books.
2 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
2 students are in the class, and every student has 2 books; the class has 4 books.
у ани 2 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
2 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book; the class has 2 books.
3 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у тома 3 книги, и 3 книги прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
4 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
4 students are in the class, and 4 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
у иры 4 коробки, и в каждой коробке 3 страницы; всего 12 страниц.
5 students are in the class, and 5 students have a key; all students have a key.
peter has 1 pencil and bought another pencil; peter has 2 pencils.
у маши 6 книг, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
mary has 2 flowers; mary planted 1 flower and keeps the other flower.
2 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
2 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 4 books.
2 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
2 students are in the class, and every student has 1 book; the class has 2 books.
у тома 3 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
3 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books; the class has 6 books.
4 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у иры 4 книги, и 4 книги прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
5 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
5 students are in the class, and 5 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
у петра 5 коробок, и в каждой коробке 4 карандаша; всего 20 карандашей.
6 students are in the class, and 6 students have a key; all students have a key.
mary has 1 flower and bought another flower; mary has 2 flowers.
у ивана 2 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
ivan has 2 books; ivan read 1 book and keeps the other book.
2 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
2 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book. how many books does the class have? the class has 2 books.
3 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
3 students are in the class, and every student has 2 books; the class has 6 books.
у иры 4 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
4 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books; the class has 12 books.
5 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у петра 5 книг, и 5 книг прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
6 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
6 students are in the class, and 6 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
у маши 6 коробок, и в каждой коробке 1 цветок; всего 6 цветков.
2 students are in the class, and 2 students have a key; both students have a key.
ivan has 1 book and bought another book; ivan has 2 books.

ira took 1 pen and 1 card; ira took a pen and a card.
there is 1 card on the table, and there are 6 cards on the table.
1 монета и 7 монет дают всего 8 монет.
1 cup and 9 cups make 10 cups in all.
1 pen and 4 pens make 5 pens in all.
there is 1 box in the box, and there are 2 boxes in the box.
1 toy and 5 toys make 6 toys in all.
there is 1 bag in the box, and there are 3 bags in the box.
1 cake and 6 cakes make 7 cakes in all.
there is 1 lamp in the box, and there are 4 lamps in the box.
1 line and 7 lines make 8 lines in all.
there is 1 basket in the box, and there are 5 baskets in the box.
1 shoe and 2 shoes make 3 shoes in all.
ann waited an egg and counted 1 egg.
tom took 1 book and 1 pen; tom took a book and a pen.
there is 1 pencil on the floor, and there are 5 pencils on the floor.
1 карта и 6 карт дают всего 7 карт.
1 box and 8 boxes make 9 boxes in all.
1 apple and 2 apples make 3 apples in all.
there is 1 card in the box, and there are 6 cards in the box.
1 cup and 3 cups make 4 cups in all.
there is 1 ball in the box, and there are 7 balls in the box.
1 bottle and 4 bottles make 5 bottles in all.
there is 1 stone in the box, and there are 2 stones in the box.
1 key and 5 keys make 6 keys in all.
there is 1 list in the box, and there are 3 lists in the box.
1 shelf and 6 shelves make 7 shelves in all.
there is 1 stick in the box, and there are 4 sticks in the box.
ann waited a key and counted 1 key.
there is 1 pen on the chair, and there are 4 pens on the chair.
1 карандаш и 5 карандашей дают всего 6 карандашей.
1 coin and 7 coins make 8 coins in all.
tom took 1 cup and 1 bottle; tom took a cup and a bottle.
there is 1 pen in the box, and there are 4 pens in the box.
1 coin and 7 coins make 8 coins in all.
there is 1 toy in the box, and there are 5 toys in the box.
1 ticket and 2 tickets make 3 tickets in all.
there is 1 cake in the box, and there are 6 cakes in the box.
1 chair and 3 chairs make 4 chairs in all.
there is 1 line in the box, and there are 7 lines in the box.
1 plate and 4 plates make 5 plates in all.
there is 1 shoe in the box, and there are 2 shoes in the box.
ann waited an apple and counted 1 apple.
there is 1 book on the shelf, and there are 3 books on the shelf.
1 ручка и 4 ручки дают всего 5 ручек.
1 card and 6 cards make 7 cards in all.
ann took 1 box and 1 ticket; ann took a box and a ticket.
there is 1 apple in the box, and there are 2 apples in the box.
1 pencil and 5 pencils make 6 pencils in all.
there is 1 cup in the box, and there are 3 cups in the box.
1 page and 6 pages make 7 pages in all.
there is 1 bottle in the box, and there are 4 bottles in the box.
1 tree and 7 trees make 8 trees in all.
there is 1 key in the box, and there are 5 keys in the box.
1 note and 2 notes make 3 notes in all.
there is 1 shelf in the box, and there are 6 shelves in the box.
1 hat and 3 hats make 4 hats in all.
ann waited a book and counted 1 book.
1 книга и 3 книги дают всего 4 книги.
1 pencil and 5 pencils make 6 pencils in all.
ivan took 1 coin and 1 page; ivan took a coin and a page.
there is 1 cup on the floor, and there are 9 cups on the floor.
1 book and 3 books make 4 books in all.
there is 1 coin in the box, and there are 7 coins in the box.
1 flower and 4 flowers make 5 flowers in all.
there is 1 ticket in the box, and there are 2 tickets in the box.
1 egg and 5 eggs make 6 eggs in all.
there is 1 chair in the box, and there are 3 chairs in the box.
1 letter and 6 letters make 7 letters in all.
there is 1 plate in the box, and there are 4 plates in the box.
1 shirt and 7 shirts make 8 shirts in all.
ann waited an hour and counted 1 hour.
ann waited a letter and counted 1 letter.
1 pen and 4 pens make 5 pens in all.
mary took 1 card and 1 flower; mary took a card and a flower.
there is 1 box on the chair, and there are 8 boxes on the chair.
1 чашка и 9 чашек дают всего 10 чашек.
there is 1 pencil in the box, and there are 5 pencils in the box.
1 box and 2 boxes make 3 boxes in all.
there is 1 page in the box, and there are 6 pages in the box.
1 bag and 3 bags make 4 bags in all.
there is 1 tree in the box, and there are 7 trees in the box.
1 lamp and 4 lamps make 5 lamps in all.
there is 1 note in the box, and there are 2 notes in the box.
1 basket and 5 baskets make 6 baskets in all.
there is 1 hat in the box, and there are 3 hats in the box.
ann waited an office and counted 1 office.
1 book and 3 books make 4 books in all.
peter took 1 pencil and 1 box; peter took a pencil and a box.
there is 1 coin on the shelf, and there are 7 coins on the shelf.
1 коробка и 8 коробок дают всего 9 коробок.
there is 1 book in the box, and there are 3 books in the box.
1 card and 6 cards make 7 cards in all.
there is 1 flower in the box, and there are 4 flowers in the box.
1 ball and 7 balls make 8 balls in all.
there is 1 egg in the box, and there are 5 eggs in the box.
1 stone and 2 stones make 3 stones in all.
there is 1 letter in the box, and there are 6 letters in the box.
1 list and 3 lists make 4 lists in all.
there is 1 shirt in the box, and there are 7 shirts in the box.
1 stick and 4 sticks make 5 sticks in all.
ann waited a ticket and counted 1 ticket.

a boy and a girl together are called children.
a man and a woman together are called people.
a teacher and a student together are called people.
a brother and a sister together are called children.
a mother and a father together are called people.
a seller and a buyer together are called people.
a doctor and a neighbour together are called people.
a worker and a driver together are called people.
a baker and a farmer together are called people.
a friend and a neighbour together are called people.
кто такие животные? корова и лошадь вместе зовутся животные.
заяц и медведь вместе зовутся животные.
what are animals? a hen and a duck together are called animals.
a plum and a cherry together are called fruits.
кто такие фрукты? банан и персик вместе зовутся фрукты.
молоток и пила вместе зовутся инструменты.
what are tools? a axe and a spade together are called tools.
a knife and a scissors together are called tools.
кто такие овощи? морковь и капуста вместе зовутся овощи.
свёкла и репа вместе зовутся овощи.
what are vegetables? a cucumber and a tomato together are called vegetables.
a son and a daughter together are called children.
кто такие дети? племянник и племянница вместе зовутся дети.
animals: cat, dog, cow, horse, fox, wolf, hare, bear, hen, duck.
овощи: морковь, капуста, лук, чеснок, свёкла, репа, огурец, помидор, картофель, кабачок.
кто такие дети? мальчик и девочка вместе зовутся дети.
кто такие люди? мужчина и женщина вместе зовутся люди.
кто такие люди? учитель и ученик вместе зовутся люди.
кто такие дети? брат и сестра вместе зовутся дети.
кто такие люди? мать и отец вместе зовутся люди.
кто такие люди? продавец и покупатель вместе зовутся люди.
кто такие люди? доктор и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
кто такие люди? рабочий и водитель вместе зовутся люди.
кто такие люди? пекарь и фермер вместе зовутся люди.
кто такие люди? друг и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
корова и лошадь вместе зовутся животные.
what are animals? a fox and a wolf together are called animals.
a hen and a duck together are called animals.
кто такие фрукты? слива и вишня вместе зовутся фрукты.
банан и персик вместе зовутся фрукты.
what are fruits? a grape and a melon together are called fruits.
a axe and a spade together are called tools.
кто такие инструменты? нож и ножницы вместе зовутся инструменты.
морковь и капуста вместе зовутся овощи.
what are vegetables? a onion and a garlic together are called vegetables.
a cucumber and a tomato together are called vegetables.
кто такие дети? сын и дочь вместе зовутся дети.
племянник и племянница вместе зовутся дети.
люди: мужчина, женщина, учитель, ученик, мать, отец, продавец, покупатель, доктор, сосед, рабочий, водитель, пекарь, фермер, друг.
vegetables: carrot, cabbage, onion, garlic, beet, turnip, cucumber, tomato, potato, marrow.
мальчик и девочка вместе зовутся дети.
мужчина и женщина вместе зовутся люди.
учитель и ученик вместе зовутся люди.
брат и сестра вместе зовутся дети.
мать и отец вместе зовутся люди.
продавец и покупатель вместе зовутся люди.
доктор и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
рабочий и водитель вместе зовутся люди.
пекарь и фермер вместе зовутся люди.
друг и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
what are animals? a cat and a dog together are called animals.
a fox and a wolf together are called animals.
кто такие животные? курица и утка вместе зовутся животные.
слива и вишня вместе зовутся фрукты.
what are fruits? a orange and a lemon together are called fruits.
a grape and a melon together are called fruits.
кто такие инструменты? топор и лопата вместе зовутся инструменты.
нож и ножницы вместе зовутся инструменты.
what are tools? a needle and a thimble together are called tools.
a onion and a garlic together are called vegetables.
кто такие овощи? огурец и помидор вместе зовутся овощи.
сын и дочь вместе зовутся дети.
what are children? a grandson and a granddaughter together are called children.
people: man, woman, teacher, student, mother, father, seller, buyer, doctor, neighbour, worker, driver, baker, farmer, friend.
инструменты: молоток, пила, топор, лопата, отвёртка, клещи, нож, ножницы, игла, напёрсток.
1 boy and 1 girl came to the school; 2 children came to the school in all.
1 man and 1 woman came to the market; 2 people came to the market in all.
1 teacher and 1 student came to the station; 2 people came to the station in all.
1 brother and 1 sister came to the park; 2 children came to the park in all.
1 mother and 1 father came to the library; 2 people came to the library in all.
1 seller and 1 buyer came to the farm; 2 people came to the farm in all.
1 doctor and 1 neighbour came to the shop; 2 people came to the shop in all.
1 worker and 1 driver came to the school; 2 people came to the school in all.
1 baker and 1 farmer came to the market; 2 people came to the market in all.
1 friend and 1 neighbour came to the station; 2 people came to the station in all.
a cat and a dog together are called animals.
кто такие животные? лиса и волк вместе зовутся животные.
курица и утка вместе зовутся животные.
what are fruits? a apple and a pear together are called fruits.
a orange and a lemon together are called fruits.
кто такие фрукты? виноград и дыня вместе зовутся фрукты.
топор и лопата вместе зовутся инструменты.
what are tools? a screwdriver and a pliers together are called tools.
a needle and a thimble together are called tools.
кто такие овощи? лук и чеснок вместе зовутся овощи.
огурец и помидор вместе зовутся овощи.
what are vegetables? a potato and a marrow together are called vegetables.
a grandson and a granddaughter together are called children.
дети: мальчик, девочка, брат, сестра, сын, дочь, внук, внучка, племянник, племянница.
tools: hammer, saw, axe, spade, screwdriver, pliers, knife, scissors, needle, thimble.
1 boy and 1 girl came to the school. how many children came to the school? 2 children came to the school in all.
2 men and 3 women came to the market. how many people came to the market? 5 people came to the market in all.
3 teachers and 5 students came to the station. how many people came to the station? 8 people came to the station in all.
4 brothers and 2 sisters came to the park. how many children came to the park? 6 children came to the park in all.
5 mothers and 4 fathers came to the library. how many people came to the library? 9 people came to the library in all.
6 sellers and 1 buyer came to the farm. how many people came to the farm? 7 people came to the farm in all.
1 doctor and 3 neighbours came to the shop. how many people came to the shop? 4 people came to the shop in all.
2 workers and 5 drivers came to the school. how many people came to the school? 7 people came to the school in all.
3 bakers and 2 farmers came to the market. how many people came to the market? 5 people came to the market in all.
4 friends and 4 neighbours came to the station. how many people came to the station? 8 people came to the station in all.
кто такие животные? кошка и собака вместе зовутся животные.
лиса и волк вместе зовутся животные.
what are animals? a hare and a bear together are called animals.
a apple and a pear together are called fruits.
кто такие фрукты? апельсин и лимон вместе зовутся фрукты.
виноград и дыня вместе зовутся фрукты.
what are tools? a hammer and a saw together are called tools.
a screwdriver and a pliers together are called tools.
кто такие инструменты? игла и напёрсток вместе зовутся инструменты.
лук и чеснок вместе зовутся овощи.
what are vegetables? a beet and a turnip together are called vegetables.
a potato and a marrow together are called vegetables.
кто такие дети? внук и внучка вместе зовутся дети.
children: boy, girl, brother, sister, son, daughter, grandson, granddaughter, nephew, niece.
фрукты: яблоко, груша, слива, вишня, апельсин, лимон, банан, персик, виноград, дыня.
1 boy and 1 girl came to the school; 2 children came to the school in all.
2 men and 3 women came to the market; 5 people came to the market in all.
3 teachers and 5 students came to the station; 8 people came to the station in all.
4 brothers and 2 sisters came to the park; 6 children came to the park in all.
5 mothers and 4 fathers came to the library; 9 people came to the library in all.
6 sellers and 1 buyer came to the farm; 7 people came to the farm in all.
1 doctor and 3 neighbours came to the shop; 4 people came to the shop in all.
2 workers and 5 drivers came to the school; 7 people came to the school in all.
3 bakers and 2 farmers came to the market; 5 people came to the market in all.
4 friends and 4 neighbours came to the station; 8 people came to the station in all.
кошка и собака вместе зовутся животные.
what are animals? a cow and a horse together are called animals.
a hare and a bear together are called animals.
кто такие фрукты? яблоко и груша вместе зовутся фрукты.
апельсин и лимон вместе зовутся фрукты.
what are fruits? a banana and a peach together are called fruits.
a hammer and a saw together are called tools.
кто такие инструменты? отвёртка и клещи вместе зовутся инструменты.
игла и напёрсток вместе зовутся инструменты.
what are vegetables? a carrot and a cabbage together are called vegetables.
a beet and a turnip together are called vegetables.
кто такие овощи? картофель и кабачок вместе зовутся овощи.
внук и внучка вместе зовутся дети.
what are children? a nephew and a niece together are called children.
fruits: apple, pear, plum, cherry, orange, lemon, banana, peach, grape, melon.
в семье мать, отец и ребёнок; в семье 3 человека.
what are children? a boy and a girl together are called children.
what are people? a man and a woman together are called people.
what are people? a teacher and a student together are called people.
what are children? a brother and a sister together are called children.
what are people? a mother and a father together are called people.
what are people? a seller and a buyer together are called people.
what are people? a doctor and a neighbour together are called people.
what are people? a worker and a driver together are called people.
what are people? a baker and a farmer together are called people.
what are people? a friend and a neighbour together are called people.
a cow and a horse together are called animals.
кто такие животные? заяц и медведь вместе зовутся животные.
яблоко и груша вместе зовутся фрукты.
what are fruits? a plum and a cherry together are called fruits.
a banana and a peach together are called fruits.
кто такие инструменты? молоток и пила вместе зовутся инструменты.
отвёртка и клещи вместе зовутся инструменты.
what are tools? a knife and a scissors together are called tools.
a carrot and a cabbage together are called vegetables.
кто такие овощи? свёкла и репа вместе зовутся овощи.
картофель и кабачок вместе зовутся овощи.
what are children? a son and a daughter together are called children.
a nephew and a niece together are called children.
животные: кошка, собака, корова, лошадь, лиса, волк, заяц, медведь, курица, утка.
the family has a mother, a father and a child; the family has 3 people.

ира работала 2 дня из 10; ира работала два раза.
peter counted the books once and counted the books again; peter counted the books twice in all.
аня работала 0 дней из 10; аня никогда не работала.
mary worked on 10 days of 10 days; mary always worked.
маша считала ручек один раз и потом ещё раз; всего маша считала два раза.
ira worked on 2 days of 10 days; ira worked twice.
ира считала яблок один раз и потом ещё раз; всего ира считала два раза.
ann worked on 0 days of 10 days; ann never worked.
пётр работал 7 дней из 10; пётр работал часто.
mary counted the pens once and counted the pens again; mary counted the pens twice in all.
том работал 1 день из 10; том работал один раз.
ira counted the apples once and counted the apples again; ira counted the apples twice in all.
иван считал карандашей один раз и потом ещё раз; всего иван считал два раза.
peter worked on 7 days of 10 days; peter often worked.
пётр считал книг один раз и потом ещё раз; всего пётр считал два раза.
tom worked on 1 day of 10 days; tom worked once.
маша работала 10 дней из 10; маша работала всегда.
ivan counted the pencils once and counted the pencils again; ivan counted the pencils twice in all.

tom counted 32 books; 32 books are about 30 books.
peter counted 48 pencils; 48 pencils are nearly 50 pencils.
маша насчитала 21 карта; это примерно 20 карт.
аня насчитала 19 яблок; это почти 20 яблок.
ira counted 41 pens; 41 pens are about 40 pens.
mary counted 19 cards; 19 cards are nearly 20 cards.
иван насчитал 32 монеты; это примерно 30 монет.
том насчитал 28 книг; это почти 30 книг.
peter counted 52 pencils; 52 pencils are about 50 pencils.
ivan counted 28 coins; 28 coins are nearly 30 coins.
аня насчитала 21 яблоко; это примерно 20 яблок.
ира насчитала 39 ручек; это почти 40 ручек.
mary counted 21 cards; 21 cards are about 20 cards.
ann counted 19 apples; 19 apples are nearly 20 apples.
том насчитал 32 книги; это примерно 30 книг.
пётр насчитал 48 карандашей; это почти 50 карандашей.
ivan counted 32 coins; 32 coins are about 30 coins.
tom counted 28 books; 28 books are nearly 30 books.
ира насчитала 41 ручка; это примерно 40 ручек.
маша насчитала 19 карт; это почти 20 карт.
ann counted 21 apples; 21 apples are about 20 apples.
ira counted 39 pens; 39 pens are nearly 40 pens.
пётр насчитал 52 карандаша; это примерно 50 карандашей.
иван насчитал 28 монет; это почти 30 монет.

почему у иры 7 коробок? потому что ира купила 4 коробки, а потом ещё 3 коробки.
ann bought bread, salt and sugar at the market; ann bought 3 things in all.
в корзине лежат ручка, монета и чашка; в корзине лежат 3 предмета.
why does tom have 5 pencils? because tom bought 3 pencils and then 2 pencils more.
почему у маши 11 яблок? потому что маша купила 6 яблок, а потом ещё 5 яблок.
mary bought coffee, milk and water at the shop; mary bought 3 things in all.
в сумке лежат игрушка, карта и цветок; в сумке лежат 3 предмета.
why does peter have 9 toys? because peter bought 5 toys and then 4 toys more.
tom bought salt, sugar and tea at the shop; tom bought 3 things in all.
в сумке лежат монета, чашка и коробка; в сумке лежат 3 предмета.
почему у тома 5 карандашей? потому что том купил 3 карандаша, а потом ещё 2 карандаша.
why does ivan have 8 pencils? because ivan bought 7 pencils and then 1 pencil more.
ivan bought milk, water and cake at the store; ivan bought 3 things in all.
why does ann have 3 apples? because ann bought 2 apples and then 1 apple more.
почему у петра 9 игрушек? потому что пётр купил 5 игрушек, а потом ещё 4 игрушки.
ira bought sugar, tea and coffee at the store; ira bought 3 things in all.
в коробке лежат чашка, коробка и игрушка; в коробке лежат 3 предмета.
why does ira have 7 boxes? because ira bought 4 boxes and then 3 boxes more.
почему у ивана 8 карандашей? потому что иван купил 7 карандашей, а потом ещё 1 карандаш.
в коробке лежат книга, ручка и монета; в коробке лежат 3 предмета.
почему у ани 3 яблока? потому что аня купила 2 яблока, а потом ещё 1 яблоко.
why does mary have 11 apples? because mary bought 6 apples and then 5 apples more.
peter bought tea, coffee and milk at the market; peter bought 3 things in all.
в корзине лежат коробка, игрушка и карта; в корзине лежат 3 предмета.

том купил 3 карандаша и 4 коробки в лавке; всего том купил 7 предметов: 3 + 4 = 7.
mary bought 6 boxes and 7 apples at the library. how many things did mary buy? mary bought 13 things in all: 6 + 7 = 13.
tom bought 2 toys and 4 boxes at the market; tom bought 6 things in all: 2 + 4 = 6.
том купил 3 карандаша и 4 коробки в лавке. сколько предметов купил том? всего том купил 7 предметов: 3 + 4 = 7.
маша купила 6 коробок и 7 яблок в библиотеке; всего маша купила 13 предметов: 6 + 7 = 13.
tom bought 2 toys and 4 boxes at the market. how many things did tom buy? tom bought 6 things in all: 2 + 4 = 6.
ira bought 4 cards and 7 flowers at the store; ira bought 11 things in all: 4 + 7 = 11.
маша купила 6 коробок и 7 яблок в библиотеке. сколько предметов купила маша? всего маша купила 13 предметов: 6 + 7 = 13.
том купил 2 игрушки и 4 коробки на рынке; всего том купил 6 предметов: 2 + 4 = 6.
ira bought 4 cards and 7 flowers at the store. how many things did ira buy? ira bought 11 things in all: 4 + 7 = 11.
ivan bought 7 cups and 4 pens at the school; ivan bought 11 things in all: 7 + 4 = 11.
том купил 2 игрушки и 4 коробки на рынке. сколько предметов купил том? всего том купил 6 предметов: 2 + 4 = 6.
ира купила 4 карты и 7 цветков в магазине; всего ира купила 11 предметов: 4 + 7 = 11.
ivan bought 7 cups and 4 pens at the school. how many things did ivan buy? ivan bought 11 things in all: 7 + 4 = 11.
ira bought 3 pages and 7 flowers at the shop; ira bought 10 things in all: 3 + 7 = 10.
ира купила 4 карты и 7 цветков в магазине. сколько предметов купила ира? всего ира купила 11 предметов: 4 + 7 = 11.
иван купил 7 чашек и 4 ручки в школе; всего иван купил 11 предметов: 7 + 4 = 11.
ira bought 3 pages and 7 flowers at the shop. how many things did ira buy? ira bought 10 things in all: 3 + 7 = 10.
peter bought 5 coins and 4 pages at the station; peter bought 9 things in all: 5 + 4 = 9.
иван купил 7 чашек и 4 ручки в школе. сколько предметов купил иван? всего иван купил 11 предметов: 7 + 4 = 11.
ира купила 3 страницы и 7 цветков в лавке; всего ира купила 10 предметов: 3 + 7 = 10.
peter bought 5 coins and 4 pages at the station. how many things did peter buy? peter bought 9 things in all: 5 + 4 = 9.
ann bought 8 flowers and 7 cards at the park; ann bought 15 things in all: 8 + 7 = 15.
ира купила 3 страницы и 7 цветков в лавке. сколько предметов купила ира? всего ира купила 10 предметов: 3 + 7 = 10.
пётр купил 5 монет и 4 страницы на вокзале; всего пётр купил 9 предметов: 5 + 4 = 9.
ann bought 8 flowers and 7 cards at the park. how many things did ann buy? ann bought 15 things in all: 8 + 7 = 15.
tom bought 3 pencils and 4 boxes at the shop; tom bought 7 things in all: 3 + 4 = 7.
пётр купил 5 монет и 4 страницы на вокзале. сколько предметов купил пётр? всего пётр купил 9 предметов: 5 + 4 = 9.
аня купила 8 цветков и 7 карт в парке; всего аня купила 15 предметов: 8 + 7 = 15.
tom bought 3 pencils and 4 boxes at the shop. how many things did tom buy? tom bought 7 things in all: 3 + 4 = 7.
mary bought 6 boxes and 7 apples at the library; mary bought 13 things in all: 6 + 7 = 13.
аня купила 8 цветков и 7 карт в парке. сколько предметов купила аня? всего аня купила 15 предметов: 8 + 7 = 15.

the bed is in the room, and the room is in the house. where is the bed? the bed is in the house.
коробка на полке, а полка в кухне; значит коробка в кухне.
the door is on the wall.
the flower is not at the market: the market is not on the path from the flower to the town.
дом на улице, а улица в городке. где дом? дом в городке.
the parking lot is on the street, and the street is in the town; so the parking lot is in the town.
комната в доме.
рубашка не на ключе: ключ не на пути от рубашки до городка.
the ticket is in the bag, and the bag is on the chair. where is the ticket? the ticket is on the chair.
стена в комнате, а комната в доме; значит стена в доме.
the box is on the shelf.
the class is not in the library: the library is not on the path from the class to the town.
дверь на стене, а стена в комнате. где дверь? дверь в комнате.
the house is on the street, and the street is in the town; so the house is in the town.
лампа на столе.
парковка не в поле: поле не на пути от парковки до городка.
the shirt is on the bed, and the bed is in the room. where is the shirt? the shirt is in the room.
камень в поле, а поле на ферме; значит камень на ферме.
the wall is in the room.
the bed is not in the cup: the cup is not on the path from the bed to the town.
коробка на полке, а полка в кухне. где коробка? коробка в кухне.
the door is on the wall, and the wall is in the room; so the door is in the room.
цветок в саду.
дом не в парке: парк не на пути от дома до городка.
the parking lot is on the street, and the street is in the town. where is the parking lot? the parking lot is in the town.
комната в доме, а дом на улице; значит комната на улице.
the stone is in the field.
the ticket is not in the toy: the toy is not on the path from the ticket to the town.
стена в комнате, а комната в доме. где стена? стена в доме.
the box is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen; so the box is in the kitchen.
класс в школе.
дверь не в магазине: магазин не на пути от двери до городка.
the house is on the street, and the street is in the town. where is the house? the house is in the town.
лампа на столе, а стол в кухне; значит лампа в кухне.
the room is in the house.
the shirt is not on the key: the key is not on the path from the shirt to the town.
камень в поле, а поле на ферме. где камень? камень на ферме.
the wall is in the room, and the room is in the house; so the wall is in the house.
кровать в комнате.
коробка не в конторе: контора не на пути от коробки до городка.
the door is on the wall, and the wall is in the room. where is the door? the door is in the room.
цветок в саду, а сад в доме; значит цветок в доме.
the lamp is on the table.
the parking lot is not in the field: the field is not on the path from the parking lot to the town.
комната в доме, а дом на улице. где комната? комната на улице.
the stone is in the field, and the field is on the farm; so the stone is on the farm.
билет в сумке.
стена не в шарике: шарик не на пути от стены до городка.
the box is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen. where is the box? the box is in the kitchen.
класс в школе, а школа на улице; значит класс на улице.
the flower is in the garden.
the house is not in the park: the park is not on the path from the house to the town.
лампа на столе, а стол в кухне. где лампа? лампа в кухне.
the room is in the house, and the house is on the street; so the room is on the street.
рубашка на кровати.
камень не на рубашке: рубашка не на пути от камня до деревни.
the wall is in the room, and the room is in the house. where is the wall? the wall is in the house.
кровать в комнате, а комната в доме; значит кровать в доме.
the class is in the school.
the door is not in the store: the store is not on the path from the door to the town.
цветок в саду, а сад в доме. где цветок? цветок в доме.
the lamp is on the table, and the table is in the kitchen; so the lamp is in the kitchen.
парковка на улице.
комната не в двери: дверь не на пути от комнаты до городка.
the stone is in the field, and the field is on the farm. where is the stone? the stone is on the farm.
билет в сумке, а сумка на стуле; значит билет на стуле.
the bed is in the room.
the box is not in the office: the office is not on the path from the box to the town.
класс в школе, а школа на улице. где класс? класс на улице.
the flower is in the garden, and the garden is in the house; so the flower is in the house.
дом на улице.
лампа не на ферме: ферма не на пути от лампы до городка.
the room is in the house, and the house is on the street. where is the room? the room is on the street.
рубашка на кровати, а кровать в комнате; значит рубашка в комнате.
the ticket is in the bag.
the wall is not in the ball: the ball is not on the path from the wall to the town.
кровать в комнате, а комната в доме. где кровать? кровать в доме.
the class is in the school, and the school is on the street; so the class is on the street.
дверь на стене.
цветок не на рынке: рынок не на пути от цветка до городка.
the lamp is on the table, and the table is in the kitchen. where is the lamp? the lamp is in the kitchen.
парковка на улице, а улица в городке; значит парковка в городке.
the shirt is on the bed.
the stone is not on the shirt: the shirt is not on the path from the stone to the village.
билет в сумке, а сумка на стуле. где билет? билет на стуле.
the bed is in the room, and the room is in the house; so the bed is in the house.
коробка на полке.
класс не в библиотеке: библиотека не на пути от класса до городка.
the flower is in the garden, and the garden is in the house. where is the flower? the flower is in the house.
дом на улице, а улица в городке; значит дом в городке.
the parking lot is on the street.
the room is not in the door: the door is not on the path from the room to the town.
рубашка на кровати, а кровать в комнате. где рубашка? рубашка в комнате.
the ticket is in the bag, and the bag is on the chair; so the ticket is on the chair.
стена в комнате.
кровать не в чашке: чашка не на пути от кровати до городка.
the class is in the school, and the school is on the street. where is the class? the class is on the street.
дверь на стене, а стена в комнате; значит дверь в комнате.
the house is on the street.
the lamp is not on the farm: the farm is not on the path from the lamp to the town.
парковка на улице, а улица в городке. где парковка? парковка в городке.
the shirt is on the bed, and the bed is in the room; so the shirt is in the room.
камень в поле.
билет не в игрушке: игрушка не на пути от билета до городка.

ira worked in the morning and rested in the day; ira worked before ira rested.
the night comes after the morning.
the day comes before the night.
аня работала вечером, а отдыхала ночью; значит аня работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
the morning comes early and the night comes late.
том работал утром, а ира отдыхала утром; они делали это в одно время.
tom works now and rests later; tom works before tom rests.
день позже утра.
утро раньше ночи.
ivan worked during the day and rested during the night; ivan worked before ivan rested.
what comes before the day? the morning comes before the day.
today comes after yesterday.
peter worked in the day and mary rested in the day; peter worked while mary rested.
tom left home in the morning and arrived at the station in the day; tom left home before tom arrived at the station.
the morning comes before the evening.
маша работала утром, а отдыхала ночью; значит маша работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
ночь позже дня.
the evening comes next after the day.
today comes before tomorrow.
пётр ушёл из дома днём, а пришёл на рынке вечером; значит пётр ушёл раньше, чем пришёл.
том работал утром, а ира отдыхала утром; они делали это в одно время.
peter worked during the morning and rested during the evening; peter worked before peter rested.
the evening comes after the day.
the evening comes before the night.
что раньше вечера? день раньше вечера.
сегодня раньше, чем завтра.
ivan works now and rests later; ivan works before ivan rests.
в неделе 7 дней, а в выходных 2 дня; в неделе на 5 дней больше.
вечер позже утра.
день раньше вечера.
ann worked in the evening and rested in the night; ann worked before ann rested.
what comes before the night? the evening comes before the night.
tom worked in the morning and ira rested in the morning; tom worked while ira rested.
ivan left home in the evening and arrived at the office in the night; ivan left home before ivan arrived at the office.
the day comes after the morning.
the morning comes before the night.
маша работала днём, а отдыхала вечером; значит маша работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
ночь позже вечера.
the morning comes first and the night comes last.
том ушёл из дома утром, а пришёл в школе днём; значит том ушёл раньше, чем пришёл.
иван работал вечером, а аня отдыхала вечером; они делали это в одно время.
утро раньше дня.
mary worked in the morning and rested in the night; mary worked before mary rested.
the night comes after the day.
the day comes next after the morning.
yesterday comes before today.
peter works now and rests later; peter works before peter rests.
tom worked in the morning and ira rested in the morning; tom worked while ira rested.
ира работала утром, а отдыхала днём; значит ира работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
ночь позже утра.
день раньше ночи.
что раньше дня? утро раньше дня.
вчера раньше, чем сегодня.
peter left home in the day and arrived at the market in the evening; peter left home before peter arrived at the market.
том ушёл из дома утром, а пришёл на вокзале днём; значит том ушёл раньше, чем пришёл.
the evening comes after the morning.
the day comes before the evening.
иван работал днём, а отдыхал ночью; значит иван работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
what comes before the evening? the day comes before the evening.
tomorrow comes after today.
пётр работал днём, а маша отдыхала днём; они делали это в одно время.
the week has 7 days and the weekend has 2 days; the week has 5 days more than the weekend.
утро раньше вечера.
mary worked in the day and rested in the evening; mary worked before mary rested.
the night comes after the evening.
the night comes next after the evening.
tom works now and rests later; tom works before tom rests.
ivan worked in the evening and ann rested in the evening; ivan worked while ann rested.
the morning comes before the day.
пётр работал утром, а отдыхал вечером; значит пётр работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
вечер позже дня.
вечер раньше ночи.
что раньше ночи? вечер раньше ночи.
tom left home in the morning and arrived at the school in the day; tom left home before tom arrived at the school.
иван ушёл из дома вечером, а пришёл в конторе ночью; значит иван ушёл раньше, чем пришёл.

the past of sell is sold.
today ira and peter lose tickets; yesterday ira and peter lost tickets.
today ira drinks a cup of tea; yesterday ira drank a cup of tea.
today ann starts a list. what is the past of start? the past of start is started.
the past of save is saved.
today ann and tom think about the answer; yesterday ann and tom thought about the answer.
today ann looks at the window; yesterday ann looked at the window.
today mary remains at home. what is the past of remain? the past of remain is remained.
the past of keep is kept.
глагол «ходить» в прошедшем даёт «ходил».
сегодня маша смотрит в окно; вчера маша смотрела в окно.
глагол «приносить» в прошедшем даёт «приносил».
today ira sells a card; yesterday ira sold a card.
today ann breaks a plate. what is the past of break? the past of break is broke.
the past of read is read.
today ann and tom start lists; yesterday ann and tom started lists.
today ann saves a coin; yesterday ann saved a coin.
today mary wants a ticket. what is the past of want? the past of want is wanted.
the past of answer is answered.
today mary and ivan remain at home; yesterday mary and ivan remained at home.
today mary keeps a shirt; yesterday mary kept a shirt.
глагол «терять» в прошедшем даёт «терял».
сегодня ира видит дверь; вчера ира видела дверь.
глагол «пить» в прошедшем даёт «пил».
сегодня аня тратит рубли; вчера аня тратила рубли.
today ann and tom break plates; yesterday ann and tom broke plates.
today ann reads a page; yesterday ann read a page.
today mary plays in the yard. what is the past of play? the past of play is played.
the past of share is shared.
today mary and ivan want tickets; yesterday mary and ivan wanted tickets.
today mary answers a question; yesterday mary answered a question.
today ira realizes the answer. what is the past of realize? the past of realize is realized.
the past of bring is brought.
глагол «ломать» в прошедшем даёт «ломал».
сегодня аня думает об ответе; вчера аня думала об ответе.
глагол «бегать» в прошедшем даёт «бегал».
сегодня маша платит за билет; вчера маша платила за билет.
today mary takes a key. what is the past of take? the past of take is took.
the past of walk is walked.
today mary and ivan play in the yard; yesterday mary and ivan played in the yard.
today mary shares a cake; yesterday mary shared a cake.
today ira earns a coin. what is the past of earn? the past of earn is earned.
the past of tell is told.
today ira and peter realize the answer; yesterday ira and peter realized the answer.
today ira brings a bag; yesterday ira brought a bag.
глагол «брать» в прошедшем даёт «брал».
сегодня маша говорит ответ; вчера маша говорила ответ.
глагол «заканчивать» в прошедшем даёт «заканчивал».
сегодня ира делит пирог; вчера ира делила пирог.
today mary and ivan take keys; yesterday mary and ivan took keys.
today mary walks to the shop; yesterday mary walked to the shop.
today ira drinks a cup of tea. what is the past of drink? the past of drink is drank.
the past of fill is filled.
today ira and peter earn coins; yesterday ira and peter earned coins.
today ira tells a story; yesterday ira told a story.
today ann looks at the window. what is the past of look? the past of look is looked.
the past of arrive is arrived.
глагол «продавать» в прошедшем даёт «продавал».
сегодня ира спрашивает о цене; вчера ира спрашивала о цене.
глагол «хотеть» в прошедшем даёт «хотел».
сегодня аня наполняет бутылку; вчера аня наполняла бутылку.
today ira sells a card. what is the past of sell? the past of sell is sold.
the past of lose is lost.
today ira and peter drink cups of tea; yesterday ira and peter drank cups of tea.
today ira fills a bottle; yesterday ira filled a bottle.
today ann saves a coin. what is the past of save? the past of save is saved.
the past of think is thought.
today ann and tom look at the window; yesterday ann and tom looked at the window.
today ann arrives at the school; yesterday ann arrived at the school.
today mary keeps a shirt. what is the past of keep? the past of keep is kept.
сегодня аня работает в конторе; вчера аня работала в конторе.
глагол «смотреть» в прошедшем даёт «смотрел».
сегодня маша приходит в школу; вчера маша приходила в школу.
today ira and peter sell cards; yesterday ira and peter sold cards.
today ira loses a ticket; yesterday ira lost a ticket.
today ann reads a page. what is the past of read? the past of read is read.
the past of start is started.
today ann and tom save coins; yesterday ann and tom saved coins.
today ann thinks about the answer; yesterday ann thought about the answer.
today mary answers a question. what is the past of answer? the past of answer is answered.
the past of remain is remained.
today mary and ivan keep shirts; yesterday mary and ivan kept shirts.
сегодня маша ходит в лавку; вчера маша ходила в лавку.
глагол «видеть» в прошедшем даёт «видел».
сегодня ира приносит сумку; вчера ира приносила сумку.
глагол «тратить» в прошедшем даёт «тратил».
the past of break is broke.
today ann and tom read pages; yesterday ann and tom read pages.
today ann starts a list; yesterday ann started a list.
today mary shares a cake. what is the past of share? the past of share is shared.
the past of want is wanted.
today mary and ivan answer questions; yesterday mary and ivan answered questions.
today mary remains at home; yesterday mary remained at home.
today ira brings a bag. what is the past of bring? the past of bring is brought.
сегодня ира теряет билет; вчера ира теряла билет.
глагол «думать» в прошедшем даёт «думал».
сегодня аня пьёт чай; вчера аня пила чай.
глагол «платить» в прошедшем даёт «платил».
today ann breaks a plate; yesterday ann broke a plate.
today mary walks to the shop. what is the past of walk? the past of walk is walked.
the past of play is played.
today mary and ivan share cakes; yesterday mary and ivan shared cakes.
today mary wants a ticket; yesterday mary wanted a ticket.
today ira tells a story. what is the past of tell? the past of tell is told.
the past of realize is realized.
today ira and peter bring bags; yesterday ira and peter brought bags.
сегодня аня ломает тарелку; вчера аня ломала тарелку.
глагол «говорить» в прошедшем даёт «говорил».
сегодня маша бегает в парке; вчера маша бегала в парке.
глагол «делить» в прошедшем даёт «делил».
the past of take is took.
today mary and ivan walk to the shop; yesterday mary and ivan walked to the shop.
today mary plays in the yard; yesterday mary played in the yard.
today ira fills a bottle. what is the past of fill? the past of fill is filled.
the past of earn is earned.
today ira and peter tell stories; yesterday ira and peter told stories.
today ira realizes the answer; yesterday ira realized the answer.
today ann arrives at the school. what is the past of arrive? the past of arrive is arrived.
сегодня маша берёт ключ; вчера маша брала ключ.
глагол «спрашивать» в прошедшем даёт «спрашивал».
сегодня ира заканчивает страницу; вчера ира заканчивала страницу.
глагол «наполнять» в прошедшем даёт «наполнял».
today mary takes a key; yesterday mary took a key.
today ira loses a ticket. what is the past of lose? the past of lose is lost.
the past of drink is drank.
today ira and peter fill bottles; yesterday ira and peter filled bottles.
today ira earns a coin; yesterday ira earned a coin.
today ann thinks about the answer. what is the past of think? the past of think is thought.
the past of look is looked.
today ann and tom arrive at the school; yesterday ann and tom arrived at the school.
сегодня ира продаёт карту; вчера ира продавала карту.
глагол «работать» в прошедшем даёт «работал».
сегодня аня хочет билет; вчера аня хотела билет.
глагол «приходить» в прошедшем даёт «приходил».

tom has 7 pens, and ira has 7 pens; tom has the same number of pens as ira.
tom bought 7 pens, but ira bought just 3 pens; 3 pens are fewer than 7 pens, and ira bought less than tom.
ira has 9 pencils, and peter has 4 pencils. how many more pencils does ira have than peter? ira has 5 more pencils than peter.
ira and peter gave 4 pencils to each other; ira gave 4 pencils to peter, and peter gave 4 pencils to ira.
peter has 11 cards, mary has 5 cards and ivan has 1 card; peter has the most cards and ivan has the least cards.
у петра 11 карт, а у маши 5 карт; у петра на 6 карт больше, чем у маши.
mary has 12 coins, and ivan has 6 coins; mary has twice as many coins as ivan.
у ивана 6 монет, а у маши 13 монет; у ивана на 7 монет меньше, чем у маши.
ivan has 14 boxes, and ann has 7 boxes; ivan has double the boxes of ann.
у ивана 8 коробок, и у ани 8 коробок; у них поровну коробок.
ann has 6 cups, and tom has 2 cups; ann has triple the cups of tom.
у ани 4 чашки, а у тома 2 чашки; вместе у них 6 чашек.
tom has 6 flowers, and ira has 3 flowers; ira has half the flowers of tom.
у тома 6 цветков, а у иры 3 цветка. на сколько цветков больше у тома? у тома на 3 цветка больше, чем у иры.
иван купил 3 коробки хлеба, а ира купила 1 коробка хлеба; у иры хлеба меньше, чем у ивана.
tom has 6 pens, and ira has 3 pens; tom has double the pens of ira.
у тома 7 ручек, и у иры 7 ручек; у них поровну ручек.
ira has 12 pencils, and peter has 4 pencils; ira has triple the pencils of peter.
у иры 9 карандашей, а у петра 4 карандаша; вместе у них 13 карандашей.
peter has 10 cards, and mary has 5 cards; mary has half the cards of peter.
у петра 11 карт, а у маши 5 карт. на сколько карт больше у петра? у петра на 6 карт больше, чем у маши.
mary has 13 coins, and ivan has 13 coins; the two counts are equal.
у маши 12 монет, а у ивана 6 монет; у маши вдвое больше, чем у ивана.
ivan has 8 boxes, and ann has 7 boxes; the two counts are different.
ann has 4 cups, and tom has 2 cups; ann has 2 more cups than tom.
ann has 4 cups, and tom has 2 cups; together they have 6 cups, and apart they have 4 cups and 2 cups.
ira has 3 flowers, and tom has 6 flowers; ira has 3 fewer flowers than tom.
tom has 6 flowers, and ira has 3 flowers; the total comes to 9 flowers altogether.
ira bought 7 cups of coffee, and ivan bought 3 cups of coffee; ivan bought less coffee than ira.
том купил 5 коробок соли, а маша купила 3 коробки соли; у маши соли меньше, чем у тома.
tom has 7 pens, and ira has 3 pens; the two counts are different.
ira has 9 pencils, and peter has 4 pencils; ira has 5 more pencils than peter.
ira has 9 pencils, and peter has 4 pencils; together they have 13 pencils, and apart they have 9 pencils and 4 pencils.
mary has 5 cards, and peter has 11 cards; mary has 6 fewer cards than peter.
peter has 11 cards, and mary has 5 cards; the total comes to 16 cards altogether.
mary has 13 coins, and ivan has 13 coins; mary has the same number of coins as ivan.
mary bought 13 coins, but ivan bought just 6 coins; 6 coins are fewer than 13 coins, and ivan bought less than mary.
ivan has 8 boxes, and ann has 7 boxes. how many more boxes does ivan have than ann? ivan has 1 more box than ann.
ivan and ann gave 7 boxes to each other; ivan gave 7 boxes to ann, and ann gave 7 boxes to ivan.
ann has 4 cups, tom has 2 cups and ira has 1 cup; ann has the most cups and ira has the least cups.
у ани 4 чашки, а у тома 2 чашки; у ани на 2 чашки больше, чем у тома.
tom has 6 flowers, and ira has 3 flowers; tom has twice as many flowers as ira.
у иры 3 цветка, а у тома 6 цветков; у иры на 3 цветка меньше, чем у тома.
mary bought 9 bottles of water, and tom bought 5 bottles of water; tom bought less water than mary.
tom has 7 pens, and ira has 3 pens. how many more pens does tom have than ira? tom has 4 more pens than ira.
tom and ira gave 3 pens to each other; tom gave 3 pens to ira, and ira gave 3 pens to tom.
ira has 9 pencils, peter has 4 pencils and mary has 1 pencil; ira has the most pencils and mary has the least pencils.
у иры 9 карандашей, а у петра 4 карандаша; у иры на 5 карандашей больше, чем у петра.
peter has 10 cards, and mary has 5 cards; peter has twice as many cards as mary.
у маши 5 карт, а у петра 11 карт; у маши на 6 карт меньше, чем у петра.
mary has 12 coins, and ivan has 6 coins; mary has double the coins of ivan.
у маши 13 монет, и у ивана 13 монет; у них поровну монет.
ivan has 21 boxes, and ann has 7 boxes; ivan has triple the boxes of ann.
у ивана 8 коробок, а у ани 7 коробок; вместе у них 15 коробок.
ann has 4 cups, and tom has 2 cups; tom has half the cups of ann.
у ани 4 чашки, а у тома 2 чашки. на сколько чашек больше у ани? у ани на 2 чашки больше, чем у тома.
tom has 6 flowers, and ira has 6 flowers; the two counts are equal.
у тома 6 цветков, а у иры 3 цветка; у тома вдвое больше, чем у иры.
ann bought 6 bags of sugar, and peter bought 2 bags of sugar; peter bought less sugar than ann.
tom has 9 pens, and ira has 3 pens; tom has triple the pens of ira.
у тома 7 ручек, а у иры 3 ручки; вместе у них 10 ручек.
ira has 8 pencils, and peter has 4 pencils; peter has half the pencils of ira.
у иры 9 карандашей, а у петра 4 карандаша. на сколько карандашей больше у иры? у иры на 5 карандашей больше, чем у петра.
peter has 11 cards, and mary has 11 cards; the two counts are equal.
у петра 10 карт, а у маши 5 карт; у петра вдвое больше, чем у маши.
mary has 13 coins, and ivan has 6 coins; the two counts are different.
ivan has 8 boxes, and ann has 7 boxes; ivan has 1 more box than ann.
ivan has 8 boxes, and ann has 7 boxes; together they have 15 boxes, and apart they have 8 boxes and 7 boxes.
tom has 2 cups, and ann has 4 cups; tom has 2 fewer cups than ann.
ann has 4 cups, and tom has 2 cups; the total comes to 6 cups altogether.
tom has 6 flowers, and ira has 6 flowers; tom has the same number of flowers as ira.
tom bought 6 flowers, but ira bought just 3 flowers; 3 flowers are fewer than 6 flowers, and ira bought less than tom.
ира купила 7 чашек кофе, а иван купил 3 чашки кофе; у ивана кофе меньше, чем у иры.
tom has 7 pens, and ira has 3 pens; tom has 4 more pens than ira.
tom has 7 pens, and ira has 3 pens; together they have 10 pens, and apart they have 7 pens and 3 pens.
peter has 4 pencils, and ira has 9 pencils; peter has 5 fewer pencils than ira.
ira has 9 pencils, and peter has 4 pencils; the total comes to 13 pencils altogether.
peter has 11 cards, and mary has 11 cards; peter has the same number of cards as mary.
peter bought 11 cards, but mary bought just 5 cards; 5 cards are fewer than 11 cards, and mary bought less than peter.
mary has 13 coins, and ivan has 6 coins. how many more coins does mary have than ivan? mary has 7 more coins than ivan.
mary and ivan gave 6 coins to each other; mary gave 6 coins to ivan, and ivan gave 6 coins to mary.
ivan has 8 boxes, ann has 7 boxes and tom has 1 box; ivan has the most boxes and tom has the least boxes.
у ивана 8 коробок, а у ани 7 коробок; у ивана на 1 коробка больше, чем у ани.
ann has 4 cups, and tom has 2 cups; ann has twice as many cups as tom.
у тома 2 чашки, а у ани 4 чашки; у тома на 2 чашки меньше, чем у ани.
tom has 6 flowers, and ira has 3 flowers; tom has double the flowers of ira.
у тома 6 цветков, и у иры 6 цветков; у них поровну цветков.
маша купила 9 чашек воды, а том купил 5 чашек воды; у тома воды меньше, чем у маши.
tom has 7 pens, ira has 3 pens and peter has 1 pen; tom has the most pens and peter has the least pens.
у тома 7 ручек, а у иры 3 ручки; у тома на 4 ручки больше, чем у иры.
ira has 8 pencils, and peter has 4 pencils; ira has twice as many pencils as peter.
у петра 4 карандаша, а у иры 9 карандашей; у петра на 5 карандашей меньше, чем у иры.
peter has 10 cards, and mary has 5 cards; peter has double the cards of mary.
у петра 11 карт, и у маши 11 карт; у них поровну карт.
mary has 18 coins, and ivan has 6 coins; mary has triple the coins of ivan.
у маши 13 монет, а у ивана 6 монет; вместе у них 19 монет.
ivan has 14 boxes, and ann has 7 boxes; ann has half the boxes of ivan.
у ивана 8 коробок, а у ани 7 коробок. на сколько коробок больше у ивана? у ивана на 1 коробка больше, чем у ани.
ann has 4 cups, and tom has 4 cups; the two counts are equal.
у ани 4 чашки, а у тома 2 чашки; у ани вдвое больше, чем у тома.
tom has 6 flowers, and ira has 3 flowers; the two counts are different.
tom bought 4 cups of tea, and mary bought 2 cups of tea; mary bought less tea than tom.
аня купила 6 коробок сахара, а пётр купил 2 коробки сахара; у петра сахара меньше, чем у ани.
tom has 6 pens, and ira has 3 pens; ira has half the pens of tom.
у тома 7 ручек, а у иры 3 ручки. на сколько ручек больше у тома? у тома на 4 ручки больше, чем у иры.
ira has 9 pencils, and peter has 9 pencils; the two counts are equal.
у иры 8 карандашей, а у петра 4 карандаша; у иры вдвое больше, чем у петра.
peter has 11 cards, and mary has 5 cards; the two counts are different.
mary has 13 coins, and ivan has 6 coins; mary has 7 more coins than ivan.
mary has 13 coins, and ivan has 6 coins; together they have 19 coins, and apart they have 13 coins and 6 coins.
ann has 7 boxes, and ivan has 8 boxes; ann has 1 fewer box than ivan.
ivan has 8 boxes, and ann has 7 boxes; the total comes to 15 boxes altogether.
ann has 4 cups, and tom has 4 cups; ann has the same number of cups as tom.
ann bought 4 cups, but tom bought just 2 cups; 2 cups are fewer than 4 cups, and tom bought less than ann.
tom has 6 flowers, and ira has 3 flowers. how many more flowers does tom have than ira? tom has 3 more flowers than ira.
tom and ira gave 3 flowers to each other; tom gave 3 flowers to ira, and ira gave 3 flowers to tom.
peter bought 6 bottles of milk, and ann bought 4 bottles of milk; ann bought less milk than peter.
ira has 3 pens, and tom has 7 pens; ira has 4 fewer pens than tom.
tom has 7 pens, and ira has 3 pens; the total comes to 10 pens altogether.
ira has 9 pencils, and peter has 9 pencils; ira has the same number of pencils as peter.
ira bought 9 pencils, but peter bought just 4 pencils; 4 pencils are fewer than 9 pencils, and peter bought less than ira.
peter has 11 cards, and mary has 5 cards. how many more cards does peter have than mary? peter has 6 more cards than mary.
peter and mary gave 5 cards to each other; peter gave 5 cards to mary, and mary gave 5 cards to peter.
mary has 13 coins, ivan has 6 coins and ann has 1 coin; mary has the most coins and ann has the least coins.
у маши 13 монет, а у ивана 6 монет; у маши на 7 монет больше, чем у ивана.
ivan has 14 boxes, and ann has 7 boxes; ivan has twice as many boxes as ann.
у ани 7 коробок, а у ивана 8 коробок; у ани на 1 коробка меньше, чем у ивана.
ann has 4 cups, and tom has 2 cups; ann has double the cups of tom.
у ани 4 чашки, и у тома 4 чашки; у них поровну чашек.
tom has 9 flowers, and ira has 3 flowers; tom has triple the flowers of ira.
у тома 6 цветков, а у иры 3 цветка; вместе у них 9 цветков.
ivan bought 3 loaves of bread, and ira bought 1 loaf of bread; ira bought less bread than ivan.
tom has 6 pens, and ira has 3 pens; tom has twice as many pens as ira.
у иры 3 ручки, а у тома 7 ручек; у иры на 4 ручки меньше, чем у тома.
ira has 8 pencils, and peter has 4 pencils; ira has double the pencils of peter.
у иры 9 карандашей, и у петра 9 карандашей; у них поровну карандашей.
peter has 15 cards, and mary has 5 cards; peter has triple the cards of mary.
у петра 11 карт, а у маши 5 карт; вместе у них 16 карт.
mary has 12 coins, and ivan has 6 coins; ivan has half the coins of mary.
у маши 13 монет, а у ивана 6 монет. на сколько монет больше у маши? у маши на 7 монет больше, чем у ивана.
ivan has 8 boxes, and ann has 8 boxes; the two counts are equal.
у ивана 14 коробок, а у ани 7 коробок; у ивана вдвое больше, чем у ани.
ann has 4 cups, and tom has 2 cups; the two counts are different.
tom has 6 flowers, and ira has 3 flowers; tom has 3 more flowers than ira.
tom has 6 flowers, and ira has 3 flowers; together they have 9 flowers, and apart they have 6 flowers and 3 flowers.
том купил 4 чашки чая, а маша купила 2 чашки чая; у маши чая меньше, чем у тома.
tom bought 5 bags of salt, and mary bought 3 bags of salt; mary bought less salt than tom.
tom has 7 pens, and ira has 7 pens; the two counts are equal.
у тома 6 ручек, а у иры 3 ручки; у тома вдвое больше, чем у иры.
ira has 9 pencils, and peter has 4 pencils; the two counts are different.
peter has 11 cards, and mary has 5 cards; peter has 6 more cards than mary.
peter has 11 cards, and mary has 5 cards; together they have 16 cards, and apart they have 11 cards and 5 cards.
ivan has 6 coins, and mary has 13 coins; ivan has 7 fewer coins than mary.
mary has 13 coins, and ivan has 6 coins; the total comes to 19 coins altogether.
ivan has 8 boxes, and ann has 8 boxes; ivan has the same number of boxes as ann.
ivan bought 8 boxes, but ann bought just 7 boxes; 7 boxes are fewer than 8 boxes, and ann bought less than ivan.
ann has 4 cups, and tom has 2 cups. how many more cups does ann have than tom? ann has 2 more cups than tom.
ann and tom gave 2 cups to each other; ann gave 2 cups to tom, and tom gave 2 cups to ann.
tom has 6 flowers, ira has 3 flowers and peter has 1 flower; tom has the most flowers and peter has the least flowers.
у тома 6 цветков, а у иры 3 цветка; у тома на 3 цветка больше, чем у иры.
пётр купил 6 чашек молока, а аня купила 4 чашки молока; у ани молока меньше, чем у петра.

tom had 11 coins and used 2 coins; 9 coins are left over.
у иры было 16 цветков, ира израсходовала 4 цветка. сколько цветков осталось? осталось 12 цветков.
mary had 26 pens and used 1 pen; mary keeps the remaining 25 pens.
ann had 16 flowers and used 5 flowers; 11 flowers remain.
tom had 21 balls and used 7 balls. how many balls remain? 14 balls remain.
ira had 16 flowers and used 4 flowers; the rest are 12 flowers.
у петра было 21 шарик, пётр израсходовал 6 шариков; осталось 15 шариков.
ivan had 11 coins and used 3 coins; 8 coins are left over.
у ани было 16 цветков, аня израсходовала 5 цветков. сколько цветков осталось? осталось 11 цветков.
tom had 11 coins and used 2 coins; tom keeps the remaining 9 coins.
peter had 21 balls and used 6 balls; 15 balls remain.
mary had 26 pens and used 1 pen. how many pens remain? 25 pens remain.
ann had 16 flowers and used 5 flowers; the rest are 11 flowers.
у тома было 21 шарик, том израсходовал 7 шариков; осталось 14 шариков.
ira had 16 flowers and used 4 flowers; 12 flowers are left over.
у петра было 21 шарик, пётр израсходовал 6 шариков. сколько шариков осталось? осталось 15 шариков.
ivan had 11 coins and used 3 coins; ivan keeps the remaining 8 coins.
tom had 21 balls and used 7 balls; 14 balls remain.
tom had 11 coins and used 2 coins. how many coins remain? 9 coins remain.
peter had 21 balls and used 6 balls; the rest are 15 balls.
у маши было 26 ручек, маша израсходовала 1 ручка; осталось 25 ручек.
ann had 16 flowers and used 5 flowers; 11 flowers are left over.
у тома было 21 шарик, том израсходовал 7 шариков. сколько шариков осталось? осталось 14 шариков.
ira had 16 flowers and used 4 flowers; ira keeps the remaining 12 flowers.
mary had 26 pens and used 1 pen; 25 pens remain.
ivan had 11 coins and used 3 coins. how many coins remain? 8 coins remain.
tom had 21 balls and used 7 balls; the rest are 14 balls.
у тома было 11 монет, том израсходовал 2 монеты; осталось 9 монет.
peter had 21 balls and used 6 balls; 15 balls are left over.
у маши было 26 ручек, маша израсходовала 1 ручка. сколько ручек осталось? осталось 25 ручек.
ann had 16 flowers and used 5 flowers; ann keeps the remaining 11 flowers.
tom had 11 coins and used 2 coins; 9 coins remain.
ira had 16 flowers and used 4 flowers. how many flowers remain? 12 flowers remain.
mary had 26 pens and used 1 pen; the rest are 25 pens.
у ивана было 11 монет, иван израсходовал 3 монеты; осталось 8 монет.
tom had 21 balls and used 7 balls; 14 balls are left over.
у тома было 11 монет, том израсходовал 2 монеты. сколько монет осталось? осталось 9 монет.
peter had 21 balls and used 6 balls; peter keeps the remaining 15 balls.
ivan had 11 coins and used 3 coins; 8 coins remain.
ann had 16 flowers and used 5 flowers. how many flowers remain? 11 flowers remain.
tom had 11 coins and used 2 coins; the rest are 9 coins.
у иры было 16 цветков, ира израсходовала 4 цветка; осталось 12 цветков.
mary had 26 pens and used 1 pen; 25 pens are left over.
у ивана было 11 монет, иван израсходовал 3 монеты. сколько монет осталось? осталось 8 монет.
tom had 21 balls and used 7 balls; tom keeps the remaining 14 balls.
ira had 16 flowers and used 4 flowers; 12 flowers remain.
peter had 21 balls and used 6 balls. how many balls remain? 15 balls remain.
ivan had 11 coins and used 3 coins; the rest are 8 coins.
у ани было 16 цветков, аня израсходовала 5 цветков; осталось 11 цветков.

the basket holds 8 books and tom filled the basket with 2 books. how many books does the basket need? the basket needs 6 books more.
ира освободила сумка: было 3 монеты, теперь там 0 монет.
mary emptied the box of 5 books; the box keeps 0 books now.
the bag holds 9 toys; ann filled the bag with 2 toys; the bag needs 7 toys more.
tom empties the basket of 2 books; the basket keeps 0 books then.
the cup holds 14 toys; peter fills the cup with 4 toys and needs 10 toys more.
коробка вмещает 17 книг; маша положила туда 5 книг; не хватает ещё 12 книг.
the bag holds 9 toys and ann filled the bag with 2 toys. how many toys does the bag need? the bag needs 7 toys more.
том освободил корзина: было 2 книги, теперь там 0 книг.
peter emptied the cup of 4 toys; the cup keeps 0 toys now.
the basket holds 6 coins; ivan filled the basket with 1 coin; the basket needs 5 coins more.
ann empties the bag of 2 toys; the bag keeps 0 toys then.
the bag holds 11 coins; ira fills the bag with 3 coins and needs 8 coins more.
чашка вмещает 14 игрушек; пётр положил туда 4 игрушки; не хватает ещё 10 игрушек.
the basket holds 6 coins and ivan filled the basket with 1 coin. how many coins does the basket need? the basket needs 5 coins more.
аня освободила сумка: было 2 игрушки, теперь там 0 игрушек.
ira emptied the bag of 3 coins; the bag keeps 0 coins now.
the box holds 17 books; mary filled the box with 5 books; the box needs 12 books more.
ivan empties the basket of 1 coin; the basket keeps 0 coins then.
the basket holds 8 books; tom fills the basket with 2 books and needs 6 books more.
сумка вмещает 11 монет; ира положила туда 3 монеты; не хватает ещё 8 монет.
the box holds 17 books and mary filled the box with 5 books. how many books does the box need? the box needs 12 books more.
иван освободил корзина: было 1 монета, теперь там 0 монет.
tom emptied the basket of 2 books; the basket keeps 0 books now.
the cup holds 14 toys; peter filled the cup with 4 toys; the cup needs 10 toys more.
mary empties the box of 5 books; the box keeps 0 books then.
the bag holds 9 toys; ann fills the bag with 2 toys and needs 7 toys more.
корзина вмещает 8 книг; том положил туда 2 книги; не хватает ещё 6 книг.
the cup holds 14 toys and peter filled the cup with 4 toys. how many toys does the cup need? the cup needs 10 toys more.
маша освободила коробка: было 5 книг, теперь там 0 книг.
ann emptied the bag of 2 toys; the bag keeps 0 toys now.
the bag holds 11 coins; ira filled the bag with 3 coins; the bag needs 8 coins more.
peter empties the cup of 4 toys; the cup keeps 0 toys then.
the basket holds 6 coins; ivan fills the basket with 1 coin and needs 5 coins more.
сумка вмещает 9 игрушек; аня положила туда 2 игрушки; не хватает ещё 7 игрушек.
the bag holds 11 coins and ira filled the bag with 3 coins. how many coins does the bag need? the bag needs 8 coins more.
пётр освободил чашка: было 4 игрушки, теперь там 0 игрушек.
ivan emptied the basket of 1 coin; the basket keeps 0 coins now.
the basket holds 8 books; tom filled the basket with 2 books; the basket needs 6 books more.
ira empties the bag of 3 coins; the bag keeps 0 coins then.
the box holds 17 books; mary fills the box with 5 books and needs 12 books more.
корзина вмещает 6 монет; иван положил туда 1 монета; не хватает ещё 5 монет.

tom shared 12 cups among 3 friends. how many cups did each friend get? each friend got 4 cups.
mary shares 6 pages among 2 friends; every friend gets 3 pages.
tom shared 12 cups among 3 friends; each friend got 4 cups.
пётр разделил 25 игрушек между 5 друзьями; каждому досталось по 5 игрушек.
ann shared 16 apples among 4 friends. how many apples did each friend get? each friend got 4 apples.
peter shares 25 toys among 5 friends; every friend gets 5 toys.
ann shared 16 apples among 4 friends; each friend got 4 apples.
ира разделила 8 цветков между 4 друзьями; каждому досталось по 2 цветка.
ivan shared 18 balls among 3 friends. how many balls did each friend get? each friend got 6 balls.
ira shares 8 flowers among 4 friends; every friend gets 2 flowers.
ivan shared 18 balls among 3 friends; each friend got 6 balls.
том разделил 12 чашек между 3 друзьями; каждому досталось по 4 чашки.
mary shared 6 pages among 2 friends. how many pages did each friend get? each friend got 3 pages.
tom shares 12 cups among 3 friends; every friend gets 4 cups.
mary shared 6 pages among 2 friends; each friend got 3 pages.
аня разделила 16 яблок между 4 друзьями; каждому досталось по 4 яблока.
peter shared 25 toys among 5 friends. how many toys did each friend get? each friend got 5 toys.
ann shares 16 apples among 4 friends; every friend gets 4 apples.
peter shared 25 toys among 5 friends; each friend got 5 toys.
иван разделил 18 шариков между 3 друзьями; каждому досталось по 6 шариков.
ira shared 8 flowers among 4 friends. how many flowers did each friend get? each friend got 2 flowers.
ivan shares 18 balls among 3 friends; every friend gets 6 balls.
ira shared 8 flowers among 4 friends; each friend got 2 flowers.
маша разделила 6 страниц между 2 друзьями; каждому досталось по 3 страницы.

tom earned 9 coins and paid 2 coins for a ticket. how many coins did tom save? tom saved 7 coins.
mary earns 21 coins and pays 3 coins for a ticket; mary saves 18 coins.
tom earned 9 coins and paid 2 coins for a ticket; tom saved 7 coins.
пётр заработал 17 рублей и заплатил 1 рубль за билет; пётр отложил 16 рублей.
ann earned 29 coins and paid 2 coins for a ticket. how many coins did ann save? ann saved 27 coins.
peter earns 17 coins and pays 1 coin for a ticket; peter saves 16 coins.
ann earned 29 coins and paid 2 coins for a ticket; ann saved 27 coins.
ира заработала 13 рублей и заплатила 4 рубля за билет; ира отложила 9 рублей.
ivan earned 25 coins and paid 5 coins for a ticket. how many coins did ivan save? ivan saved 20 coins.
ira earns 13 coins and pays 4 coins for a ticket; ira saves 9 coins.
ivan earned 25 coins and paid 5 coins for a ticket; ivan saved 20 coins.
том заработал 9 рублей и заплатил 2 рубля за билет; том отложил 7 рублей.
mary earned 21 coins and paid 3 coins for a ticket. how many coins did mary save? mary saved 18 coins.
tom earns 9 coins and pays 2 coins for a ticket; tom saves 7 coins.
mary earned 21 coins and paid 3 coins for a ticket; mary saved 18 coins.
аня заработала 29 рублей и заплатила 2 рубля за билет; аня отложила 27 рублей.
peter earned 17 coins and paid 1 coin for a ticket. how many coins did peter save? peter saved 16 coins.
ann earns 29 coins and pays 2 coins for a ticket; ann saves 27 coins.
peter earned 17 coins and paid 1 coin for a ticket; peter saved 16 coins.
иван заработал 25 рублей и заплатил 5 рублей за билет; иван отложил 20 рублей.
ira earned 13 coins and paid 4 coins for a ticket. how many coins did ira save? ira saved 9 coins.
ivan earns 25 coins and pays 5 coins for a ticket; ivan saves 20 coins.
ira earned 13 coins and paid 4 coins for a ticket; ira saved 9 coins.
маша заработала 21 рубль и заплатила 3 рубля за билет; маша отложила 18 рублей.

у тома 3 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
tom has 1 pencil and bought another pencil; tom has 2 pencils.
4 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books; the class has 12 books.
у петра 5 книг, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
6 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
mary has 2 boxes; mary picked 1 box and keeps the other box.
у ивана 2 книги, и 2 книги прочитаны; обе книги прочитаны.
3 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
3 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
3 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 6 books.
4 students are in the class, and 4 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
5 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
у петра 5 коробок, и в каждой коробке 4 книги; всего 20 книг.
6 students are in the class, and every student has 1 book; the class has 6 books.
2 students are in the class, and 2 students have a key; both students have a key.
у ани 3 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
ann has 1 card and bought another card; ann has 2 cards.
3 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books; the class has 6 books.
у иры 4 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
5 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
peter has 2 books; peter read 1 book and keeps the other book.
у маши 6 книг, и 6 книг прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
2 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
3 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
3 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 9 books.
3 students are in the class, and 3 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
4 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
у иры 4 коробки, и в каждой коробке 3 цветка; всего 12 цветков.
5 students are in the class, and every student has 4 books; the class has 20 books.
6 students are in the class, and 6 students have a key; all students have a key.
у ивана 2 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
ivan has 1 ball and bought another ball; ivan has 2 balls.
3 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books; the class has 9 books.
у тома 3 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
4 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
ira has 2 flowers; ira planted 1 flower and keeps the other flower.
у петра 5 книг, и 5 книг прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
6 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
2 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
2 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 4 books.
3 students are in the class, and 3 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
3 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
у тома 3 коробки, и в каждой коробке 2 карандаша; всего 6 карандашей.
4 students are in the class, and every student has 3 books; the class has 12 books.
5 students are in the class, and 5 students have a key; all students have a key.
у маши 6 книг, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
mary has 1 box and bought another box; mary has 2 boxes.
2 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books; the class has 4 books.
у ани 3 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
3 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
tom has 2 pencils; tom picked 1 pencil and keeps the other pencil.
у иры 4 книги, и 4 книги прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
5 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
6 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
6 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book. how many books does the class have? the class has 6 books.
2 students are in the class, and 2 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
3 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
у ани 3 коробки, и в каждой коробке 3 карты; всего 9 карт.
3 students are in the class, and every student has 2 books; the class has 6 books.
4 students are in the class, and 4 students have a key; all students have a key.
у петра 5 книг, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
peter has 1 book and bought another book; peter has 2 books.
6 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book; the class has 6 books.
у ивана 2 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
3 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
ann has 2 cards; ann read 1 card and keeps the other card.
у тома 3 книги, и 3 книги прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
4 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
5 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
5 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 20 books.
6 students are in the class, and 6 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
2 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
у ивана 2 коробки, и в каждой коробке 2 шарика; всего 4 шарика.
3 students are in the class, and every student has 3 books; the class has 9 books.
3 students are in the class, and 3 students have a key; all students have a key.
у иры 4 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
ira has 1 flower and bought another flower; ira has 2 flowers.
5 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books; the class has 20 books.
у маши 6 книг, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
2 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
ivan has 2 balls; ivan picked 1 ball and keeps the other ball.
у ани 3 книги, и 3 книги прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
3 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
4 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
4 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 12 books.
5 students are in the class, and 5 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
6 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
у маши 6 коробок, и в каждой коробке 1 коробка; всего 6 коробок.
2 students are in the class, and every student has 2 books; the class has 4 books.
3 students are in the class, and 3 students have a key; all students have a key.

1 book and 3 books make 4 books in all.
mary took 1 card and 1 toy; mary took a card and a toy.
there is 1 cup on the floor, and there are 9 cups on the floor.
1 book and 4 books make 5 books in all.
there is 1 cup in the box, and there are 4 cups in the box.
1 ticket and 3 tickets make 4 tickets in all.
there is 1 stone in the box, and there are 3 stones in the box.
1 line and 2 lines make 3 lines in all.
there is 1 shirt in the box, and there are 2 shirts in the box.
ann waited an office and counted 1 office.
1 pen and 4 pens make 5 pens in all.
ivan took 1 coin and 1 ball; ivan took a coin and a ball.
there is 1 flower on the table, and there are 2 flowers on the table.
1 pencil and 6 pencils make 7 pencils in all.
there is 1 toy in the box, and there are 6 toys in the box.
1 bottle and 5 bottles make 6 bottles in all.
there is 1 lamp in the box, and there are 5 lamps in the box.
1 list and 4 lists make 5 lists in all.
there is 1 hat in the box, and there are 4 hats in the box.
ann waited a letter and counted 1 letter.
1 pencil and 5 pencils make 6 pencils in all.
ann took 1 box and 1 bag; ann took a box and a bag.
there is 1 apple in the box, and there are 3 apples in the box.
1 coin and 2 coins make 3 coins in all.
there is 1 ball in the box, and there are 2 balls in the box.
1 cake and 7 cakes make 8 cakes in all.
there is 1 letter in the box, and there are 7 letters in the box.
1 basket and 6 baskets make 7 baskets in all.
ann waited an hour and counted 1 hour.
1 книга и 3 книги дают всего 4 книги.
1 card and 6 cards make 7 cards in all.
tom took 1 cup and 1 egg; tom took a cup and an egg.
there is 1 pen in the box, and there are 5 pens in the box.
1 cup and 4 cups make 5 cups in all.
there is 1 bag in the box, and there are 4 bags in the box.
1 stone and 3 stones make 4 stones in all.
there is 1 note in the box, and there are 3 notes in the box.
1 shirt and 2 shirts make 3 shirts in all.
ann waited a book and counted 1 book.
1 ручка и 4 ручки дают всего 5 ручек.
1 coin and 7 coins make 8 coins in all.
ira took 1 flower and 1 tree; ira took a flower and a tree.
there is 1 card in the box, and there are 7 cards in the box.
1 toy and 6 toys make 7 toys in all.
there is 1 egg in the box, and there are 6 eggs in the box.
1 lamp and 5 lamps make 6 lamps in all.
there is 1 plate in the box, and there are 5 plates in the box.
1 hat and 4 hats make 5 hats in all.
there is 1 book on the shelf, and there are 3 books on the shelf.
1 карандаш и 5 карандашей дают всего 6 карандашей.
1 box and 8 boxes make 9 boxes in all.
1 apple and 3 apples make 4 apples in all.
there is 1 box in the box, and there are 3 boxes in the box.
1 ball and 2 balls make 3 balls in all.
there is 1 tree in the box, and there are 2 trees in the box.
1 letter and 7 letters make 8 letters in all.
there is 1 shelf in the box, and there are 7 shelves in the box.
ann waited an apple and counted 1 apple.
there is 1 pen on the chair, and there are 4 pens on the chair.
1 карта и 6 карт дают всего 7 карт.
1 cup and 9 cups make 10 cups in all.
1 pen and 5 pens make 6 pens in all.
there is 1 flower in the box, and there are 5 flowers in the box.
1 bag and 4 bags make 5 bags in all.
there is 1 chair in the box, and there are 4 chairs in the box.
1 note and 3 notes make 4 notes in all.
there is 1 shoe in the box, and there are 3 shoes in the box.
ann waited a key and counted 1 key.
there is 1 pencil on the floor, and there are 5 pencils on the floor.
1 монета и 7 монет дают всего 8 монет.
1 flower and 2 flowers make 3 flowers in all.
1 card and 7 cards make 8 cards in all.
there is 1 page in the box, and there are 7 pages in the box.
1 egg and 6 eggs make 7 eggs in all.
there is 1 key in the box, and there are 6 keys in the box.
1 plate and 5 plates make 6 plates in all.
there is 1 stick in the box, and there are 5 sticks in the box.
tom took 1 book and 1 pencil; tom took a book and a pencil.
there is 1 card on the table, and there are 6 cards on the table.
1 коробка и 8 коробок дают всего 9 коробок.
there is 1 book in the box, and there are 4 books in the box.
1 box and 3 boxes make 4 boxes in all.
there is 1 ticket in the box, and there are 3 tickets in the box.
1 tree and 2 trees make 3 trees in all.
there is 1 line in the box, and there are 2 lines in the box.
1 shelf and 7 shelves make 8 shelves in all.
ann waited an egg and counted 1 egg.
ira took 1 pen and 1 coin; ira took a pen and a coin.
there is 1 coin on the shelf, and there are 7 coins on the shelf.
1 чашка и 9 чашек дают всего 10 чашек.
there is 1 pencil in the box, and there are 6 pencils in the box.
1 flower and 5 flowers make 6 flowers in all.
there is 1 bottle in the box, and there are 5 bottles in the box.
1 chair and 4 chairs make 5 chairs in all.
there is 1 list in the box, and there are 4 lists in the box.
1 shoe and 3 shoes make 4 shoes in all.
ann waited a ticket and counted 1 ticket.
peter took 1 pencil and 1 cup; peter took a pencil and a cup.
there is 1 box on the chair, and there are 8 boxes on the chair.
1 цветок и 2 цветка дают всего 3 цветка.
there is 1 coin in the box, and there are 2 coins in the box.
1 page and 7 pages make 8 pages in all.
there is 1 cake in the box, and there are 7 cakes in the box.
1 key and 6 keys make 7 keys in all.
there is 1 basket in the box, and there are 6 baskets in the box.
1 stick and 5 sticks make 6 sticks in all.

1 boy and 1 girl came to the market; 2 children came to the market in all.
4 teachers and 3 students came to the park. how many people came to the park? 7 people came to the park in all.
6 mothers and 2 fathers came to the farm; 8 people came to the farm in all.
what are people? a seller and a buyer together are called people.
a worker and a driver together are called people.
кто такие люди? друг и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
a fox and a wolf together are called animals.
what are fruits? a apple and a pear together are called fruits.
виноград и дыня вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие инструменты? отвёртка и клещи вместе зовутся инструменты.
a carrot and a cabbage together are called vegetables.
what are vegetables? a cucumber and a tomato together are called vegetables.
племянник и племянница вместе зовутся дети.
инструменты: молоток, пила, топор, лопата, отвёртка, клещи, нож, ножницы, игла, напёрсток.
3 men and 1 woman came to the station. how many people came to the station? 4 people came to the station in all.
5 brothers and 5 sisters came to the library; 10 children came to the library in all.
what are people? a mother and a father together are called people.
a doctor and a neighbour together are called people.
кто такие люди? пекарь и фермер вместе зовутся люди.
what are animals? a cat and a dog together are called animals.
курица и утка вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие фрукты? апельсин и лимон вместе зовутся фрукты.
a hammer and a saw together are called tools.
what are tools? a knife and a scissors together are called tools.
свёкла и репа вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие дети? сын и дочь вместе зовутся дети.
people: man, woman, teacher, student, mother, father, seller, buyer, doctor, neighbour, worker, driver, baker, farmer, friend.
2 boys and 4 girls came to the market. how many children came to the market? 6 children came to the market in all.
4 teachers and 3 students came to the park; 7 people came to the park in all.
what are children? a brother and a sister together are called children.
a seller and a buyer together are called people.
кто такие люди? рабочий и водитель вместе зовутся люди.
друг и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
кто такие животные? лиса и волк вместе зовутся животные.
a apple and a pear together are called fruits.
what are fruits? a banana and a peach together are called fruits.
отвёртка и клещи вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие овощи? морковь и капуста вместе зовутся овощи.
a cucumber and a tomato together are called vegetables.
what are children? a grandson and a granddaughter together are called children.
tools: hammer, saw, axe, spade, screwdriver, pliers, knife, scissors, needle, thimble.
3 men and 1 woman came to the station; 4 people came to the station in all.
what are people? a teacher and a student together are called people.
a mother and a father together are called people.
кто такие люди? доктор и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
пекарь и фермер вместе зовутся люди.
a cat and a dog together are called animals.
what are animals? a hare and a bear together are called animals.
апельсин и лимон вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие инструменты? молоток и пила вместе зовутся инструменты.
a knife and a scissors together are called tools.
what are vegetables? a onion and a garlic together are called vegetables.
сын и дочь вместе зовутся дети.
дети: мальчик, девочка, брат, сестра, сын, дочь, внук, внучка, племянник, племянница.
2 boys and 4 girls came to the market; 6 children came to the market in all.
what are people? a man and a woman together are called people.
a brother and a sister together are called children.
кто такие люди? продавец и покупатель вместе зовутся люди.
рабочий и водитель вместе зовутся люди.
1 friend and 1 neighbour came to the park; 2 people came to the park in all.
лиса и волк вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие фрукты? яблоко и груша вместе зовутся фрукты.
a banana and a peach together are called fruits.
what are tools? a axe and a spade together are called tools.
морковь и капуста вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие овощи? огурец и помидор вместе зовутся овощи.
a grandson and a granddaughter together are called children.
фрукты: яблоко, груша, слива, вишня, апельсин, лимон, банан, персик, виноград, дыня.
what are children? a boy and a girl together are called children.
a teacher and a student together are called people.
кто такие люди? мать и отец вместе зовутся люди.
доктор и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
1 baker and 1 farmer came to the station; 2 people came to the station in all.
кто такие животные? кошка и собака вместе зовутся животные.
a hare and a bear together are called animals.
what are fruits? a plum and a cherry together are called fruits.
молоток и пила вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие инструменты? нож и ножницы вместе зовутся инструменты.
a onion and a garlic together are called vegetables.
what are vegetables? a potato and a marrow together are called vegetables.
children: boy, girl, brother, sister, son, daughter, grandson, granddaughter, nephew, niece.
в семье мать, отец и ребёнок; в семье 3 человека.
a man and a woman together are called people.
кто такие дети? брат и сестра вместе зовутся дети.
продавец и покупатель вместе зовутся люди.
1 worker and 1 driver came to the market; 2 people came to the market in all.
5 friends and 2 neighbours came to the park. how many people came to the park? 7 people came to the park in all.
what are animals? a cow and a horse together are called animals.
яблоко и груша вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие фрукты? банан и персик вместе зовутся фрукты.
a axe and a spade together are called tools.
what are tools? a needle and a thimble together are called tools.
огурец и помидор вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие дети? внук и внучка вместе зовутся дети.
fruits: apple, pear, plum, cherry, orange, lemon, banana, peach, grape, melon.
a boy and a girl together are called children.
кто такие люди? учитель и ученик вместе зовутся люди.
мать и отец вместе зовутся люди.
1 doctor and 1 neighbour came to the school; 2 people came to the school in all.
4 bakers and 5 farmers came to the station. how many people came to the station? 9 people came to the station in all.
кошка и собака вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие животные? заяц и медведь вместе зовутся животные.
a plum and a cherry together are called fruits.
what are fruits? a grape and a melon together are called fruits.
нож и ножницы вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие овощи? лук и чеснок вместе зовутся овощи.
a potato and a marrow together are called vegetables.
what are children? a nephew and a niece together are called children.
the family has a mother, a father and a child; the family has 3 people.
кто такие люди? мужчина и женщина вместе зовутся люди.
брат и сестра вместе зовутся дети.
1 seller and 1 buyer came to the shop; 2 people came to the shop in all.
3 workers and 3 drivers came to the market. how many people came to the market? 6 people came to the market in all.
5 friends and 2 neighbours came to the park; 7 people came to the park in all.
a cow and a horse together are called animals.
what are animals? a hen and a duck together are called animals.
банан и персик вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие инструменты? топор и лопата вместе зовутся инструменты.
a needle and a thimble together are called tools.
what are vegetables? a beet and a turnip together are called vegetables.
внук и внучка вместе зовутся дети.
животные: кошка, собака, корова, лошадь, лиса, волк, заяц, медведь, курица, утка.
кто такие дети? мальчик и девочка вместе зовутся дети.
учитель и ученик вместе зовутся люди.
1 mother and 1 father came to the farm; 2 people came to the farm in all.
2 doctors and 1 neighbour came to the school. how many people came to the school? 3 people came to the school in all.
4 bakers and 5 farmers came to the station; 9 people came to the station in all.
what are people? a friend and a neighbour together are called people.
заяц и медведь вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие фрукты? слива и вишня вместе зовутся фрукты.
a grape and a melon together are called fruits.
what are tools? a screwdriver and a pliers together are called tools.
лук и чеснок вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие овощи? картофель и кабачок вместе зовутся овощи.
a nephew and a niece together are called children.
овощи: морковь, капуста, лук, чеснок, свёкла, репа, огурец, помидор, картофель, кабачок.
мужчина и женщина вместе зовутся люди.
1 brother and 1 sister came to the library; 2 children came to the library in all.
1 seller and 4 buyers came to the shop. how many people came to the shop? 5 people came to the shop in all.
3 workers and 3 drivers came to the market; 6 people came to the market in all.
what are people? a baker and a farmer together are called people.
кто такие животные? корова и лошадь вместе зовутся животные.
a hen and a duck together are called animals.
what are fruits? a orange and a lemon together are called fruits.
топор и лопата вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие инструменты? игла и напёрсток вместе зовутся инструменты.
a beet and a turnip together are called vegetables.
what are children? a son and a daughter together are called children.
animals: cat, dog, cow, horse, fox, wolf, hare, bear, hen, duck.
мальчик и девочка вместе зовутся дети.
1 teacher and 1 student came to the park; 2 people came to the park in all.
6 mothers and 2 fathers came to the farm. how many people came to the farm? 8 people came to the farm in all.
2 doctors and 1 neighbour came to the school; 3 people came to the school in all.
what are people? a worker and a driver together are called people.
a friend and a neighbour together are called people.
what are animals? a fox and a wolf together are called animals.
слива и вишня вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие фрукты? виноград и дыня вместе зовутся фрукты.
a screwdriver and a pliers together are called tools.
what are vegetables? a carrot and a cabbage together are called vegetables.
картофель и кабачок вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие дети? племянник и племянница вместе зовутся дети.
vegetables: carrot, cabbage, onion, garlic, beet, turnip, cucumber, tomato, potato, marrow.
1 man and 1 woman came to the station; 2 people came to the station in all.
5 brothers and 5 sisters came to the library. how many children came to the library? 10 children came to the library in all.
1 seller and 4 buyers came to the shop; 5 people came to the shop in all.
what are people? a doctor and a neighbour together are called people.
a baker and a farmer together are called people.
корова и лошадь вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие животные? курица и утка вместе зовутся животные.
a orange and a lemon together are called fruits.
what are tools? a hammer and a saw together are called tools.
игла и напёрсток вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие овощи? свёкла и репа вместе зовутся овощи.
a son and a daughter together are called children.
люди: мужчина, женщина, учитель, ученик, мать, отец, продавец, покупатель, доктор, сосед, рабочий, водитель, пекарь, фермер, друг.

ira worked on 1 day of 10 days; ira worked once.
маша считала монет один раз и потом ещё раз; всего маша считала два раза.
mary worked on 7 days of 10 days; mary often worked.
аня считала чашек один раз и потом ещё раз; всего аня считала два раза.
peter counted the cards once and counted the cards again; peter counted the cards twice in all.
ира работала 1 день из 10; ира работала один раз.
ivan counted the boxes once and counted the boxes again; ivan counted the boxes twice in all.
маша работала 7 дней из 10; маша работала часто.
tom worked on 0 days of 10 days; tom never worked.
пётр считал карт один раз и потом ещё раз; всего пётр считал два раза.
peter worked on 2 days of 10 days; peter worked twice.
иван считал коробок один раз и потом ещё раз; всего иван считал два раза.
ivan worked on 10 days of 10 days; ivan always worked.
том работал 0 дней из 10; том никогда не работал.
mary counted the coins once and counted the coins again; mary counted the coins twice in all.
пётр работал 2 дня из 10; пётр работал два раза.
ann counted the cups once and counted the cups again; ann counted the cups twice in all.
иван работал 10 дней из 10; иван работал всегда.

том насчитал 28 коробок; это почти 30 коробок.
mary counted 21 toys; 21 toys are about 20 toys.
tom counted 28 boxes; 28 boxes are nearly 30 boxes.
пётр насчитал 52 цветка; это примерно 50 цветков.
аня насчитала 39 шариков; это почти 40 шариков.
peter counted 52 flowers; 52 flowers are about 50 flowers.
ann counted 39 balls; 39 balls are nearly 40 balls.
ира насчитала 41 чашка; это примерно 40 чашек.
иван насчитал 28 страниц; это почти 30 страниц.
ira counted 41 cups; 41 cups are about 40 cups.
ivan counted 28 pages; 28 pages are nearly 30 pages.
том насчитал 32 коробки; это примерно 30 коробок.
маша насчитала 19 игрушек; это почти 20 игрушек.
tom counted 32 boxes; 32 boxes are about 30 boxes.
mary counted 19 toys; 19 toys are nearly 20 toys.
аня насчитала 41 шарик; это примерно 40 шариков.
пётр насчитал 48 цветков; это почти 50 цветков.
ann counted 41 balls; 41 balls are about 40 balls.
peter counted 48 flowers; 48 flowers are nearly 50 flowers.
иван насчитал 32 страницы; это примерно 30 страниц.
ира насчитала 39 чашек; это почти 40 чашек.
ivan counted 32 pages; 32 pages are about 30 pages.
ira counted 39 cups; 39 cups are nearly 40 cups.
маша насчитала 21 игрушка; это примерно 20 игрушек.

why does ira have 9 coins? because ira bought 4 coins and then 5 coins more.
ira bought coffee, milk and water at the store; ira bought 3 things in all.
why does tom have 7 pens? because tom bought 3 pens and then 4 pens more.
почему у ани 6 монет? потому что аня купила 2 монеты, а потом ещё 4 монеты.
в сумке лежат ручка, монета и чашка; в сумке лежат 3 предмета.
почему у ивана 10 ручек? потому что иван купил 7 ручек, а потом ещё 3 ручки.
в коробке лежат цветок, книга и ручка; в коробке лежат 3 предмета.
почему у маши 8 шариков? потому что маша купила 6 шариков, а потом ещё 2 шарика.
в корзине лежат игрушка, карта и цветок; в корзине лежат 3 предмета.
почему у петра 6 цветков? потому что пётр купил 5 цветков, а потом ещё 1 цветок.
ivan bought cake, bread and salt at the store; ivan bought 3 things in all.
почему у иры 9 монет? потому что ира купила 4 монеты, а потом ещё 5 монет.
peter bought milk, water and cake at the market; peter bought 3 things in all.
почему у тома 7 ручек? потому что том купил 3 ручки, а потом ещё 4 ручки.
tom bought tea, coffee and milk at the shop; tom bought 3 things in all.
в коробке лежат монета, чашка и коробка; в коробке лежат 3 предмета.
why does ann have 6 coins? because ann bought 2 coins and then 4 coins more.
в корзине лежат книга, ручка и монета; в корзине лежат 3 предмета.
why does ivan have 10 pens? because ivan bought 7 pens and then 3 pens more.
в сумке лежат карта, цветок и книга; в сумке лежат 3 предмета.
why does mary have 8 balls? because mary bought 6 balls and then 2 balls more.
ann bought bread, salt and sugar at the market; ann bought 3 things in all.
why does peter have 6 flowers? because peter bought 5 flowers and then 1 flower more.
mary bought water, cake and bread at the shop; mary bought 3 things in all.

mary bought 6 flowers and 6 pencils at the library. how many things did mary buy? mary bought 12 things in all: 6 + 6 = 12.
том купил 2 шарика и 3 игрушки на рынке; всего том купил 5 предметов: 2 + 3 = 5.
пётр купил 5 чашек и 3 книги на вокзале. сколько предметов купил пётр? всего пётр купил 8 предметов: 5 + 3 = 8.
tom bought 2 balls and 3 toys at the market; tom bought 5 things in all: 2 + 3 = 5.
peter bought 5 cups and 3 books at the station. how many things did peter buy? peter bought 8 things in all: 5 + 3 = 8.
аня купила 8 страниц и 6 чашек в парке; всего аня купила 14 предметов: 8 + 6 = 14.
ира купила 4 коробки и 6 шариков в магазине. сколько предметов купила ира? всего ира купила 10 предметов: 4 + 6 = 10.
ann bought 8 pages and 6 cups at the park; ann bought 14 things in all: 8 + 6 = 14.
ira bought 4 boxes and 6 balls at the store. how many things did ira buy? ira bought 10 things in all: 4 + 6 = 10.
иван купил 7 игрушек и 3 монеты в школе; всего иван купил 10 предметов: 7 + 3 = 10.
ира купила 3 яблока и 6 шариков в лавке. сколько предметов купила ира? всего ира купила 9 предметов: 3 + 6 = 9.
ivan bought 7 toys and 3 coins at the school; ivan bought 10 things in all: 7 + 3 = 10.
ira bought 3 apples and 6 balls at the shop. how many things did ira buy? ira bought 9 things in all: 3 + 6 = 9.
маша купила 6 цветков и 6 карандашей в библиотеке; всего маша купила 12 предметов: 6 + 6 = 12.
том купил 2 шарика и 3 игрушки на рынке. сколько предметов купил том? всего том купил 5 предметов: 2 + 3 = 5.
mary bought 6 flowers and 6 pencils at the library; mary bought 12 things in all: 6 + 6 = 12.
tom bought 2 balls and 3 toys at the market. how many things did tom buy? tom bought 5 things in all: 2 + 3 = 5.
пётр купил 5 чашек и 3 книги на вокзале; всего пётр купил 8 предметов: 5 + 3 = 8.
аня купила 8 страниц и 6 чашек в парке. сколько предметов купила аня? всего аня купила 14 предметов: 8 + 6 = 14.
peter bought 5 cups and 3 books at the station; peter bought 8 things in all: 5 + 3 = 8.
ann bought 8 pages and 6 cups at the park. how many things did ann buy? ann bought 14 things in all: 8 + 6 = 14.
ира купила 4 коробки и 6 шариков в магазине; всего ира купила 10 предметов: 4 + 6 = 10.
иван купил 7 игрушек и 3 монеты в школе. сколько предметов купил иван? всего иван купил 10 предметов: 7 + 3 = 10.
ira bought 4 boxes and 6 balls at the store; ira bought 10 things in all: 4 + 6 = 10.
ivan bought 7 toys and 3 coins at the school. how many things did ivan buy? ivan bought 10 things in all: 7 + 3 = 10.
ира купила 3 яблока и 6 шариков в лавке; всего ира купила 9 предметов: 3 + 6 = 9.
маша купила 6 цветков и 6 карандашей в библиотеке. сколько предметов купила маша? всего маша купила 12 предметов: 6 + 6 = 12.
ira bought 3 apples and 6 balls at the shop; ira bought 9 things in all: 3 + 6 = 9.

the bottle is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen; so the bottle is in the kitchen.
the cup is on the shelf.
пол не на ферме: ферма не на пути от пола до городка.
кухня в доме, а дом на улице. где кухня? кухня на улице.
река в лесу, а лес на горе; значит река на горе.
вокзал на дороге.
the tree is not on the table: the table is not on the path from the tree to the mountain.
the bottle is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen. where is the bottle? the bottle is in the kitchen.
the cup is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen; so the cup is in the kitchen.
the hat is on the shelf.
кухня не в двери: дверь не на пути от кухни до городка.
река в лесу, а лес на горе. где река? река на горе.
вокзал на дороге, а дорога в городе; значит вокзал в городе.
дерево в лесу.
the bottle is not at the market: the market is not on the path from the bottle to the town.
the cup is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen. where is the cup? the cup is in the kitchen.
the hat is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen; so the hat is in the kitchen.
the market is on the street.
река не на лампе: лампа не на пути от реки до горы.
вокзал на дороге, а дорога в городе. где вокзал? вокзал в городе.
дерево в лесу, а лес на горе; значит дерево на горе.
бутылка на полке.
the cup is not in the city: the city is not on the path from the cup to the town.
the hat is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen. where is the hat? the hat is in the kitchen.
the market is on the street, and the street is in the town; so the market is in the town.
the shelf is in the kitchen.
вокзал не на шляпе: шляпа не на пути от вокзала до города.
дерево в лесу, а лес на горе. где дерево? дерево на горе.
бутылка на полке, а полка в кухне; значит бутылка в кухне.
чашка на полке.
the hat is not on the mountain: the mountain is not on the path from the hat to the town.
the market is on the street, and the street is in the town. where is the market? the market is in the town.
the shelf is in the kitchen, and the kitchen is in the house; so the shelf is in the house.
the table is in the kitchen.
дерево не на столе: стол не на пути от дерева до горы.
бутылка на полке, а полка в кухне. где бутылка? бутылка в кухне.
чашка на полке, а полка в кухне; значит чашка в кухне.
шляпа на полке.
the market is not on the tree: the tree is not on the path from the market to the town.
the shelf is in the kitchen, and the kitchen is in the house. where is the shelf? the shelf is in the house.
the table is in the kitchen, and the kitchen is in the house; so the table is in the house.
the basket is on the floor.
бутылка не на рынке: рынок не на пути от бутылки до городка.
чашка на полке, а полка в кухне. где чашка? чашка в кухне.
шляпа на полке, а полка в кухне; значит шляпа в кухне.
рынок на улице.
the shelf is not in the book: the book is not on the path from the shelf to the town.
the table is in the kitchen, and the kitchen is in the house. where is the table? the table is in the house.
the basket is on the floor, and the floor is in the room; so the basket is in the room.
the chair is in the room.
чашка не в городе: город не на пути от чашки до городка.
шляпа на полке, а полка в кухне. где шляпа? шляпа в кухне.
рынок на улице, а улица в городке; значит рынок в городке.
полка в кухне.
the table is not on the shelf: the shelf is not on the path from the table to the town.
the basket is on the floor, and the floor is in the room. where is the basket? the basket is in the room.
the chair is in the room, and the room is in the house; so the chair is in the house.
the floor is in the room.
шляпа не на горе: гора не на пути от шляпы до городка.
рынок на улице, а улица в городке. где рынок? рынок в городке.
полка в кухне, а кухня в доме; значит полка в доме.
стол в кухне.
the basket is not in the school: the school is not on the path from the basket to the town.
the chair is in the room, and the room is in the house. where is the chair? the chair is in the house.
the floor is in the room, and the room is in the house; so the floor is in the house.
the kitchen is in the house.
рынок не на дереве: дерево не на пути от рынка до городка.
полка в кухне, а кухня в доме. где полка? полка в доме.
стол в кухне, а кухня в доме; значит стол в доме.
корзина на полу.
the chair is not in the yard: the yard is not on the path from the chair to the town.
the floor is in the room, and the room is in the house. where is the floor? the floor is in the house.
the kitchen is in the house, and the house is on the street; so the kitchen is on the street.
the river is in the forest.
полка не в книге: книга не на пути от полки до городка.
стол в кухне, а кухня в доме. где стол? стол в доме.
корзина на полу, а пол в комнате; значит корзина в комнате.
стул в комнате.
the floor is not on the farm: the farm is not on the path from the floor to the town.
the kitchen is in the house, and the house is on the street. where is the kitchen? the kitchen is on the street.
the river is in the forest, and the forest is on the mountain; so the river is on the mountain.
the station is on the road.
стол не на полке: полка не на пути от стола до городка.
корзина на полу, а пол в комнате. где корзина? корзина в комнате.
стул в комнате, а комната в доме; значит стул в доме.
пол в комнате.
the kitchen is not in the door: the door is not on the path from the kitchen to the town.
the river is in the forest, and the forest is on the mountain. where is the river? the river is on the mountain.
the station is on the road, and the road is in the city; so the station is in the city.
the tree is in the forest.
корзина не в школе: школа не на пути от корзины до городка.
стул в комнате, а комната в доме. где стул? стул в доме.
пол в комнате, а комната в доме; значит пол в доме.
кухня в доме.
the river is not on the lamp: the lamp is not on the path from the river to the mountain.
the station is on the road, and the road is in the city. where is the station? the station is in the city.
the tree is in the forest, and the forest is on the mountain; so the tree is on the mountain.
the bottle is on the shelf.
стул не в дворе: двор не на пути от стула до городка.
пол в комнате, а комната в доме. где пол? пол в доме.
кухня в доме, а дом на улице; значит кухня на улице.
река в лесу.
the station is not on the hat: the hat is not on the path from the station to the city.
the tree is in the forest, and the forest is on the mountain. where is the tree? the tree is on the mountain.

утро раньше вечера.
вечер позже дня.
том работал вечером, а отдыхал ночью; значит том работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
today comes after yesterday.
маша ушла из дома днём, а пришла на рынке вечером; значит маша ушла раньше, чем пришла.
в неделе 7 дней, а в выходных 2 дня; в неделе на 5 дней больше.
the morning comes before the night.
the night comes after the day.
что раньше дня? утро раньше дня.
tomorrow comes after today.
ann worked in the evening and tom rested in the evening; ann worked while tom rested.
peter worked during the morning and rested during the day; peter worked before peter rested.
утро раньше ночи.
ночь позже дня.
что раньше вечера? день раньше вечера.
ira worked in the morning and peter rested in the morning; ira worked while peter rested.
аня работала вечером, а том отдыхал вечером; они делали это в одно время.
пётр работал утром, а отдыхал днём; значит пётр работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
the day comes before the evening.
the night comes after the evening.
что раньше ночи? вечер раньше ночи.
ира работала утром, а пётр отдыхал утром; они делали это в одно время.
ira left home in the morning and arrived at the station in the day; ira left home before ira arrived at the station.
mary worked in the morning and rested in the evening; mary worked before mary rested.
день раньше вечера.
ночь позже вечера.
yesterday comes before today.
mary left home in the day and arrived at the market in the evening; mary left home before mary arrived at the market.
the week has 7 days and the weekend has 2 days; the week has 5 days more than the weekend.
маша работала утром, а отдыхала вечером; значит маша работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
the day comes before the night.
what comes before the day? the morning comes before the day.
today comes before tomorrow.
ann works now and rests later; ann works before ann rests.
the day comes after the morning.
ivan worked during the morning and rested during the night; ivan worked before ivan rested.
день раньше ночи.
what comes before the evening? the day comes before the evening.
ira works now and rests later; ira works before ira rests.
аня ушла из дома вечером, а пришла в конторе ночью; значит аня ушла раньше, чем пришла.
день позже утра.
иван работал утром, а отдыхал ночью; значит иван работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
the evening comes before the night.
what comes before the night? the evening comes before the night.
ира ушла из дома утром, а пришла в школе днём; значит ира ушла раньше, чем пришла.
ira worked in the morning and peter rested in the morning; ira worked while peter rested.
the evening comes after the morning.
ivan worked during the day and rested during the evening; ivan worked before ivan rested.
вечер раньше ночи.
the morning comes early and the night comes late.
mary worked in the day and ivan rested in the day; mary worked while ivan rested.
ира работала утром, а пётр отдыхал утром; они делали это в одно время.
вечер позже утра.
иван работал днём, а отдыхал вечером; значит иван работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
the day comes next after the morning.
вчера раньше, чем сегодня.
маша работала днём, а иван отдыхал днём; они делали это в одно время.
the morning comes before the day.
the night comes after the morning.
ann worked in the day and rested in the night; ann worked before ann rested.
the evening comes next after the day.
сегодня раньше, чем завтра.
ann left home in the evening and arrived at the office in the night; ann left home before ann arrived at the office.
утро раньше дня.
ночь позже утра.
аня работала днём, а отдыхала ночью; значит аня работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
the night comes next after the evening.
ira left home in the morning and arrived at the school in the day; ira left home before ira arrived at the school.
ira works now and rests later; ira works before ira rests.
the morning comes before the evening.
the evening comes after the day.
tom worked during the evening and rested during the night; tom worked before tom rested.
the morning comes first and the night comes last.
mary works now and rests later; mary works before mary rests.
ира ушла из дома утром, а пришла на вокзале днём; значит ира ушла раньше, чем пришла.

today ann and tom write letters; yesterday ann and tom wrote letters.
the past of run is ran.
today ann waits at the station. what is the past of wait? the past of wait is waited.
today ira pays a coin; yesterday ira paid a coin.
today ira and peter say the answer; yesterday ira and peter said the answer.
the past of hear is heard.
today ira returns to the village. what is the past of return? the past of return is returned.
сегодня аня пишет письмо; вчера аня писала письмо.
глагол «рассказывать» в прошедшем даёт «рассказывал».
сегодня ира хранит рубашку; вчера ира хранила рубашку.
глагол «понимать» в прошедшем даёт «понимал».
today ira finds a key; yesterday ira found a key.
today ira and peter eat apples; yesterday ira and peter ate apples.
the past of finish is finished.
today ira pays a coin. what is the past of pay? the past of pay is paid.
today mary asks a question; yesterday mary asked a question.
today mary and ivan decide the answer; yesterday mary and ivan decided the answer.
the past of carry is carried.
глагол «находить» в прошедшем даёт «находил».
сегодня маша слышит ответ; вчера маша слышала ответ.
глагол «носить» в прошедшем даёт «носил».
the past of buy is bought.
today ira finds a key. what is the past of find? the past of find is found.
today mary works in the office; yesterday mary worked in the office.
today mary and ivan empty baskets; yesterday mary and ivan emptied baskets.
the past of need is needed.
today mary asks a question. what is the past of ask? the past of ask is asked.
today ann leaves the house; yesterday ann left the house.
today ann and tom stop at the door; yesterday ann and tom stopped at the door.
сегодня аня читает страницу; вчера аня читала страницу.
глагол «решать» в прошедшем даёт «решал».
сегодня ира опустошает корзину; вчера ира опустошала корзину.
today mary and ivan give coins; yesterday mary and ivan gave coins.
the past of count is counted.
today mary works in the office. what is the past of work? the past of work is worked.
today ann spends a coin; yesterday ann spent a coin.
today ann and tom know the answer; yesterday ann and tom knew the answer.
the past of see is saw.
today ann leaves the house. what is the past of leave? the past of leave is left.
сегодня ира покупает книгу; вчера ира покупала книгу.
глагол «ждать» в прошедшем даёт «ждал».
сегодня маша играет во дворе; вчера маша играла во дворе.
глагол «копить» в прошедшем даёт «копил».
today ann writes a letter; yesterday ann wrote a letter.
today ann and tom run to the park; yesterday ann and tom ran to the park.
the past of wait is waited.
today ann spends a coin. what is the past of spend? the past of spend is spent.
today ira says the answer; yesterday ira said the answer.
today ira and peter hear the answer; yesterday ira and peter heard the answer.
the past of return is returned.
глагол «давать» в прошедшем даёт «давал».
сегодня аня рассказывает историю; вчера аня рассказывала историю.
глагол «есть» в прошедшем даёт «ел».
сегодня ира понимает ответ; вчера ира понимала ответ.
today ann writes a letter. what is the past of write? the past of write is wrote.
today ira eats an apple; yesterday ira ate an apple.
today ira and peter finish notes; yesterday ira and peter finished notes.
the past of pay is paid.
today ira says the answer. what is the past of say? the past of say is said.
today mary decides the answer; yesterday mary decided the answer.
today mary and ivan carry baskets; yesterday mary and ivan carried baskets.
сегодня ира находит ключ; вчера ира находила ключ.
глагол «знать» в прошедшем даёт «знал».
сегодня маша носит корзину; вчера маша носила корзину.
today ira and peter buy books; yesterday ira and peter bought books.
the past of find is found.
today ira eats an apple. what is the past of eat? the past of eat is ate.
today mary empties a basket; yesterday mary emptied a basket.
today mary and ivan need keys; yesterday mary and ivan needed keys.
the past of ask is asked.
today mary decides the answer. what is the past of decide? the past of decide is decided.
today ann stops at the door; yesterday ann stopped at the door.
глагол «считать» в прошедшем даёт «считал».
сегодня аня решает задачу; вчера аня решала задачу.
глагол «уходить» в прошедшем даёт «уходил».
today mary gives a coin; yesterday mary gave a coin.
today mary and ivan count the apples; yesterday mary and ivan counted the apples.
the past of work is worked.
today mary empties a basket. what is the past of empty? the past of empty is emptied.
today ann knows the answer; yesterday ann knew the answer.
today ann and tom see the door; yesterday ann and tom saw the door.
the past of leave is left.
today ann stops at the door. what is the past of stop? the past of stop is stopped.
сегодня ира ждёт на вокзале; вчера ира ждала на вокзале.
глагол «начинать» в прошедшем даёт «начинал».
сегодня маша копит монеты; вчера маша копила монеты.
today mary gives a coin. what is the past of give? the past of give is gave.
today ann runs to the park; yesterday ann ran to the park.
today ann and tom wait at the station; yesterday ann and tom waited at the station.
the past of spend is spent.
today ann knows the answer. what is the past of know? the past of know is knew.
today ira hears the answer; yesterday ira heard the answer.
today ira and peter return to the village; yesterday ira and peter returned to the village.
сегодня маша даёт монету; вчера маша давала монету.
глагол «отвечать» в прошедшем даёт «отвечал».
сегодня аня ест яблоко; вчера аня ела яблоко.
глагол «зарабатывать» в прошедшем даёт «зарабатывал».
the past of write is wrote.
today ann runs to the park. what is the past of run? the past of run is ran.
today ira finishes a note; yesterday ira finished a note.
today ira and peter pay coins; yesterday ira and peter paid coins.
the past of say is said.
today ira hears the answer. what is the past of hear? the past of hear is heard.
today mary carries a basket; yesterday mary carried a basket.
глагол «писать» в прошедшем даёт «писал».
сегодня ира знает ответ; вчера ира знала ответ.
глагол «хранить» в прошедшем даёт «хранил».
today ira buys a book; yesterday ira bought a book.
today ira and peter find keys; yesterday ira and peter found keys.
the past of eat is ate.
today ira finishes a note. what is the past of finish? the past of finish is finished.
today mary needs a key; yesterday mary needed a key.
today mary and ivan ask questions; yesterday mary and ivan asked questions.
the past of decide is decided.
today mary carries a basket. what is the past of carry? the past of carry is carried.
сегодня маша считает яблоки; вчера маша считала яблоки.
глагол «слышать» в прошедшем даёт «слышал».
сегодня аня уходит из дома; вчера аня уходила из дома.
today ira buys a book. what is the past of buy? the past of buy is bought.
today mary counts the apples; yesterday mary counted the apples.
today mary and ivan work in the office; yesterday mary and ivan worked in the office.
the past of empty is emptied.
today mary needs a key. what is the past of need? the past of need is needed.
today ann sees the door; yesterday ann saw the door.
today ann and tom leave the house; yesterday ann and tom left the house.
the past of stop is stopped.
глагол «читать» в прошедшем даёт «читал».
сегодня ира начинает список; вчера ира начинала список.
глагол «опустошать» в прошедшем даёт «опустошал».
the past of give is gave.
today mary counts the apples. what is the past of count? the past of count is counted.
today ann waits at the station; yesterday ann waited at the station.
today ann and tom spend coins; yesterday ann and tom spent coins.
the past of know is knew.
today ann sees the door. what is the past of see? the past of see is saw.
today ira returns to the village; yesterday ira returned to the village.
глагол «покупать» в прошедшем даёт «покупал».
сегодня маша отвечает на вопрос; вчера маша отвечала на вопрос.
глагол «играть» в прошедшем даёт «играл».
сегодня аня зарабатывает рубли; вчера аня зарабатывала рубли.

ira has 11 cards, and peter has 11 cards; the two counts are equal.
mary has 5 coins, and peter has 6 coins; mary has 1 fewer coin than peter.
peter and mary gave 5 coins to each other; peter gave 5 coins to mary, and mary gave 5 coins to peter.
mary has 12 boxes, and ivan has 6 boxes; mary has double the boxes of ivan.
у маши 8 коробок, а у ивана 6 коробок. на сколько коробок больше у маши? у маши на 2 коробки больше, чем у ивана.
ivan has 10 cups, and ann has 7 cups; together they have 17 cups, and apart they have 10 cups and 7 cups.
ann has 6 flowers, and tom has 2 flowers. how many more flowers does ann have than tom? ann has 4 more flowers than tom.
у тома 2 цветка, а у ани 6 цветков; у тома на 4 цветка меньше, чем у ани.
tom has 6 toys, and ira has 3 toys; ira has half the toys of tom.
ira has 10 pages, and peter has 4 pages; ira has 6 more pages than peter.
ira bought 10 pages, but peter bought just 4 pages; 4 pages are fewer than 10 pages, and peter bought less than ira.
маша купила 8 чашек молока, а том купил 5 чашек молока; у тома молока меньше, чем у маши.
ira has 11 cards, peter has 4 cards and mary has 1 card; ira has the most cards and mary has the least cards.
у иры 11 карт, и у петра 11 карт; у них поровну карт.
peter has 6 coins, and mary has 6 coins; the two counts are equal.
ivan has 6 boxes, and mary has 8 boxes; ivan has 2 fewer boxes than mary.
mary and ivan gave 6 boxes to each other; mary gave 6 boxes to ivan, and ivan gave 6 boxes to mary.
ivan has 14 cups, and ann has 7 cups; ivan has double the cups of ann.
у ивана 10 чашек, а у ани 7 чашек. на сколько чашек больше у ивана? у ивана на 3 чашки больше, чем у ани.
ann has 6 flowers, and tom has 2 flowers; together they have 8 flowers, and apart they have 6 flowers and 2 flowers.
tom has 8 toys, and ira has 3 toys. how many more toys does tom have than ira? tom has 5 more toys than ira.
у иры 3 игрушки, а у тома 8 игрушек; у иры на 5 игрушек меньше, чем у тома.
ira has 8 pages, and peter has 4 pages; peter has half the pages of ira.
ira bought 6 cups of tea, and ivan bought 3 cups of tea; ivan bought less tea than ira.
ира купила 7 коробок соли, а иван купил 4 коробки соли; у ивана соли меньше, чем у иры.
ira has 11 cards, and peter has 4 cards; the total comes to 15 cards altogether.
peter has 6 coins, mary has 5 coins and ivan has 1 coin; peter has the most coins and ivan has the least coins.
у петра 6 монет, и у маши 6 монет; у них поровну монет.
mary has 8 boxes, and ivan has 8 boxes; the two counts are equal.
ann has 7 cups, and ivan has 10 cups; ann has 3 fewer cups than ivan.
ivan and ann gave 7 cups to each other; ivan gave 7 cups to ann, and ann gave 7 cups to ivan.
ann has 4 flowers, and tom has 2 flowers; ann has double the flowers of tom.
у ани 6 цветков, а у тома 2 цветка. на сколько цветков больше у ани? у ани на 4 цветка больше, чем у тома.
tom has 8 toys, and ira has 3 toys; together they have 11 toys, and apart they have 8 toys and 3 toys.
ira has 10 pages, and peter has 4 pages. how many more pages does ira have than peter? ira has 6 more pages than peter.
у петра 4 страницы, а у иры 10 страниц; у петра на 6 страниц меньше, чем у иры.
ann bought 5 loaves of bread, and peter bought 2 loaves of bread; peter bought less bread than ann.
ira has 12 cards, and peter has 4 cards; ira has triple the cards of peter.
у иры 8 карт, а у петра 4 карты; у иры вдвое больше, чем у петра.
peter has 6 coins, and mary has 5 coins; the total comes to 11 coins altogether.
mary has 8 boxes, ivan has 6 boxes and ann has 1 box; mary has the most boxes and ann has the least boxes.
у маши 8 коробок, и у ивана 8 коробок; у них поровну коробок.
ivan has 10 cups, and ann has 10 cups; the two counts are equal.
tom has 2 flowers, and ann has 6 flowers; tom has 4 fewer flowers than ann.
ann and tom gave 2 flowers to each other; ann gave 2 flowers to tom, and tom gave 2 flowers to ann.
tom has 6 toys, and ira has 3 toys; tom has double the toys of ira.
у тома 8 игрушек, а у иры 3 игрушки. на сколько игрушек больше у тома? у тома на 5 игрушек больше, чем у иры.
ira has 10 pages, and peter has 4 pages; together they have 14 pages, and apart they have 10 pages and 4 pages.
пётр купил 5 чашек кофе, а аня купила 4 чашки кофе; у ани кофе меньше, чем у петра.
ira has 11 cards, and peter has 11 cards; ira has the same number of cards as peter.
у иры 11 карт, а у петра 4 карты; у иры на 7 карт больше, чем у петра.
peter has 15 coins, and mary has 5 coins; peter has triple the coins of mary.
у петра 10 монет, а у маши 5 монет; у петра вдвое больше, чем у маши.
mary has 8 boxes, and ivan has 6 boxes; the total comes to 14 boxes altogether.
ivan has 10 cups, ann has 7 cups and tom has 1 cup; ivan has the most cups and tom has the least cups.
у ивана 10 чашек, и у ани 10 чашек; у них поровну чашек.
ann has 6 flowers, and tom has 6 flowers; the two counts are equal.
ira has 3 toys, and tom has 8 toys; ira has 5 fewer toys than tom.
tom and ira gave 3 toys to each other; tom gave 3 toys to ira, and ira gave 3 toys to tom.
ira has 8 pages, and peter has 4 pages; ira has double the pages of peter.
у иры 10 страниц, а у петра 4 страницы. на сколько страниц больше у иры? у иры на 6 страниц больше, чем у петра.
том купил 4 коробки сахара, а маша купила 3 коробки сахара; у маши сахара меньше, чем у тома.
ira has 11 cards, and peter has 4 cards; the two counts are different.
peter has 6 coins, and mary has 6 coins; peter has the same number of coins as mary.
у петра 6 монет, а у маши 5 монет; у петра на 1 монета больше, чем у маши.
mary has 18 boxes, and ivan has 6 boxes; mary has triple the boxes of ivan.
у маши 12 коробок, а у ивана 6 коробок; у маши вдвое больше, чем у ивана.
ivan has 10 cups, and ann has 7 cups; the total comes to 17 cups altogether.
ann has 6 flowers, tom has 2 flowers and ira has 1 flower; ann has the most flowers and ira has the least flowers.
у ани 6 цветков, и у тома 6 цветков; у них поровну цветков.
tom has 8 toys, and ira has 8 toys; the two counts are equal.
peter has 4 pages, and ira has 10 pages; peter has 6 fewer pages than ira.
ira and peter gave 4 pages to each other; ira gave 4 pages to peter, and peter gave 4 pages to ira.
ivan bought 2 bottles of water, and ira bought 1 bottle of water; ira bought less water than ivan.
ira has 8 cards, and peter has 4 cards; ira has twice as many cards as peter.
у иры 11 карт, а у петра 4 карты; вместе у них 15 карт.
peter has 6 coins, and mary has 5 coins; the two counts are different.
mary has 8 boxes, and ivan has 8 boxes; mary has the same number of boxes as ivan.
у маши 8 коробок, а у ивана 6 коробок; у маши на 2 коробки больше, чем у ивана.
ivan has 21 cups, and ann has 7 cups; ivan has triple the cups of ann.
у ивана 14 чашек, а у ани 7 чашек; у ивана вдвое больше, чем у ани.
ann has 6 flowers, and tom has 2 flowers; the total comes to 8 flowers altogether.
tom has 8 toys, ira has 3 toys and peter has 1 toy; tom has the most toys and peter has the least toys.
у тома 8 игрушек, и у иры 8 игрушек; у них поровну игрушек.
ira has 10 pages, and peter has 10 pages; the two counts are equal.
ира купила 6 чашек чая, а иван купил 3 чашки чая; у ивана чая меньше, чем у иры.
ira has 11 cards, and peter has 4 cards; ira has 7 more cards than peter.
ira bought 11 cards, but peter bought just 4 cards; 4 cards are fewer than 11 cards, and peter bought less than ira.
peter has 10 coins, and mary has 5 coins; peter has twice as many coins as mary.
у петра 6 монет, а у маши 5 монет; вместе у них 11 монет.
mary has 8 boxes, and ivan has 6 boxes; the two counts are different.
ivan has 10 cups, and ann has 10 cups; ivan has the same number of cups as ann.
у ивана 10 чашек, а у ани 7 чашек; у ивана на 3 чашки больше, чем у ани.
ann has 6 flowers, and tom has 2 flowers; ann has triple the flowers of tom.
у ани 4 цветка, а у тома 2 цветка; у ани вдвое больше, чем у тома.
tom has 8 toys, and ira has 3 toys; the total comes to 11 toys altogether.
ira has 10 pages, peter has 4 pages and mary has 1 page; ira has the most pages and mary has the least pages.
у иры 10 страниц, и у петра 10 страниц; у них поровну страниц.
аня купила 5 коробок хлеба, а пётр купил 2 коробки хлеба; у петра хлеба меньше, чем у ани.
ira has 8 cards, and peter has 4 cards; peter has half the cards of ira.
peter has 6 coins, and mary has 5 coins; peter has 1 more coin than mary.
peter bought 6 coins, but mary bought just 5 coins; 5 coins are fewer than 6 coins, and mary bought less than peter.
mary has 12 boxes, and ivan has 6 boxes; mary has twice as many boxes as ivan.
у маши 8 коробок, а у ивана 6 коробок; вместе у них 14 коробок.
ivan has 10 cups, and ann has 7 cups; the two counts are different.
ann has 6 flowers, and tom has 6 flowers; ann has the same number of flowers as tom.
у ани 6 цветков, а у тома 2 цветка; у ани на 4 цветка больше, чем у тома.
tom has 9 toys, and ira has 3 toys; tom has triple the toys of ira.
у тома 6 игрушек, а у иры 3 игрушки; у тома вдвое больше, чем у иры.
ira has 10 pages, and peter has 4 pages; the total comes to 14 pages altogether.
mary bought 8 bottles of milk, and tom bought 5 bottles of milk; tom bought less milk than mary.
ira has 11 cards, and peter has 4 cards. how many more cards does ira have than peter? ira has 7 more cards than peter.
у петра 4 карты, а у иры 11 карт; у петра на 7 карт меньше, чем у иры.
peter has 10 coins, and mary has 5 coins; mary has half the coins of peter.
mary has 8 boxes, and ivan has 6 boxes; mary has 2 more boxes than ivan.
mary bought 8 boxes, but ivan bought just 6 boxes; 6 boxes are fewer than 8 boxes, and ivan bought less than mary.
ivan has 14 cups, and ann has 7 cups; ivan has twice as many cups as ann.
у ивана 10 чашек, а у ани 7 чашек; вместе у них 17 чашек.
ann has 6 flowers, and tom has 2 flowers; the two counts are different.
tom has 8 toys, and ira has 8 toys; tom has the same number of toys as ira.
у тома 8 игрушек, а у иры 3 игрушки; у тома на 5 игрушек больше, чем у иры.
ira has 12 pages, and peter has 4 pages; ira has triple the pages of peter.
у иры 8 страниц, а у петра 4 страницы; у иры вдвое больше, чем у петра.
ira bought 7 bags of salt, and ivan bought 4 bags of salt; ivan bought less salt than ira.
ira has 11 cards, and peter has 4 cards; together they have 15 cards, and apart they have 11 cards and 4 cards.
peter has 6 coins, and mary has 5 coins. how many more coins does peter have than mary? peter has 1 more coin than mary.
у маши 5 монет, а у петра 6 монет; у маши на 1 монета меньше, чем у петра.
mary has 12 boxes, and ivan has 6 boxes; ivan has half the boxes of mary.
ivan has 10 cups, and ann has 7 cups; ivan has 3 more cups than ann.
ivan bought 10 cups, but ann bought just 7 cups; 7 cups are fewer than 10 cups, and ann bought less than ivan.
ann has 4 flowers, and tom has 2 flowers; ann has twice as many flowers as tom.
у ани 6 цветков, а у тома 2 цветка; вместе у них 8 цветков.
tom has 8 toys, and ira has 3 toys; the two counts are different.
ira has 10 pages, and peter has 10 pages; ira has the same number of pages as peter.
у иры 10 страниц, а у петра 4 страницы; у иры на 6 страниц больше, чем у петра.
иван купил 2 чашки воды, а ира купила 1 чашка воды; у иры воды меньше, чем у ивана.
ira has 8 cards, and peter has 4 cards; ira has double the cards of peter.
у иры 11 карт, а у петра 4 карты. на сколько карт больше у иры? у иры на 7 карт больше, чем у петра.
peter has 6 coins, and mary has 5 coins; together they have 11 coins, and apart they have 6 coins and 5 coins.
mary has 8 boxes, and ivan has 6 boxes. how many more boxes does mary have than ivan? mary has 2 more boxes than ivan.
у ивана 6 коробок, а у маши 8 коробок; у ивана на 2 коробки меньше, чем у маши.
ivan has 14 cups, and ann has 7 cups; ann has half the cups of ivan.
ann has 6 flowers, and tom has 2 flowers; ann has 4 more flowers than tom.
ann bought 6 flowers, but tom bought just 2 flowers; 2 flowers are fewer than 6 flowers, and tom bought less than ann.
tom has 6 toys, and ira has 3 toys; tom has twice as many toys as ira.
у тома 8 игрушек, а у иры 3 игрушки; вместе у них 11 игрушек.
ira has 10 pages, and peter has 4 pages; the two counts are different.
peter bought 5 cups of coffee, and ann bought 4 cups of coffee; ann bought less coffee than peter.
peter has 4 cards, and ira has 11 cards; peter has 7 fewer cards than ira.
ira and peter gave 4 cards to each other; ira gave 4 cards to peter, and peter gave 4 cards to ira.
peter has 10 coins, and mary has 5 coins; peter has double the coins of mary.
у петра 6 монет, а у маши 5 монет. на сколько монет больше у петра? у петра на 1 монета больше, чем у маши.
mary has 8 boxes, and ivan has 6 boxes; together they have 14 boxes, and apart they have 8 boxes and 6 boxes.
ivan has 10 cups, and ann has 7 cups. how many more cups does ivan have than ann? ivan has 3 more cups than ann.
у ани 7 чашек, а у ивана 10 чашек; у ани на 3 чашки меньше, чем у ивана.
ann has 4 flowers, and tom has 2 flowers; tom has half the flowers of ann.
tom has 8 toys, and ira has 3 toys; tom has 5 more toys than ira.
tom bought 8 toys, but ira bought just 3 toys; 3 toys are fewer than 8 toys, and ira bought less than tom.
ira has 8 pages, and peter has 4 pages; ira has twice as many pages as peter.
у иры 10 страниц, а у петра 4 страницы; вместе у них 14 страниц.
tom bought 4 bags of sugar, and mary bought 3 bags of sugar; mary bought less sugar than tom.

peter had 19 books and used 5 books; 14 books are left over.
ivan had 9 cups and used 2 cups; the rest are 7 cups.
tom had 19 books and used 6 books; 13 books remain.
у иры было 24 карты, ира израсходовала 1 карта. сколько карт осталось? осталось 23 карты.
у петра было 19 книг, пётр израсходовал 5 книг; осталось 14 книг.
ivan had 9 cups and used 2 cups. how many cups remain? 7 cups remain.
tom had 19 books and used 6 books; tom keeps the remaining 13 books.
ira had 14 pages and used 3 pages; 11 pages are left over.
mary had 24 cards and used 7 cards; the rest are 17 cards.
ann had 14 pages and used 4 pages; 10 pages remain.
у тома было 19 книг, том израсходовал 6 книг. сколько книг осталось? осталось 13 книг.
у иры было 14 страниц, ира израсходовала 3 страницы; осталось 11 страниц.
mary had 24 cards and used 7 cards. how many cards remain? 17 cards remain.
ann had 14 pages and used 4 pages; ann keeps the remaining 10 pages.
ira had 24 cards and used 1 card; 23 cards are left over.
peter had 19 books and used 5 books; the rest are 14 books.
ivan had 9 cups and used 2 cups; 7 cups remain.
у ани было 14 страниц, аня израсходовала 4 страницы. сколько страниц осталось? осталось 10 страниц.
у иры было 24 карты, ира израсходовала 1 карта; осталось 23 карты.
peter had 19 books and used 5 books. how many books remain? 14 books remain.
ivan had 9 cups and used 2 cups; ivan keeps the remaining 7 cups.
tom had 19 books and used 6 books; 13 books are left over.
ira had 14 pages and used 3 pages; the rest are 11 pages.
mary had 24 cards and used 7 cards; 17 cards remain.
у ивана было 9 чашек, иван израсходовал 2 чашки. сколько чашек осталось? осталось 7 чашек.
у тома было 19 книг, том израсходовал 6 книг; осталось 13 книг.
ira had 14 pages and used 3 pages. how many pages remain? 11 pages remain.
mary had 24 cards and used 7 cards; mary keeps the remaining 17 cards.
ann had 14 pages and used 4 pages; 10 pages are left over.
ira had 24 cards and used 1 card; the rest are 23 cards.
peter had 19 books and used 5 books; 14 books remain.
у маши было 24 карты, маша израсходовала 7 карт. сколько карт осталось? осталось 17 карт.
у ани было 14 страниц, аня израсходовала 4 страницы; осталось 10 страниц.
ira had 24 cards and used 1 card. how many cards remain? 23 cards remain.
peter had 19 books and used 5 books; peter keeps the remaining 14 books.
ivan had 9 cups and used 2 cups; 7 cups are left over.
tom had 19 books and used 6 books; the rest are 13 books.
ira had 14 pages and used 3 pages; 11 pages remain.
у петра было 19 книг, пётр израсходовал 5 книг. сколько книг осталось? осталось 14 книг.
у ивана было 9 чашек, иван израсходовал 2 чашки; осталось 7 чашек.
tom had 19 books and used 6 books. how many books remain? 13 books remain.
ira had 14 pages and used 3 pages; ira keeps the remaining 11 pages.
mary had 24 cards and used 7 cards; 17 cards are left over.
ann had 14 pages and used 4 pages; the rest are 10 pages.
ira had 24 cards and used 1 card; 23 cards remain.
у иры было 14 страниц, ира израсходовала 3 страницы. сколько страниц осталось? осталось 11 страниц.
у маши было 24 карты, маша израсходовала 7 карт; осталось 17 карт.
ann had 14 pages and used 4 pages. how many pages remain? 10 pages remain.
ira had 24 cards and used 1 card; ira keeps the remaining 23 cards.

the cup holds 13 boxes and peter filled the cup with 4 boxes. how many boxes does the cup need? the cup needs 9 boxes more.
the basket holds 19 pens; ivan fills the basket with 1 pen and needs 18 pens more.
the cup holds 11 pages; tom filled the cup with 3 pages; the cup needs 8 pages more.
ира освободила сумка: было 3 ручки, теперь там 0 ручек.
коробка вмещает 16 страниц; маша положила туда 5 страниц; не хватает ещё 11 страниц.
ann empties the bag of 2 boxes; the bag keeps 0 boxes then.
ira emptied the bag of 3 pens; the bag keeps 0 pens now.
the box holds 16 pages and mary filled the box with 5 pages. how many pages does the box need? the box needs 11 pages more.
the bag holds 8 boxes; ann fills the bag with 2 boxes and needs 6 boxes more.
the bag holds 10 pens; ira filled the bag with 3 pens; the bag needs 7 pens more.
пётр освободил чашка: было 4 коробки, теперь там 0 коробок.
корзина вмещает 19 ручек; иван положил туда 1 ручка; не хватает ещё 18 ручек.
tom empties the cup of 3 pages; the cup keeps 0 pages then.
peter emptied the cup of 4 boxes; the cup keeps 0 boxes now.
the basket holds 19 pens and ivan filled the basket with 1 pen. how many pens does the basket need? the basket needs 18 pens more.
the cup holds 11 pages; tom fills the cup with 3 pages and needs 8 pages more.
the cup holds 13 boxes; peter filled the cup with 4 boxes; the cup needs 9 boxes more.
маша освободила коробка: было 5 страниц, теперь там 0 страниц.
сумка вмещает 8 коробок; аня положила туда 2 коробки; не хватает ещё 6 коробок.
ira empties the bag of 3 pens; the bag keeps 0 pens then.
mary emptied the box of 5 pages; the box keeps 0 pages now.
the bag holds 8 boxes and ann filled the bag with 2 boxes. how many boxes does the bag need? the bag needs 6 boxes more.
the bag holds 10 pens; ira fills the bag with 3 pens and needs 7 pens more.
the box holds 16 pages; mary filled the box with 5 pages; the box needs 11 pages more.
иван освободил корзина: было 1 ручка, теперь там 0 ручек.
чашка вмещает 11 страниц; том положил туда 3 страницы; не хватает ещё 8 страниц.
peter empties the cup of 4 boxes; the cup keeps 0 boxes then.
ivan emptied the basket of 1 pen; the basket keeps 0 pens now.
the cup holds 11 pages and tom filled the cup with 3 pages. how many pages does the cup need? the cup needs 8 pages more.
the cup holds 13 boxes; peter fills the cup with 4 boxes and needs 9 boxes more.
the basket holds 19 pens; ivan filled the basket with 1 pen; the basket needs 18 pens more.
аня освободила сумка: было 2 коробки, теперь там 0 коробок.
сумка вмещает 10 ручек; ира положила туда 3 ручки; не хватает ещё 7 ручек.
mary empties the box of 5 pages; the box keeps 0 pages then.
ann emptied the bag of 2 boxes; the bag keeps 0 boxes now.
the bag holds 10 pens and ira filled the bag with 3 pens. how many pens does the bag need? the bag needs 7 pens more.
the box holds 16 pages; mary fills the box with 5 pages and needs 11 pages more.
the bag holds 8 boxes; ann filled the bag with 2 boxes; the bag needs 6 boxes more.
том освободил чашка: было 3 страницы, теперь там 0 страниц.
чашка вмещает 13 коробок; пётр положил туда 4 коробки; не хватает ещё 9 коробок.
ivan empties the basket of 1 pen; the basket keeps 0 pens then.
tom emptied the cup of 3 pages; the cup keeps 0 pages now.

mary shares 4 cards among 2 friends; every friend gets 2 cards.
tom shared 30 cups among 5 friends. how many cups did each friend get? each friend got 6 cups.
маша разделила 4 карты между 2 друзьями; каждому досталось по 2 карты.
ira shared 24 pens among 4 friends; each friend got 6 pens.
ivan shares 15 coins among 3 friends; every friend gets 5 coins.
ira shared 24 pens among 4 friends. how many pens did each friend get? each friend got 6 pens.
иван разделил 15 монет между 3 друзьями; каждому досталось по 5 монет.
peter shared 20 pencils among 5 friends; each friend got 4 pencils.
ann shares 12 boxes among 4 friends; every friend gets 3 boxes.
peter shared 20 pencils among 5 friends. how many pencils did each friend get? each friend got 4 pencils.
аня разделила 12 коробок между 4 друзьями; каждому досталось по 3 коробки.
mary shared 4 cards among 2 friends; each friend got 2 cards.
tom shares 30 cups among 5 friends; every friend gets 6 cups.
mary shared 4 cards among 2 friends. how many cards did each friend get? each friend got 2 cards.
том разделил 30 чашек между 5 друзьями; каждому досталось по 6 чашек.
ivan shared 15 coins among 3 friends; each friend got 5 coins.
ira shares 24 pens among 4 friends; every friend gets 6 pens.
ivan shared 15 coins among 3 friends. how many coins did each friend get? each friend got 5 coins.
ира разделила 24 ручки между 4 друзьями; каждому досталось по 6 ручек.
ann shared 12 boxes among 4 friends; each friend got 3 boxes.
peter shares 20 pencils among 5 friends; every friend gets 4 pencils.
ann shared 12 boxes among 4 friends. how many boxes did each friend get? each friend got 3 boxes.
пётр разделил 20 карандашей между 5 друзьями; каждому досталось по 4 карандаша.
tom shared 30 cups among 5 friends; each friend got 6 cups.

mary earns 20 coins and pays 2 coins for a ticket; mary saves 18 coins.
tom earned 7 coins and paid 3 coins for a ticket. how many coins did tom save? tom saved 4 coins.
маша заработала 20 рублей и заплатила 2 рубля за билет; маша отложила 18 рублей.
ira earned 12 coins and paid 3 coins for a ticket; ira saved 9 coins.
ivan earns 24 coins and pays 4 coins for a ticket; ivan saves 20 coins.
ira earned 12 coins and paid 3 coins for a ticket. how many coins did ira save? ira saved 9 coins.
иван заработал 24 рубля и заплатил 4 рубля за билет; иван отложил 20 рублей.
peter earned 16 coins and paid 5 coins for a ticket; peter saved 11 coins.
ann earns 28 coins and pays 1 coin for a ticket; ann saves 27 coins.
peter earned 16 coins and paid 5 coins for a ticket. how many coins did peter save? peter saved 11 coins.
аня заработала 28 рублей и заплатила 1 рубль за билет; аня отложила 27 рублей.
mary earned 20 coins and paid 2 coins for a ticket; mary saved 18 coins.
tom earns 7 coins and pays 3 coins for a ticket; tom saves 4 coins.
mary earned 20 coins and paid 2 coins for a ticket. how many coins did mary save? mary saved 18 coins.
том заработал 7 рублей и заплатил 3 рубля за билет; том отложил 4 рубля.
ivan earned 24 coins and paid 4 coins for a ticket; ivan saved 20 coins.
ira earns 12 coins and pays 3 coins for a ticket; ira saves 9 coins.
ivan earned 24 coins and paid 4 coins for a ticket. how many coins did ivan save? ivan saved 20 coins.
ира заработала 12 рублей и заплатила 3 рубля за билет; ира отложила 9 рублей.
ann earned 28 coins and paid 1 coin for a ticket; ann saved 27 coins.
peter earns 16 coins and pays 5 coins for a ticket; peter saves 11 coins.
ann earned 28 coins and paid 1 coin for a ticket. how many coins did ann save? ann saved 27 coins.
пётр заработал 16 рублей и заплатил 5 рублей за билет; пётр отложил 11 рублей.
tom earned 7 coins and paid 3 coins for a ticket; tom saved 4 coins.

4 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books; the class has 12 books.
5 students are in the class, and 5 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
у маши 6 книг, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
2 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
3 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у ани 3 коробки, и в каждой коробке 3 ручки; всего 9 ручек.
tom has 2 cups; tom drank 1 cup and keeps the other cup.
4 students are in the class, and every student has 3 books; the class has 12 books.
у петра 5 книг, и 5 книг прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
6 students are in the class, and 6 students have a key; all students have a key.
2 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
у ани 3 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
4 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
tom has 1 cup and bought another cup; tom has 2 cups.
4 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 12 books.
5 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books; the class has 20 books.
6 students are in the class, and 6 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
у ивана 2 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
3 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
4 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у тома 4 коробки, и в каждой коробке 4 чашки; всего 16 чашек.
ira has 2 boxes; ira picked 1 box and keeps the other box.
5 students are in the class, and every student has 4 books; the class has 20 books.
у маши 6 книг, и 6 книг прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
2 students are in the class, and 2 students have a key; both students have a key.
3 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
у тома 4 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
4 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
ira has 1 box and bought another box; ira has 2 boxes.
5 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 20 books.
6 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book; the class has 6 books.
2 students are in the class, and 2 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
у ани 3 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
4 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
4 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у иры 4 коробки, и в каждой коробке 3 коробки; всего 12 коробок.
peter has 2 balls; peter picked 1 ball and keeps the other ball.
6 students are in the class, and every student has 1 book; the class has 6 books.
у ивана 2 книги, и 2 книги прочитаны; обе книги прочитаны.
3 students are in the class, and 3 students have a key; all students have a key.
4 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
у иры 4 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
5 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
peter has 1 ball and bought another ball; peter has 2 balls.
6 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book. how many books does the class have? the class has 6 books.
2 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books; the class has 4 books.
3 students are in the class, and 3 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
у тома 4 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
4 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
5 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у петра 5 коробок, и в каждой коробке 4 шарика; всего 20 шариков.
mary has 2 cards; mary read 1 card and keeps the other card.
2 students are in the class, and every student has 2 books; the class has 4 books.
у ани 3 книги, и 3 книги прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
4 students are in the class, and 4 students have a key; all students have a key.
4 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
у петра 5 книг, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
6 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
mary has 1 card and bought another card; mary has 2 cards.
2 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 4 books.
3 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books; the class has 9 books.
4 students are in the class, and 4 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
у иры 4 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
5 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
6 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у маши 6 коробок, и в каждой коробке 1 карта; всего 6 карт.
ivan has 2 toys; ivan picked 1 toy and keeps the other toy.
3 students are in the class, and every student has 3 books; the class has 9 books.
у тома 4 книги, и 4 книги прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
4 students are in the class, and 4 students have a key; all students have a key.
5 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
у маши 6 книг, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
2 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
ivan has 1 toy and bought another toy; ivan has 2 toys.
3 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 9 books.
4 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books; the class has 16 books.
4 students are in the class, and 4 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
у петра 5 книг, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
6 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
2 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у ивана 2 коробки, и в каждой коробке 2 игрушки; всего 4 игрушки.
ann has 2 pens; ann picked 1 pen and keeps the other pen.
4 students are in the class, and every student has 4 books; the class has 16 books.
у иры 4 книги, и 4 книги прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
5 students are in the class, and 5 students have a key; all students have a key.
6 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
у ивана 2 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
3 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
ann has 1 pen and bought another pen; ann has 2 pens.
4 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 16 books.

mary took 1 card and 1 page; mary took a card and a page.
1 cup and 9 cups make 10 cups in all.
1 book and 5 books make 6 books in all.
there is 1 flower in the box, and there are 6 flowers in the box.
1 bottle and 6 bottles make 7 bottles in all.
there is 1 key in the box, and there are 7 keys in the box.
1 basket and 7 baskets make 8 baskets in all.
ann waited an egg and counted 1 egg.
1 карандаш и 5 карандашей дают всего 6 карандашей.
there is 1 cup on the floor, and there are 9 cups on the floor.
1 apple and 4 apples make 5 apples in all.
there is 1 cup in the box, and there are 5 cups in the box.
1 bag and 5 bags make 6 bags in all.
there is 1 lamp in the box, and there are 6 lamps in the box.
1 plate and 6 plates make 7 plates in all.
ann waited an hour and counted 1 hour.
peter took 1 pencil and 1 flower; peter took a pencil and a flower.
1 box and 8 boxes make 9 boxes in all.
1 игрушка и 3 игрушки дают всего 4 игрушки.
there is 1 box in the box, and there are 4 boxes in the box.
1 ticket and 4 tickets make 5 tickets in all.
there is 1 chair in the box, and there are 5 chairs in the box.
1 list and 5 lists make 6 lists in all.
there is 1 stick in the box, and there are 6 sticks in the box.
1 ручка и 4 ручки дают всего 5 ручек.
there is 1 box on the chair, and there are 8 boxes on the chair.
peter took 1 toy and 1 lamp; peter took a toy and a lamp.
there is 1 coin in the box, and there are 3 coins in the box.
1 ball and 3 balls make 4 balls in all.
there is 1 stone in the box, and there are 4 stones in the box.
1 note and 4 notes make 5 notes in all.
there is 1 hat in the box, and there are 5 hats in the box.
ira took 1 pen and 1 box; ira took a pen and a box.
1 coin and 7 coins make 8 coins in all.
1 цветок и 2 цветка дают всего 3 цветка.
there is 1 card in the box, and there are 2 cards in the box.
1 page and 2 pages make 3 pages in all.
there is 1 tree in the box, and there are 3 trees in the box.
1 line and 3 lines make 4 lines in all.
there is 1 shoe in the box, and there are 4 shoes in the box.
ann waited a letter and counted 1 letter.
there is 1 coin on the shelf, and there are 7 coins on the shelf.
ira took 1 flower and 1 stone; ira took a flower and a stone.
there is 1 pencil in the box, and there are 7 pencils in the box.
1 toy and 7 toys make 8 toys in all.
there is 1 cake in the box, and there are 2 cakes in the box.
1 letter and 2 letters make 3 letters in all.
there is 1 shirt in the box, and there are 3 shirts in the box.
ann waited a key and counted 1 key.
1 card and 6 cards make 7 cards in all.
1 чашка и 9 чашек дают всего 10 чашек.
there is 1 pen in the box, and there are 6 pens in the box.
1 flower and 6 flowers make 7 flowers in all.
there is 1 egg in the box, and there are 7 eggs in the box.
1 key and 7 keys make 8 keys in all.
there is 1 shelf in the box, and there are 2 shelves in the box.
ann waited an office and counted 1 office.
there is 1 card on the table, and there are 6 cards on the table.
tom took 1 cup and 1 cake; tom took a cup and a cake.
there is 1 book in the box, and there are 5 books in the box.
1 cup and 5 cups make 6 cups in all.
there is 1 bottle in the box, and there are 6 bottles in the box.
1 lamp and 6 lamps make 7 lamps in all.
there is 1 basket in the box, and there are 7 baskets in the box.
ann waited an apple and counted 1 apple.
1 pencil and 5 pencils make 6 pencils in all.
1 коробка и 8 коробок дают всего 9 коробок.
there is 1 apple in the box, and there are 4 apples in the box.
1 box and 4 boxes make 5 boxes in all.
there is 1 bag in the box, and there are 5 bags in the box.
1 chair and 5 chairs make 6 chairs in all.
there is 1 plate in the box, and there are 6 plates in the box.
1 stick and 6 sticks make 7 sticks in all.
there is 1 pencil on the floor, and there are 5 pencils on the floor.
ann took 1 box and 1 bottle; ann took a box and a bottle.
1 toy and 3 toys make 4 toys in all.
1 coin and 3 coins make 4 coins in all.
there is 1 ticket in the box, and there are 4 tickets in the box.
1 stone and 4 stones make 5 stones in all.
there is 1 list in the box, and there are 5 lists in the box.
1 hat and 5 hats make 6 hats in all.
1 pen and 4 pens make 5 pens in all.
1 монета и 7 монет дают всего 8 монет.
there is 1 toy on the shelf, and there are 3 toys on the shelf.
1 card and 2 cards make 3 cards in all.
there is 1 ball in the box, and there are 3 balls in the box.
1 tree and 3 trees make 4 trees in all.
there is 1 note in the box, and there are 4 notes in the box.
1 shoe and 4 shoes make 5 shoes in all.
there is 1 pen on the chair, and there are 4 pens on the chair.
ivan took 1 coin and 1 ticket; ivan took a coin and a ticket.
1 flower and 2 flowers make 3 flowers in all.
1 pencil and 7 pencils make 8 pencils in all.
there is 1 page in the box, and there are 2 pages in the box.
1 cake and 2 cakes make 3 cakes in all.
there is 1 line in the box, and there are 3 lines in the box.
1 shirt and 3 shirts make 4 shirts in all.
ann waited a ticket and counted 1 ticket.
1 карта и 6 карт дают всего 7 карт.
there is 1 flower on the table, and there are 2 flowers on the table.
1 pen and 6 pens make 7 pens in all.
there is 1 toy in the box, and there are 7 toys in the box.
1 egg and 7 eggs make 8 eggs in all.
there is 1 letter in the box, and there are 2 letters in the box.
1 shelf and 2 shelves make 3 shelves in all.
ann waited a book and counted 1 book.

1 man and 1 woman came to the park; 2 people came to the park in all.
6 brothers and 3 sisters came to the farm. how many children came to the farm? 9 children came to the farm in all.
2 sellers and 2 buyers came to the school; 4 people came to the school in all.
what are people? a doctor and a neighbour together are called people.
a baker and a farmer together are called people.
корова и лошадь вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие животные? курица и утка вместе зовутся животные.
a orange and a lemon together are called fruits.
what are tools? a hammer and a saw together are called tools.
игла и напёрсток вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие овощи? свёкла и репа вместе зовутся овощи.
a son and a daughter together are called children.
люди: мужчина, женщина, учитель, ученик, мать, отец, продавец, покупатель, доктор, сосед, рабочий, водитель, пекарь, фермер, друг.
1 boy and 1 girl came to the station; 2 children came to the station in all.
5 teachers and 1 student came to the library. how many people came to the library? 6 people came to the library in all.
1 mother and 5 fathers came to the shop; 6 people came to the shop in all.
what are people? a seller and a buyer together are called people.
a worker and a driver together are called people.
кто такие люди? друг и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
a fox and a wolf together are called animals.
what are fruits? a apple and a pear together are called fruits.
виноград и дыня вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие инструменты? отвёртка и клещи вместе зовутся инструменты.
a carrot and a cabbage together are called vegetables.
what are vegetables? a cucumber and a tomato together are called vegetables.
племянник и племянница вместе зовутся дети.
инструменты: молоток, пила, топор, лопата, отвёртка, клещи, нож, ножницы, игла, напёрсток.
4 men and 4 women came to the park. how many people came to the park? 8 people came to the park in all.
6 brothers and 3 sisters came to the farm; 9 children came to the farm in all.
what are people? a mother and a father together are called people.
a doctor and a neighbour together are called people.
кто такие люди? пекарь и фермер вместе зовутся люди.
what are animals? a cat and a dog together are called animals.
курица и утка вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие фрукты? апельсин и лимон вместе зовутся фрукты.
a hammer and a saw together are called tools.
what are tools? a knife and a scissors together are called tools.
свёкла и репа вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие дети? сын и дочь вместе зовутся дети.
people: man, woman, teacher, student, mother, father, seller, buyer, doctor, neighbour, worker, driver, baker, farmer, friend.
3 boys and 2 girls came to the station. how many children came to the station? 5 children came to the station in all.
5 teachers and 1 student came to the library; 6 people came to the library in all.
what are children? a brother and a sister together are called children.
a seller and a buyer together are called people.
кто такие люди? рабочий и водитель вместе зовутся люди.
друг и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
кто такие животные? лиса и волк вместе зовутся животные.
a apple and a pear together are called fruits.
what are fruits? a banana and a peach together are called fruits.
отвёртка и клещи вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие овощи? морковь и капуста вместе зовутся овощи.
a cucumber and a tomato together are called vegetables.
what are children? a grandson and a granddaughter together are called children.
tools: hammer, saw, axe, spade, screwdriver, pliers, knife, scissors, needle, thimble.
4 men and 4 women came to the park; 8 people came to the park in all.
what are people? a teacher and a student together are called people.
a mother and a father together are called people.
кто такие люди? доктор и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
пекарь и фермер вместе зовутся люди.
a cat and a dog together are called animals.
what are animals? a hare and a bear together are called animals.
апельсин и лимон вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие инструменты? молоток и пила вместе зовутся инструменты.
a knife and a scissors together are called tools.
what are vegetables? a onion and a garlic together are called vegetables.
сын и дочь вместе зовутся дети.
дети: мальчик, девочка, брат, сестра, сын, дочь, внук, внучка, племянник, племянница.
3 boys and 2 girls came to the station; 5 children came to the station in all.
what are people? a man and a woman together are called people.
a brother and a sister together are called children.
кто такие люди? продавец и покупатель вместе зовутся люди.
рабочий и водитель вместе зовутся люди.
1 friend and 1 neighbour came to the library; 2 people came to the library in all.
лиса и волк вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие фрукты? яблоко и груша вместе зовутся фрукты.
a banana and a peach together are called fruits.
what are tools? a axe and a spade together are called tools.
морковь и капуста вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие овощи? огурец и помидор вместе зовутся овощи.
a grandson and a granddaughter together are called children.
фрукты: яблоко, груша, слива, вишня, апельсин, лимон, банан, персик, виноград, дыня.
what are children? a boy and a girl together are called children.
a teacher and a student together are called people.
кто такие люди? мать и отец вместе зовутся люди.
доктор и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
1 baker and 1 farmer came to the park; 2 people came to the park in all.
кто такие животные? кошка и собака вместе зовутся животные.
a hare and a bear together are called animals.
what are fruits? a plum and a cherry together are called fruits.
молоток и пила вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие инструменты? нож и ножницы вместе зовутся инструменты.
a onion and a garlic together are called vegetables.
what are vegetables? a potato and a marrow together are called vegetables.
children: boy, girl, brother, sister, son, daughter, grandson, granddaughter, nephew, niece.
в семье мать, отец и ребёнок; в семье 3 человека.
a man and a woman together are called people.
кто такие дети? брат и сестра вместе зовутся дети.
продавец и покупатель вместе зовутся люди.
1 worker and 1 driver came to the station; 2 people came to the station in all.
6 friends and 5 neighbours came to the library. how many people came to the library? 11 people came to the library in all.
what are animals? a cow and a horse together are called animals.
яблоко и груша вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие фрукты? банан и персик вместе зовутся фрукты.
a axe and a spade together are called tools.
what are tools? a needle and a thimble together are called tools.
огурец и помидор вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие дети? внук и внучка вместе зовутся дети.
fruits: apple, pear, plum, cherry, orange, lemon, banana, peach, grape, melon.
a boy and a girl together are called children.
кто такие люди? учитель и ученик вместе зовутся люди.
мать и отец вместе зовутся люди.
1 doctor and 1 neighbour came to the market; 2 people came to the market in all.
5 bakers and 3 farmers came to the park. how many people came to the park? 8 people came to the park in all.
кошка и собака вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие животные? заяц и медведь вместе зовутся животные.
a plum and a cherry together are called fruits.
what are fruits? a grape and a melon together are called fruits.
нож и ножницы вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие овощи? лук и чеснок вместе зовутся овощи.
a potato and a marrow together are called vegetables.
what are children? a nephew and a niece together are called children.
the family has a mother, a father and a child; the family has 3 people.
кто такие люди? мужчина и женщина вместе зовутся люди.
брат и сестра вместе зовутся дети.
1 seller and 1 buyer came to the school; 2 people came to the school in all.
4 workers and 1 driver came to the station. how many people came to the station? 5 people came to the station in all.
6 friends and 5 neighbours came to the library; 11 people came to the library in all.
a cow and a horse together are called animals.
what are animals? a hen and a duck together are called animals.
банан и персик вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие инструменты? топор и лопата вместе зовутся инструменты.
a needle and a thimble together are called tools.
what are vegetables? a beet and a turnip together are called vegetables.
внук и внучка вместе зовутся дети.
животные: кошка, собака, корова, лошадь, лиса, волк, заяц, медведь, курица, утка.
кто такие дети? мальчик и девочка вместе зовутся дети.
учитель и ученик вместе зовутся люди.
1 mother and 1 father came to the shop; 2 people came to the shop in all.
3 doctors and 4 neighbours came to the market. how many people came to the market? 7 people came to the market in all.
5 bakers and 3 farmers came to the park; 8 people came to the park in all.
what are people? a friend and a neighbour together are called people.
заяц и медведь вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие фрукты? слива и вишня вместе зовутся фрукты.
a grape and a melon together are called fruits.
what are tools? a screwdriver and a pliers together are called tools.
лук и чеснок вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие овощи? картофель и кабачок вместе зовутся овощи.
a nephew and a niece together are called children.
овощи: морковь, капуста, лук, чеснок, свёкла, репа, огурец, помидор, картофель, кабачок.
мужчина и женщина вместе зовутся люди.
1 brother and 1 sister came to the farm; 2 children came to the farm in all.
2 sellers and 2 buyers came to the school. how many people came to the school? 4 people came to the school in all.
4 workers and 1 driver came to the station; 5 people came to the station in all.
what are people? a baker and a farmer together are called people.
кто такие животные? корова и лошадь вместе зовутся животные.
a hen and a duck together are called animals.
what are fruits? a orange and a lemon together are called fruits.
топор и лопата вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие инструменты? игла и напёрсток вместе зовутся инструменты.
a beet and a turnip together are called vegetables.
what are children? a son and a daughter together are called children.
animals: cat, dog, cow, horse, fox, wolf, hare, bear, hen, duck.
мальчик и девочка вместе зовутся дети.
1 teacher and 1 student came to the library; 2 people came to the library in all.
1 mother and 5 fathers came to the shop. how many people came to the shop? 6 people came to the shop in all.
3 doctors and 4 neighbours came to the market; 7 people came to the market in all.
what are people? a worker and a driver together are called people.
a friend and a neighbour together are called people.
what are animals? a fox and a wolf together are called animals.
слива и вишня вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие фрукты? виноград и дыня вместе зовутся фрукты.
a screwdriver and a pliers together are called tools.
what are vegetables? a carrot and a cabbage together are called vegetables.
картофель и кабачок вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие дети? племянник и племянница вместе зовутся дети.
vegetables: carrot, cabbage, onion, garlic, beet, turnip, cucumber, tomato, potato, marrow.

аня работала 10 дней из 10; аня работала всегда.
mary worked on 2 days of 10 days; mary worked twice.
том считал шариков один раз и потом ещё раз; всего том считал два раза.
ivan counted the toys once and counted the toys again; ivan counted the toys twice in all.
иван работал 7 дней из 10; иван работал часто.
peter worked on 1 day of 10 days; peter worked once.
аня считала страниц один раз и потом ещё раз; всего аня считала два раза.
mary counted the flowers once and counted the flowers again; mary counted the flowers twice in all.
маша работала 2 дня из 10; маша работала два раза.
ira worked on 0 days of 10 days; ira never worked.
иван считал игрушек один раз и потом ещё раз; всего иван считал два раза.
ann worked on 10 days of 10 days; ann always worked.
пётр работал 1 день из 10; пётр работал один раз.
tom counted the balls once and counted the balls again; tom counted the balls twice in all.
маша считала цветков один раз и потом ещё раз; всего маша считала два раза.
ivan worked on 7 days of 10 days; ivan often worked.
ира работала 0 дней из 10; ира никогда не работала.
ann counted the pages once and counted the pages again; ann counted the pages twice in all.

mary counted 21 pens; 21 pens are about 20 pens.
том насчитал 48 монет; это почти 50 монет.
маша насчитала 21 ручка; это примерно 20 ручек.
ira counted 39 apples; 39 apples are nearly 40 apples.
ivan counted 32 pencils; 32 pencils are about 30 pencils.
ира насчитала 39 яблок; это почти 40 яблок.
иван насчитал 32 карандаша; это примерно 30 карандашей.
peter counted 48 books; 48 books are nearly 50 books.
ann counted 41 cards; 41 cards are about 40 cards.
пётр насчитал 48 книг; это почти 50 книг.
аня насчитала 41 карта; это примерно 40 карт.
mary counted 19 pens; 19 pens are nearly 20 pens.
tom counted 52 coins; 52 coins are about 50 coins.
маша насчитала 19 ручек; это почти 20 ручек.
том насчитал 52 монеты; это примерно 50 монет.
ivan counted 28 pencils; 28 pencils are nearly 30 pencils.
ira counted 41 apples; 41 apples are about 40 apples.
иван насчитал 28 карандашей; это почти 30 карандашей.
ира насчитала 41 яблоко; это примерно 40 яблок.
ann counted 39 cards; 39 cards are nearly 40 cards.
peter counted 52 books; 52 books are about 50 books.
аня насчитала 39 карт; это почти 40 карт.
пётр насчитал 52 книги; это примерно 50 книг.
tom counted 48 coins; 48 coins are nearly 50 coins.

почему у ани 3 карты? потому что аня купила 2 карты, а потом ещё 1 карта.
в коробке лежат карта, цветок и книга; в коробке лежат 3 предмета.
почему у тома 5 чашек? потому что том купил 3 чашки, а потом ещё 2 чашки.
why does ira have 6 cards? because ira bought 4 cards and then 2 cards more.
peter bought cake, bread and salt at the market; peter bought 3 things in all.
why does peter have 8 cups? because peter bought 5 cups and then 3 cups more.
ivan bought salt, sugar and tea at the store; ivan bought 3 things in all.
why does mary have 10 pages? because mary bought 6 pages and then 4 pages more.
tom bought tea, coffee and milk at the shop; tom bought 3 things in all.
why does ivan have 12 books? because ivan bought 7 books and then 5 books more.
в коробке лежат чашка, коробка и игрушка; в коробке лежат 3 предмета.
why does ann have 3 cards? because ann bought 2 cards and then 1 card more.
в сумке лежат игрушка, карта и цветок; в сумке лежат 3 предмета.
why does tom have 5 cups? because tom bought 3 cups and then 2 cups more.
в корзине лежат цветок, книга и ручка; в корзине лежат 3 предмета.
ira bought water, cake and bread at the store; ira bought 3 things in all.
почему у иры 6 карт? потому что ира купила 4 карты, а потом ещё 2 карты.
mary bought bread, salt and sugar at the shop; mary bought 3 things in all.
почему у петра 8 чашек? потому что пётр купил 5 чашек, а потом ещё 3 чашки.
ann bought sugar, tea and coffee at the market; ann bought 3 things in all.
почему у маши 10 страниц? потому что маша купила 6 страниц, а потом ещё 4 страницы.
в сумке лежат монета, чашка и коробка; в сумке лежат 3 предмета.
почему у ивана 12 книг? потому что иван купил 7 книг, а потом ещё 5 книг.
в корзине лежат коробка, игрушка и карта; в корзине лежат 3 предмета.

mary bought 6 pages and 5 boxes at the library; mary bought 11 things in all: 6 + 5 = 11.
peter bought 4 pencils and 2 cards at the store. how many things did peter buy? peter bought 6 things in all: 4 + 2 = 6.
иван купил 7 шариков и 2 цветка в школе; всего иван купил 9 предметов: 7 + 2 = 9.
маша купила 5 карт и 5 коробок на вокзале. сколько предметов купила маша? всего маша купила 10 предметов: 5 + 5 = 10.
tom bought 2 books and 2 apples at the market; tom bought 4 things in all: 2 + 2 = 4.
mary bought 6 pages and 5 boxes at the library. how many things did mary buy? mary bought 11 things in all: 6 + 5 = 11.
пётр купил 4 карандаша и 2 карты в магазине; всего пётр купил 6 предметов: 4 + 2 = 6.
иван купил 7 шариков и 2 цветка в школе. сколько предметов купил иван? всего иван купил 9 предметов: 7 + 2 = 9.
peter bought 5 toys and 2 cards at the station; peter bought 7 things in all: 5 + 2 = 7.
tom bought 2 books and 2 apples at the market. how many things did tom buy? tom bought 4 things in all: 2 + 2 = 4.
маша купила 6 страниц и 5 коробок в библиотеке; всего маша купила 11 предметов: 6 + 5 = 11.
пётр купил 4 карандаша и 2 карты в магазине. сколько предметов купил пётр? всего пётр купил 6 предметов: 4 + 2 = 6.
ann bought 8 apples and 5 pages at the park; ann bought 13 things in all: 8 + 5 = 13.
peter bought 5 toys and 2 cards at the station. how many things did peter buy? peter bought 7 things in all: 5 + 2 = 7.
том купил 2 книги и 2 яблока на рынке; всего том купил 4 предмета: 2 + 2 = 4.
маша купила 6 страниц и 5 коробок в библиотеке. сколько предметов купила маша? всего маша купила 11 предметов: 6 + 5 = 11.
mary bought 5 cards and 5 boxes at the station; mary bought 10 things in all: 5 + 5 = 10.
ann bought 8 apples and 5 pages at the park. how many things did ann buy? ann bought 13 things in all: 8 + 5 = 13.
пётр купил 5 игрушек и 2 карты на вокзале; всего пётр купил 7 предметов: 5 + 2 = 7.
том купил 2 книги и 2 яблока на рынке. сколько предметов купил том? всего том купил 4 предмета: 2 + 2 = 4.
ivan bought 7 balls and 2 flowers at the school; ivan bought 9 things in all: 7 + 2 = 9.
mary bought 5 cards and 5 boxes at the station. how many things did mary buy? mary bought 10 things in all: 5 + 5 = 10.
аня купила 8 яблок и 5 страниц в парке; всего аня купила 13 предметов: 8 + 5 = 13.
пётр купил 5 игрушек и 2 карты на вокзале. сколько предметов купил пётр? всего пётр купил 7 предметов: 5 + 2 = 7.
peter bought 4 pencils and 2 cards at the store; peter bought 6 things in all: 4 + 2 = 6.
ivan bought 7 balls and 2 flowers at the school. how many things did ivan buy? ivan bought 9 things in all: 7 + 2 = 9.
маша купила 5 карт и 5 коробок на вокзале; всего маша купила 10 предметов: 5 + 5 = 10.
аня купила 8 яблок и 5 страниц в парке. сколько предметов купила аня? всего аня купила 13 предметов: 8 + 5 = 13.

сумка на стуле.
машина на парковке, а парковка на улице; значит машина на улице.
поле на ферме, а ферма в деревне. где поле? поле в деревне.
ключ не в цветке: цветок не на пути от ключа до городка.
the school is on the street.
the store is on the road, and the road is in the city; so the store is in the city.
the window is on the wall, and the wall is in the room. where is the window? the window is in the room.
the book is not on the road: the road is not on the path from the book to the town.
монета в коробке.
сад в доме, а дом на улице; значит сад на улице.
письмо на столе, а стол в кухне. где письмо? письмо в кухне.
школа не в монете: монета не на пути от школы до городка.
the toy is in the basket.
the bag is on the chair, and the chair is in the room; so the bag is in the room.
the car is in the parking lot, and the parking lot is on the street. where is the car? the car is on the street.
the field is not in the river: the river is not on the path from the field to the village.
ключ в коробке.
тарелка на полке, а полка в кухне; значит тарелка в кухне.
лавка на улице, а улица в городке. где лавка? лавка в городке.
игрушка не в классе: класс не на пути от игрушки до городка.
the book is on the table.
the coin is in the box, and the box is on the shelf; so the coin is on the shelf.
the garden is in the house, and the house is on the street. where is the garden? the garden is on the street.
the letter is not on the hat: the hat is not on the path from the letter to the town.
школа на улице.
магазин на дороге, а дорога в городе; значит магазин в городе.
окно на стене, а стена в комнате. где окно? окно в комнате.
книга не на дороге: дорога не на пути от книги до городка.
the field is on the farm.
the key is in the box, and the box is on the shelf; so the key is on the shelf.
the plate is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen. where is the plate? the plate is in the kitchen.
the shop is not on the table: the table is not on the path from the shop to the town.
игрушка в корзине.
сумка на стуле, а стул в комнате; значит сумка в комнате.
машина на парковке, а парковка на улице. где машина? машина на улице.
поле не в реке: река не на пути от поля до деревни.
the letter is on the table.
the school is on the street, and the street is in the town; so the school is in the town.
the store is on the road, and the road is in the city. where is the store? the store is in the city.
the window is not in the office: the office is not on the path from the window to the town.
книга на столе.
монета в коробке, а коробка на полке; значит монета на полке.
сад в доме, а дом на улице. где сад? сад на улице.
письмо не на шляпе: шляпа не на пути от письма до городка.
the shop is on the street.
the toy is in the basket, and the basket is on the floor; so the toy is on the floor.
the bag is on the chair, and the chair is in the room. where is the bag? the bag is in the room.
the car is not in the city: the city is not on the path from the car to the town.
поле на ферме.
ключ в коробке, а коробка на полке; значит ключ на полке.
тарелка на полке, а полка в кухне. где тарелка? тарелка в кухне.
лавка не на столе: стол не на пути от лавки до городка.
the window is on the wall.
the book is on the table, and the table is in the kitchen; so the book is in the kitchen.
the coin is in the box, and the box is on the shelf. where is the coin? the coin is on the shelf.
the garden is not on the stone: the stone is not on the path from the garden to the town.
письмо на столе.
школа на улице, а улица в городке; значит школа в городке.
магазин на дороге, а дорога в городе. где магазин? магазин в городе.
окно не в конторе: контора не на пути от окна до городка.
the car is in the parking lot.
the field is on the farm, and the farm is in the village; so the field is in the village.
the key is in the box, and the box is on the shelf. where is the key? the key is on the shelf.
the plate is not in the coin: the coin is not on the path from the plate to the town.
лавка на улице.
игрушка в корзине, а корзина на полу; значит игрушка на полу.
сумка на стуле, а стул в комнате. где сумка? сумка в комнате.
машина не в городе: город не на пути от машины до городка.
the garden is in the house.
the letter is on the table, and the table is in the kitchen; so the letter is in the kitchen.
the school is on the street, and the street is in the town. where is the school? the school is in the town.
the store is not on the floor: the floor is not on the path from the store to the city.
окно на стене.
книга на столе, а стол в кухне; значит книга в кухне.
монета в коробке, а коробка на полке. где монета? монета на полке.
сад не на камне: камень не на пути от сада до городка.
the plate is on the shelf.
the shop is on the street, and the street is in the town; so the shop is in the town.
the toy is in the basket, and the basket is on the floor. where is the toy? the toy is on the floor.
the bag is not in the park: the park is not on the path from the bag to the town.
машина на парковке.
поле на ферме, а ферма в деревне; значит поле в деревне.
ключ в коробке, а коробка на полке. где ключ? ключ на полке.
тарелка не в монете: монета не на пути от тарелки до городка.
the store is on the road.
the window is on the wall, and the wall is in the room; so the window is in the room.
the book is on the table, and the table is in the kitchen. where is the book? the book is in the kitchen.
the coin is not in the river: the river is not on the path from the coin to the town.
сад в доме.
письмо на столе, а стол в кухне; значит письмо в кухне.
школа на улице, а улица в городке. где школа? школа в городке.
магазин не на полу: пол не на пути от магазина до города.
the bag is on the chair.
the car is in the parking lot, and the parking lot is on the street; so the car is on the street.
the field is on the farm, and the farm is in the village. where is the field? the field is in the village.
the key is not in the flower: the flower is not on the path from the key to the town.
тарелка на полке.
лавка на улице, а улица в городке; значит лавка в городке.
игрушка в корзине, а корзина на полу. где игрушка? игрушка на полу.
сумка не в парке: парк не на пути от сумки до городка.
the coin is in the box.
the garden is in the house, and the house is on the street; so the garden is on the street.
the letter is on the table, and the table is in the kitchen. where is the letter? the letter is in the kitchen.
the school is not in the coin: the coin is not on the path from the school to the town.
магазин на дороге.
окно на стене, а стена в комнате; значит окно в комнате.
книга на столе, а стол в кухне. где книга? книга в кухне.
монета не в реке: река не на пути от монеты до городка.
the key is in the box.
the plate is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen; so the plate is in the kitchen.
the shop is on the street, and the street is in the town. where is the shop? the shop is in the town.
the toy is not in the class: the class is not on the path from the toy to the town.

день позже утра.
день раньше вечера.
что раньше дня? утро раньше дня.
peter left home in the morning and arrived at the school in the day; peter left home before peter arrived at the school.
пётр работал утром, а маша отдыхала утром; они делали это в одно время.
ann worked in the morning and rested in the night; ann worked before ann rested.
the night comes after the evening.
today comes after yesterday.
tom left home in the evening and arrived at the office in the night; tom left home before tom arrived at the office.
the evening comes after the morning.
the day comes before the night.
что раньше вечера? день раньше вечера.
ivan works now and rests later; ivan works before ivan rests.
the morning comes before the day.
аня работала утром, а отдыхала ночью; значит аня работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
ночь позже вечера.
tomorrow comes after today.
peter works now and rests later; peter works before peter rests.
вечер позже утра.
день раньше ночи.
что раньше ночи? вечер раньше ночи.
иван ушёл из дома днём, а пришёл на рынке вечером; значит иван ушёл раньше, чем пришёл.
утро раньше дня.
ann worked in the day and rested in the evening; ann worked before ann rested.
what comes before the day? the morning comes before the day.
peter worked in the morning and mary rested in the morning; peter worked while mary rested.
пётр ушёл из дома утром, а пришёл на вокзале днём; значит пётр ушёл раньше, чем пришёл.
the night comes after the morning.
the evening comes before the night.
yesterday comes before today.
tom worked in the evening and ira rested in the evening; tom worked while ira rested.
the morning comes before the evening.
аня работала днём, а отдыхала вечером; значит аня работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
what comes before the evening? the day comes before the evening.
пётр работал утром, а маша отдыхала утром; они делали это в одно время.
в неделе 7 дней, а в выходных 2 дня; в неделе на 5 дней больше.
ночь позже утра.
вечер раньше ночи.
today comes before tomorrow.
том работал вечером, а ира отдыхала вечером; они делали это в одно время.
утро раньше вечера.
tom worked during the day and rested during the night; tom worked before tom rested.
what comes before the night? the evening comes before the night.
ivan left home in the day and arrived at the market in the evening; ivan left home before ivan arrived at the market.
mary worked in the morning and rested in the day; mary worked before mary rested.
the evening comes after the day.
the day comes next after the morning.
peter works now and rests later; peter works before peter rests.
peter left home in the morning and arrived at the station in the day; peter left home before peter arrived at the station.
the morning comes before the night.
том работал днём, а отдыхал ночью; значит том работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
the morning comes early and the night comes late.
tom works now and rests later; tom works before tom rests.
маша работала утром, а отдыхала днём; значит маша работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
вечер позже дня.
the evening comes next after the day.
пётр ушёл из дома утром, а пришёл в школе днём; значит пётр ушёл раньше, чем пришёл.
the week has 7 days and the weekend has 2 days; the week has 5 days more than the weekend.
утро раньше ночи.
ira worked in the evening and rested in the night; ira worked before ira rested.
вчера раньше, чем сегодня.
том ушёл из дома вечером, а пришёл в конторе ночью; значит том ушёл раньше, чем пришёл.
ivan worked during the morning and rested during the evening; ivan worked before ivan rested.
the night comes after the day.
the night comes next after the evening.
ivan worked in the day and ann rested in the day; ivan worked while ann rested.
the day comes after the morning.
the day comes before the evening.
ира работала вечером, а отдыхала ночью; значит ира работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
сегодня раньше, чем завтра.
peter worked in the morning and mary rested in the morning; peter worked while mary rested.
иван работал утром, а отдыхал вечером; значит иван работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
ночь позже дня.
the morning comes first and the night comes last.
иван работал днём, а аня отдыхала днём; они делали это в одно время.

today ann takes a key; yesterday ann took a key.
today ira and peter read pages; yesterday ira and peter read pages.
the past of fill is filled.
today ann wants a ticket. what is the past of want? the past of want is wanted.
today mary realizes the answer; yesterday mary realized the answer.
today ann and tom keep shirts; yesterday ann and tom kept shirts.
сегодня аня говорит ответ; вчера аня говорила ответ.
глагол «приносить» в прошедшем даёт «приносил».
the past of take is took.
today ira reads a page. what is the past of read? the past of read is read.
today ann shares a cake; yesterday ann shared a cake.
today ira and peter think about the answer; yesterday ira and peter thought about the answer.
the past of realize is realized.
today ann keeps a shirt. what is the past of keep? the past of keep is kept.
сегодня ира думает об ответе; вчера ира думала об ответе.
глагол «приходить» в прошедшем даёт «приходил».
today ira breaks a plate; yesterday ira broke a plate.
today mary and ivan drink cups of tea; yesterday mary and ivan drank cups of tea.
the past of share is shared.
today ira thinks about the answer. what is the past of think? the past of think is thought.
today ann remains at home; yesterday ann remained at home.
глагол «продавать» в прошедшем даёт «продавал».
сегодня маша видит дверь; вчера маша видела дверь.
глагол «наполнять» в прошедшем даёт «наполнял».
the past of break is broke.
today mary drinks a cup of tea. what is the past of drink? the past of drink is drank.
today ira saves a coin; yesterday ira saved a coin.
today mary and ivan tell stories; yesterday mary and ivan told stories.
the past of remain is remained.
глагол «брать» в прошедшем даёт «брал».
сегодня аня смотрит в окно; вчера аня смотрела в окно.
глагол «делить» в прошедшем даёт «делил».
today mary loses a ticket; yesterday mary lost a ticket.
today ann and tom play in the yard; yesterday ann and tom played in the yard.
the past of save is saved.
today mary tells a story. what is the past of tell? the past of tell is told.
today ira arrives at the school; yesterday ira arrived at the school.
глагол «ломать» в прошедшем даёт «ломал».
сегодня ира хочет билет; вчера ира хотела билет.
глагол «платить» в прошедшем даёт «платил».
the past of lose is lost.
today ann plays in the yard. what is the past of play? the past of play is played.
today mary earns a coin; yesterday mary earned a coin.
today ann and tom answer questions; yesterday ann and tom answered questions.
the past of arrive is arrived.
глагол «терять» в прошедшем даёт «терял».
сегодня маша заканчивает страницу; вчера маша заканчивала страницу.
глагол «тратить» в прошедшем даёт «тратил».
today ann walks to the shop; yesterday ann walked to the shop.
today ira and peter start lists; yesterday ira and peter started lists.
the past of earn is earned.
today ann answers a question. what is the past of answer? the past of answer is answered.
today mary brings a bag; yesterday mary brought a bag.
глагол «ходить» в прошедшем даёт «ходил».
сегодня аня бегает в парке; вчера аня бегала в парке.
today mary and ivan sell cards; yesterday mary and ivan sold cards.
the past of walk is walked.
today ira starts a list. what is the past of start? the past of start is started.
today ann wants a ticket; yesterday ann wanted a ticket.
today ira and peter look at the window; yesterday ira and peter looked at the window.
the past of bring is brought.
глагол «работать» в прошедшем даёт «работал».
сегодня ира пьёт чай; вчера ира пила чай.
today mary sells a card. what is the past of sell? the past of sell is sold.
today ira reads a page; yesterday ira read a page.
today mary and ivan fill bottles; yesterday mary and ivan filled bottles.
the past of want is wanted.
today ira looks at the window. what is the past of look? the past of look is looked.
today ann keeps a shirt; yesterday ann kept a shirt.
глагол «спрашивать» в прошедшем даёт «спрашивал».
сегодня маша приносит сумку; вчера маша приносила сумку.
today ann and tom take keys; yesterday ann and tom took keys.
the past of read is read.
today mary fills a bottle. what is the past of fill? the past of fill is filled.
today ira thinks about the answer; yesterday ira thought about the answer.
today mary and ivan realize the answer; yesterday mary and ivan realized the answer.
the past of keep is kept.
глагол «говорить» в прошедшем даёт «говорил».
сегодня аня приходит в школу; вчера аня приходила в школу.
today ann takes a key. what is the past of take? the past of take is took.
today mary drinks a cup of tea; yesterday mary drank a cup of tea.
today ann and tom share cakes; yesterday ann and tom shared cakes.
the past of think is thought.
today mary realizes the answer. what is the past of realize? the past of realize is realized.
сегодня маша продаёт карту; вчера маша продавала карту.
глагол «думать» в прошедшем даёт «думал».
сегодня ира наполняет бутылку; вчера ира наполняла бутылку.
today ira and peter break plates; yesterday ira and peter broke plates.
the past of drink is drank.
today ann shares a cake. what is the past of share? the past of share is shared.
today mary tells a story; yesterday mary told a story.
today ann and tom remain at home; yesterday ann and tom remained at home.
сегодня аня берёт ключ; вчера аня брала ключ.
глагол «видеть» в прошедшем даёт «видел».
сегодня маша делит пирог; вчера маша делила пирог.
today ira breaks a plate. what is the past of break? the past of break is broke.
today ann plays in the yard; yesterday ann played in the yard.
today ira and peter save coins; yesterday ira and peter saved coins.
the past of tell is told.
today ann remains at home. what is the past of remain? the past of remain is remained.
сегодня ира ломает тарелку; вчера ира ломала тарелку.
глагол «смотреть» в прошедшем даёт «смотрел».
сегодня аня платит за билет; вчера аня платила за билет.
today mary and ivan lose tickets; yesterday mary and ivan lost tickets.
the past of play is played.
today ira saves a coin. what is the past of save? the past of save is saved.
today ann answers a question; yesterday ann answered a question.
today ira and peter arrive at the school; yesterday ira and peter arrived at the school.
сегодня маша теряет билет; вчера маша теряла билет.
глагол «хотеть» в прошедшем даёт «хотел».
сегодня ира тратит рубли; вчера ира тратила рубли.
today mary loses a ticket. what is the past of lose? the past of lose is lost.
today ira starts a list; yesterday ira started a list.
today mary and ivan earn coins; yesterday mary and ivan earned coins.
the past of answer is answered.
today ira arrives at the school. what is the past of arrive? the past of arrive is arrived.
сегодня аня ходит в лавку; вчера аня ходила в лавку.
глагол «заканчивать» в прошедшем даёт «заканчивал».
today mary sells a card; yesterday mary sold a card.
today ann and tom walk to the shop; yesterday ann and tom walked to the shop.
the past of start is started.
today mary earns a coin. what is the past of earn? the past of earn is earned.
today ira looks at the window; yesterday ira looked at the window.
today mary and ivan bring bags; yesterday mary and ivan brought bags.
сегодня ира работает в конторе; вчера ира работала в конторе.
глагол «бегать» в прошедшем даёт «бегал».
the past of sell is sold.
today ann walks to the shop. what is the past of walk? the past of walk is walked.
today mary fills a bottle; yesterday mary filled a bottle.
today ann and tom want tickets; yesterday ann and tom wanted tickets.
the past of look is looked.
today mary brings a bag. what is the past of bring? the past of bring is brought.
сегодня маша спрашивает о цене; вчера маша спрашивала о цене.
глагол «пить» в прошедшем даёт «пил».

peter has 8 boxes, mary has 5 boxes and ivan has 1 box; peter has the most boxes and ivan has the least boxes.
mary has 10 cups, and ivan has 6 cups; mary has 4 more cups than ivan.
у маши 10 чашек, и у ивана 10 чашек; у них поровну чашек.
ivan bought 12 flowers, but ann bought just 7 flowers; 7 flowers are fewer than 12 flowers, and ann bought less than ivan.
ann has 8 toys, and tom has 8 toys; the two counts are equal.
tom has 6 pages, and ira has 3 pages; tom has twice as many pages as ira.
peter has 4 balls, and ira has 5 balls; peter has 1 fewer ball than ira.
у иры 5 шариков, а у петра 4 шарика; вместе у них 9 шариков.
peter and mary gave 5 apples to each other; peter gave 5 apples to mary, and mary gave 5 apples to peter.
ira bought 6 bags of sugar, and ivan bought 4 bags of sugar; ivan bought less sugar than ira.
peter bought 8 boxes, but mary bought just 5 boxes; 5 boxes are fewer than 8 boxes, and mary bought less than peter.
mary has 10 cups, and ivan has 10 cups; the two counts are equal.
ivan has 14 flowers, and ann has 7 flowers; ivan has twice as many flowers as ann.
tom has 2 toys, and ann has 8 toys; tom has 6 fewer toys than ann.
у ани 8 игрушек, а у тома 2 игрушки; вместе у них 10 игрушек.
tom and ira gave 3 pages to each other; tom gave 3 pages to ira, and ira gave 3 pages to tom.
ira has 5 balls, and peter has 4 balls; the two counts are different.
peter has 10 apples, and mary has 5 apples; peter has double the apples of mary.
mary bought 7 cups of coffee, and tom bought 5 cups of coffee; tom bought less coffee than mary.
peter has 10 boxes, and mary has 5 boxes; peter has twice as many boxes as mary.
ivan has 6 cups, and mary has 10 cups; ivan has 4 fewer cups than mary.
у маши 10 чашек, а у ивана 6 чашек; вместе у них 16 чашек.
ivan and ann gave 7 flowers to each other; ivan gave 7 flowers to ann, and ann gave 7 flowers to ivan.
ann has 8 toys, and tom has 2 toys; the two counts are different.
tom has 6 pages, and ira has 3 pages; tom has double the pages of ira.
ira has 5 balls, and peter has 5 balls; ira has the same number of balls as peter.
у иры 5 шариков, а у петра 4 шарика. на сколько шариков больше у иры? у иры на 1 шарик больше, чем у петра.
у петра 7 яблок, а у маши 5 яблок; у петра на 2 яблока больше, чем у маши.
ира купила 6 коробок сахара, а иван купил 4 коробки сахара; у ивана сахара меньше, чем у иры.
peter and mary gave 5 boxes to each other; peter gave 5 boxes to mary, and mary gave 5 boxes to peter.
mary has 10 cups, and ivan has 6 cups; the two counts are different.
ivan has 14 flowers, and ann has 7 flowers; ivan has double the flowers of ann.
ann has 8 toys, and tom has 8 toys; ann has the same number of toys as tom.
у ани 8 игрушек, а у тома 2 игрушки. на сколько игрушек больше у ани? у ани на 6 игрушек больше, чем у тома.
у тома 10 страниц, а у иры 3 страницы; у тома на 7 страниц больше, чем у иры.
ira has 5 balls, and peter has 4 balls; together they have 9 balls, and apart they have 5 balls and 4 balls.
peter has 15 apples, and mary has 5 apples; peter has triple the apples of mary.
маша купила 7 чашек кофе, а том купил 5 чашек кофе; у тома кофе меньше, чем у маши.
peter has 10 boxes, and mary has 5 boxes; peter has double the boxes of mary.
mary has 10 cups, and ivan has 10 cups; mary has the same number of cups as ivan.
у маши 10 чашек, а у ивана 6 чашек. на сколько чашек больше у маши? у маши на 4 чашки больше, чем у ивана.
у ивана 12 цветков, а у ани 7 цветков; у ивана на 5 цветков больше, чем у ани.
ann has 8 toys, and tom has 2 toys; together they have 10 toys, and apart they have 8 toys and 2 toys.
tom has 9 pages, and ira has 3 pages; tom has triple the pages of ira.
ira has 5 balls, and peter has 4 balls. how many more balls does ira have than peter? ira has 1 more ball than peter.
у иры 8 шариков, а у петра 4 шарика; у иры вдвое больше, чем у петра.
у маши 5 яблок, а у петра 7 яблок; у маши на 2 яблока меньше, чем у петра.
peter bought 9 bags of salt, and ann bought 5 bags of salt; ann bought less salt than peter.
у петра 8 коробок, а у маши 5 коробок; у петра на 3 коробки больше, чем у маши.
mary has 10 cups, and ivan has 6 cups; together they have 16 cups, and apart they have 10 cups and 6 cups.
ivan has 21 flowers, and ann has 7 flowers; ivan has triple the flowers of ann.
ann has 8 toys, and tom has 2 toys. how many more toys does ann have than tom? ann has 6 more toys than tom.
у ани 4 игрушки, а у тома 2 игрушки; у ани вдвое больше, чем у тома.
у иры 3 страницы, а у тома 10 страниц; у иры на 7 страниц меньше, чем у тома.
ira has 5 balls, and peter has 4 balls; the total comes to 9 balls altogether.
peter has 10 apples, and mary has 5 apples; mary has half the apples of peter.
ivan bought 5 bottles of milk, and ira bought 1 bottle of milk; ira bought less milk than ivan.
peter has 15 boxes, and mary has 5 boxes; peter has triple the boxes of mary.
mary has 10 cups, and ivan has 6 cups. how many more cups does mary have than ivan? mary has 4 more cups than ivan.
у маши 12 чашек, а у ивана 6 чашек; у маши вдвое больше, чем у ивана.
у ани 7 цветков, а у ивана 12 цветков; у ани на 5 цветков меньше, чем у ивана.
ann has 8 toys, and tom has 2 toys; the total comes to 10 toys altogether.
tom has 6 pages, and ira has 3 pages; ira has half the pages of tom.
ira has 5 balls, peter has 4 balls and mary has 1 ball; ira has the most balls and mary has the least balls.
peter has 7 apples, and mary has 5 apples; peter has 2 more apples than mary.
у петра 7 яблок, и у маши 7 яблок; у них поровну яблок.
пётр купил 9 коробок соли, а аня купила 5 коробок соли; у ани соли меньше, чем у петра.
у маши 5 коробок, а у петра 8 коробок; у маши на 3 коробки меньше, чем у петра.
mary has 10 cups, and ivan has 6 cups; the total comes to 16 cups altogether.
ivan has 14 flowers, and ann has 7 flowers; ann has half the flowers of ivan.
ann has 8 toys, tom has 2 toys and ira has 1 toy; ann has the most toys and ira has the least toys.
tom has 10 pages, and ira has 3 pages; tom has 7 more pages than ira.
у тома 10 страниц, и у иры 10 страниц; у них поровну страниц.
ira bought 5 balls, but peter bought just 4 balls; 4 balls are fewer than 5 balls, and peter bought less than ira.
peter has 7 apples, and mary has 7 apples; the two counts are equal.
иван купил 5 чашек молока, а ира купила 1 чашка молока; у иры молока меньше, чем у ивана.
peter has 10 boxes, and mary has 5 boxes; mary has half the boxes of peter.
mary has 10 cups, ivan has 6 cups and ann has 1 cup; mary has the most cups and ann has the least cups.
ivan has 12 flowers, and ann has 7 flowers; ivan has 5 more flowers than ann.
у ивана 12 цветков, и у ани 12 цветков; у них поровну цветков.
ann bought 8 toys, but tom bought just 2 toys; 2 toys are fewer than 8 toys, and tom bought less than ann.
tom has 10 pages, and ira has 10 pages; the two counts are equal.
ira has 8 balls, and peter has 4 balls; ira has twice as many balls as peter.
mary has 5 apples, and peter has 7 apples; mary has 2 fewer apples than peter.
у петра 7 яблок, а у маши 5 яблок; вместе у них 12 яблок.
peter has 8 boxes, and mary has 5 boxes; peter has 3 more boxes than mary.
у петра 8 коробок, и у маши 8 коробок; у них поровну коробок.
mary bought 10 cups, but ivan bought just 6 cups; 6 cups are fewer than 10 cups, and ivan bought less than mary.
ivan has 12 flowers, and ann has 12 flowers; the two counts are equal.
ann has 4 toys, and tom has 2 toys; ann has twice as many toys as tom.
ira has 3 pages, and tom has 10 pages; ira has 7 fewer pages than tom.
у тома 10 страниц, а у иры 3 страницы; вместе у них 13 страниц.
ira and peter gave 4 balls to each other; ira gave 4 balls to peter, and peter gave 4 balls to ira.
peter has 7 apples, and mary has 5 apples; the two counts are different.
ann bought 4 bottles of water, and peter bought 2 bottles of water; peter bought less water than ann.
peter has 8 boxes, and mary has 8 boxes; the two counts are equal.
mary has 12 cups, and ivan has 6 cups; mary has twice as many cups as ivan.
ann has 7 flowers, and ivan has 12 flowers; ann has 5 fewer flowers than ivan.
у ивана 12 цветков, а у ани 7 цветков; вместе у них 19 цветков.
ann and tom gave 2 toys to each other; ann gave 2 toys to tom, and tom gave 2 toys to ann.
tom has 10 pages, and ira has 3 pages; the two counts are different.
ira has 8 balls, and peter has 4 balls; ira has double the balls of peter.
peter has 7 apples, and mary has 7 apples; peter has the same number of apples as mary.
у петра 7 яблок, а у маши 5 яблок. на сколько яблок больше у петра? у петра на 2 яблока больше, чем у маши.
mary has 5 boxes, and peter has 8 boxes; mary has 3 fewer boxes than peter.
у петра 8 коробок, а у маши 5 коробок; вместе у них 13 коробок.
mary and ivan gave 6 cups to each other; mary gave 6 cups to ivan, and ivan gave 6 cups to mary.
ivan has 12 flowers, and ann has 7 flowers; the two counts are different.
ann has 4 toys, and tom has 2 toys; ann has double the toys of tom.
tom has 10 pages, and ira has 10 pages; tom has the same number of pages as ira.
у тома 10 страниц, а у иры 3 страницы. на сколько страниц больше у тома? у тома на 7 страниц больше, чем у иры.
у иры 5 шариков, а у петра 4 шарика; у иры на 1 шарик больше, чем у петра.
peter has 7 apples, and mary has 5 apples; together they have 12 apples, and apart they have 7 apples and 5 apples.
аня купила 4 чашки воды, а пётр купил 2 чашки воды; у петра воды меньше, чем у ани.
peter has 8 boxes, and mary has 5 boxes; the two counts are different.
mary has 12 cups, and ivan has 6 cups; mary has double the cups of ivan.
ivan has 12 flowers, and ann has 12 flowers; ivan has the same number of flowers as ann.
у ивана 12 цветков, а у ани 7 цветков. на сколько цветков больше у ивана? у ивана на 5 цветков больше, чем у ани.
у ани 8 игрушек, а у тома 2 игрушки; у ани на 6 игрушек больше, чем у тома.
tom has 10 pages, and ira has 3 pages; together they have 13 pages, and apart they have 10 pages and 3 pages.
ira has 12 balls, and peter has 4 balls; ira has triple the balls of peter.
peter has 7 apples, and mary has 5 apples. how many more apples does peter have than mary? peter has 2 more apples than mary.
у петра 10 яблок, а у маши 5 яблок; у петра вдвое больше, чем у маши.
peter has 8 boxes, and mary has 8 boxes; peter has the same number of boxes as mary.
у петра 8 коробок, а у маши 5 коробок. на сколько коробок больше у петра? у петра на 3 коробки больше, чем у маши.
у маши 10 чашек, а у ивана 6 чашек; у маши на 4 чашки больше, чем у ивана.
ivan has 12 flowers, and ann has 7 flowers; together they have 19 flowers, and apart they have 12 flowers and 7 flowers.
ann has 6 toys, and tom has 2 toys; ann has triple the toys of tom.
tom has 10 pages, and ira has 3 pages. how many more pages does tom have than ira? tom has 7 more pages than ira.
у тома 6 страниц, а у иры 3 страницы; у тома вдвое больше, чем у иры.
у петра 4 шарика, а у иры 5 шариков; у петра на 1 шарик меньше, чем у иры.
peter has 7 apples, and mary has 5 apples; the total comes to 12 apples altogether.
tom bought 7 loaves of bread, and mary bought 3 loaves of bread; mary bought less bread than tom.
peter has 8 boxes, and mary has 5 boxes; together they have 13 boxes, and apart they have 8 boxes and 5 boxes.
mary has 18 cups, and ivan has 6 cups; mary has triple the cups of ivan.
ivan has 12 flowers, and ann has 7 flowers. how many more flowers does ivan have than ann? ivan has 5 more flowers than ann.
у ивана 14 цветков, а у ани 7 цветков; у ивана вдвое больше, чем у ани.
у тома 2 игрушки, а у ани 8 игрушек; у тома на 6 игрушек меньше, чем у ани.
tom has 10 pages, and ira has 3 pages; the total comes to 13 pages altogether.
ira has 8 balls, and peter has 4 balls; peter has half the balls of ira.
peter has 7 apples, mary has 5 apples and ivan has 1 apple; peter has the most apples and ivan has the least apples.
peter bought 8 cups of tea, and ann bought 4 cups of tea; ann bought less tea than peter.
peter has 8 boxes, and mary has 5 boxes. how many more boxes does peter have than mary? peter has 3 more boxes than mary.
у петра 10 коробок, а у маши 5 коробок; у петра вдвое больше, чем у маши.
у ивана 6 чашек, а у маши 10 чашек; у ивана на 4 чашки меньше, чем у маши.
ivan has 12 flowers, and ann has 7 flowers; the total comes to 19 flowers altogether.
ann has 4 toys, and tom has 2 toys; tom has half the toys of ann.
tom has 10 pages, ira has 3 pages and peter has 1 page; tom has the most pages and peter has the least pages.
ira has 5 balls, and peter has 4 balls; ira has 1 more ball than peter.
у иры 5 шариков, и у петра 5 шариков; у них поровну шариков.
peter bought 7 apples, but mary bought just 5 apples; 5 apples are fewer than 7 apples, and mary bought less than peter.
том купил 7 коробок хлеба, а маша купила 3 коробки хлеба; у маши хлеба меньше, чем у тома.
peter has 8 boxes, and mary has 5 boxes; the total comes to 13 boxes altogether.
mary has 12 cups, and ivan has 6 cups; ivan has half the cups of mary.
ivan has 12 flowers, ann has 7 flowers and tom has 1 flower; ivan has the most flowers and tom has the least flowers.
ann has 8 toys, and tom has 2 toys; ann has 6 more toys than tom.
у ани 8 игрушек, и у тома 8 игрушек; у них поровну игрушек.
tom bought 10 pages, but ira bought just 3 pages; 3 pages are fewer than 10 pages, and ira bought less than tom.
ira has 5 balls, and peter has 5 balls; the two counts are equal.
peter has 10 apples, and mary has 5 apples; peter has twice as many apples as mary.
пётр купил 8 чашек чая, а аня купила 4 чашки чая; у ани чая меньше, чем у петра.

peter had 17 pencils and used 4 pencils. how many pencils remain? 13 pencils remain.
ann had 12 apples and used 3 apples; 9 apples remain.
ira had 22 boxes and used 7 boxes; ira keeps the remaining 15 boxes.
у петра было 17 карандашей, пётр израсходовал 4 карандаша. сколько карандашей осталось? осталось 13 карандашей.
ann had 12 apples and used 3 apples; 9 apples are left over.
у иры было 22 коробки, ира израсходовала 7 коробок; осталось 15 коробок.
mary had 22 boxes and used 6 boxes; the rest are 16 boxes.
ann had 12 apples and used 3 apples. how many apples remain? 9 apples remain.
peter had 27 toys and used 2 toys; 25 toys remain.
mary had 22 boxes and used 6 boxes; mary keeps the remaining 16 boxes.
у ани было 12 яблок, аня израсходовала 3 яблока. сколько яблок осталось? осталось 9 яблок.
peter had 27 toys and used 2 toys; 25 toys are left over.
у маши было 22 коробки, маша израсходовала 6 коробок; осталось 16 коробок.
tom had 17 pencils and used 5 pencils; the rest are 12 pencils.
peter had 27 toys and used 2 toys. how many toys remain? 25 toys remain.
ivan had 27 toys and used 1 toy; 26 toys remain.
tom had 17 pencils and used 5 pencils; tom keeps the remaining 12 pencils.
у петра было 27 игрушек, пётр израсходовал 2 игрушки. сколько игрушек осталось? осталось 25 игрушек.
ivan had 27 toys and used 1 toy; 26 toys are left over.
у тома было 17 карандашей, том израсходовал 5 карандашей; осталось 12 карандашей.
peter had 17 pencils and used 4 pencils; the rest are 13 pencils.
ivan had 27 toys and used 1 toy. how many toys remain? 26 toys remain.
ira had 22 boxes and used 7 boxes; 15 boxes remain.
peter had 17 pencils and used 4 pencils; peter keeps the remaining 13 pencils.
у ивана было 27 игрушек, иван израсходовал 1 игрушка. сколько игрушек осталось? осталось 26 игрушек.
ira had 22 boxes and used 7 boxes; 15 boxes are left over.
у петра было 17 карандашей, пётр израсходовал 4 карандаша; осталось 13 карандашей.
ann had 12 apples and used 3 apples; the rest are 9 apples.
ira had 22 boxes and used 7 boxes. how many boxes remain? 15 boxes remain.
mary had 22 boxes and used 6 boxes; 16 boxes remain.
ann had 12 apples and used 3 apples; ann keeps the remaining 9 apples.
у иры было 22 коробки, ира израсходовала 7 коробок. сколько коробок осталось? осталось 15 коробок.
mary had 22 boxes and used 6 boxes; 16 boxes are left over.
у ани было 12 яблок, аня израсходовала 3 яблока; осталось 9 яблок.
peter had 27 toys and used 2 toys; the rest are 25 toys.
mary had 22 boxes and used 6 boxes. how many boxes remain? 16 boxes remain.
tom had 17 pencils and used 5 pencils; 12 pencils remain.
peter had 27 toys and used 2 toys; peter keeps the remaining 25 toys.
у маши было 22 коробки, маша израсходовала 6 коробок. сколько коробок осталось? осталось 16 коробок.
tom had 17 pencils and used 5 pencils; 12 pencils are left over.
у петра было 27 игрушек, пётр израсходовал 2 игрушки; осталось 25 игрушек.
ivan had 27 toys and used 1 toy; the rest are 26 toys.
tom had 17 pencils and used 5 pencils. how many pencils remain? 12 pencils remain.
peter had 17 pencils and used 4 pencils; 13 pencils remain.
ivan had 27 toys and used 1 toy; ivan keeps the remaining 26 toys.
у тома было 17 карандашей, том израсходовал 5 карандашей. сколько карандашей осталось? осталось 12 карандашей.
peter had 17 pencils and used 4 pencils; 13 pencils are left over.
у ивана было 27 игрушек, иван израсходовал 1 игрушка; осталось 26 игрушек.
ira had 22 boxes and used 7 boxes; the rest are 15 boxes.

peter empties the cup of 4 pencils; the cup keeps 0 pencils then.
the bag holds 7 pencils; ann filled the bag with 2 pencils; the bag needs 5 pencils more.
ira emptied the box of 4 balls; the box keeps 0 balls now.
маша освободила коробка: было 5 чашек, теперь там 0 чашек.
the cup holds 10 cups and tom filled the cup with 3 cups. how many cups does the cup need? the cup needs 7 cups more.
чашка вмещает 12 карандашей; пётр положил туда 4 карандаша; не хватает ещё 8 карандашей.
the bag holds 7 pencils; ann fills the bag with 2 pencils and needs 5 pencils more.
ira empties the box of 4 balls; the box keeps 0 balls then.
the basket holds 18 balls; ivan filled the basket with 1 ball; the basket needs 17 balls more.
tom emptied the cup of 3 cups; the cup keeps 0 cups now.
пётр освободил чашка: было 4 карандаша, теперь там 0 карандашей.
the bag holds 7 pencils and ann filled the bag with 2 pencils. how many pencils does the bag need? the bag needs 5 pencils more.
коробка вмещает 13 шариков; ира положила туда 4 шарика; не хватает ещё 9 шариков.
the basket holds 18 balls; ivan fills the basket with 1 ball and needs 17 balls more.
tom empties the cup of 3 cups; the cup keeps 0 cups then.
the box holds 15 cups; mary filled the box with 5 cups; the box needs 10 cups more.
ann emptied the bag of 2 pencils; the bag keeps 0 pencils now.
ира освободила коробка: было 4 шарика, теперь там 0 шариков.
the basket holds 18 balls and ivan filled the basket with 1 ball. how many balls does the basket need? the basket needs 17 balls more.
чашка вмещает 10 чашек; том положил туда 3 чашки; не хватает ещё 7 чашек.
the box holds 15 cups; mary fills the box with 5 cups and needs 10 cups more.
ann empties the bag of 2 pencils; the bag keeps 0 pencils then.
the cup holds 12 pencils; peter filled the cup with 4 pencils; the cup needs 8 pencils more.
ivan emptied the basket of 1 ball; the basket keeps 0 balls now.
том освободил чашка: было 3 чашки, теперь там 0 чашек.
the box holds 15 cups and mary filled the box with 5 cups. how many cups does the box need? the box needs 10 cups more.
сумка вмещает 7 карандашей; аня положила туда 2 карандаша; не хватает ещё 5 карандашей.
the cup holds 12 pencils; peter fills the cup with 4 pencils and needs 8 pencils more.
ivan empties the basket of 1 ball; the basket keeps 0 balls then.
the box holds 13 balls; ira filled the box with 4 balls; the box needs 9 balls more.
mary emptied the box of 5 cups; the box keeps 0 cups now.
аня освободила сумка: было 2 карандаша, теперь там 0 карандашей.
the cup holds 12 pencils and peter filled the cup with 4 pencils. how many pencils does the cup need? the cup needs 8 pencils more.
корзина вмещает 18 шариков; иван положил туда 1 шарик; не хватает ещё 17 шариков.
the box holds 13 balls; ira fills the box with 4 balls and needs 9 balls more.
mary empties the box of 5 cups; the box keeps 0 cups then.
the cup holds 10 cups; tom filled the cup with 3 cups; the cup needs 7 cups more.
peter emptied the cup of 4 pencils; the cup keeps 0 pencils now.
иван освободил корзина: было 1 шарик, теперь там 0 шариков.
the box holds 13 balls and ira filled the box with 4 balls. how many balls does the box need? the box needs 9 balls more.
коробка вмещает 15 чашек; маша положила туда 5 чашек; не хватает ещё 10 чашек.
the cup holds 10 cups; tom fills the cup with 3 cups and needs 7 cups more.

mary shared 12 pages among 2 friends; each friend got 6 pages.
ira shares 6 pens among 2 friends; every friend gets 3 pens.
ann shared 8 apples among 4 friends. how many apples did each friend get? each friend got 2 apples.
маша разделила 12 страниц между 2 друзьями; каждому досталось по 6 страниц.
peter shared 15 toys among 5 friends; each friend got 3 toys.
tom shares 25 books among 5 friends; every friend gets 5 books.
ivan shared 12 balls among 3 friends. how many balls did each friend get? each friend got 4 balls.
пётр разделил 15 игрушек между 5 друзьями; каждому досталось по 3 игрушки.
ira shared 6 pens among 2 friends; each friend got 3 pens.
ann shares 8 apples among 4 friends; every friend gets 2 apples.
mary shared 12 pages among 2 friends. how many pages did each friend get? each friend got 6 pages.
ира разделила 6 ручек между 2 друзьями; каждому досталось по 3 ручки.
tom shared 25 books among 5 friends; each friend got 5 books.
ivan shares 12 balls among 3 friends; every friend gets 4 balls.
peter shared 15 toys among 5 friends. how many toys did each friend get? each friend got 3 toys.
том разделил 25 книг между 5 друзьями; каждому досталось по 5 книг.
ann shared 8 apples among 4 friends; each friend got 2 apples.
mary shares 12 pages among 2 friends; every friend gets 6 pages.
ira shared 6 pens among 2 friends. how many pens did each friend get? each friend got 3 pens.
аня разделила 8 яблок между 4 друзьями; каждому досталось по 2 яблока.
ivan shared 12 balls among 3 friends; each friend got 4 balls.
peter shares 15 toys among 5 friends; every friend gets 3 toys.
tom shared 25 books among 5 friends. how many books did each friend get? each friend got 5 books.
иван разделил 12 шариков между 3 друзьями; каждому досталось по 4 шарика.

mary earned 19 coins and paid 1 coin for a ticket; mary saved 18 coins.
ira earns 10 coins and pays 4 coins for a ticket; ira saves 6 coins.
ann earned 27 coins and paid 5 coins for a ticket. how many coins did ann save? ann saved 22 coins.
маша заработала 19 рублей и заплатила 1 рубль за билет; маша отложила 18 рублей.
peter earned 15 coins and paid 4 coins for a ticket; peter saved 11 coins.
tom earns 6 coins and pays 2 coins for a ticket; tom saves 4 coins.
ivan earned 23 coins and paid 3 coins for a ticket. how many coins did ivan save? ivan saved 20 coins.
пётр заработал 15 рублей и заплатил 4 рубля за билет; пётр отложил 11 рублей.
ira earned 10 coins and paid 4 coins for a ticket; ira saved 6 coins.
ann earns 27 coins and pays 5 coins for a ticket; ann saves 22 coins.
mary earned 19 coins and paid 1 coin for a ticket. how many coins did mary save? mary saved 18 coins.
ира заработала 10 рублей и заплатила 4 рубля за билет; ира отложила 6 рублей.
tom earned 6 coins and paid 2 coins for a ticket; tom saved 4 coins.
ivan earns 23 coins and pays 3 coins for a ticket; ivan saves 20 coins.
peter earned 15 coins and paid 4 coins for a ticket. how many coins did peter save? peter saved 11 coins.
том заработал 6 рублей и заплатил 2 рубля за билет; том отложил 4 рубля.
ann earned 27 coins and paid 5 coins for a ticket; ann saved 22 coins.
mary earns 19 coins and pays 1 coin for a ticket; mary saves 18 coins.
ira earned 10 coins and paid 4 coins for a ticket. how many coins did ira save? ira saved 6 coins.
аня заработала 27 рублей и заплатила 5 рублей за билет; аня отложила 22 рубля.
ivan earned 23 coins and paid 3 coins for a ticket; ivan saved 20 coins.
peter earns 15 coins and pays 4 coins for a ticket; peter saves 11 coins.
tom earned 6 coins and paid 2 coins for a ticket. how many coins did tom save? tom saved 4 coins.
иван заработал 23 рубля и заплатил 3 рубля за билет; иван отложил 20 рублей.

5 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
6 students are in the class, and 6 students have a key; all students have a key.
у ивана 2 книги, и 2 книги прочитаны; обе книги прочитаны.
3 students are in the class, and every student has 3 books; the class has 9 books.
tom has 2 coins; tom picked 1 coin and keeps the other coin.
у иры 5 коробок, и в каждой коробке 1 страница; всего 5 страниц.
6 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
2 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
у ани 3 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
4 students are in the class, and 4 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
5 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book; the class has 5 books.
5 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 20 books.
mary has 1 pen and bought another pen; mary has 2 pens.
3 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
у тома 4 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
5 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
5 students are in the class, and 5 students have a key; all students have a key.
у маши 6 книг, и 6 книг прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
2 students are in the class, and every student has 2 books; the class has 4 books.
ann has 2 apples; ann ate 1 apple and keeps the other apple.
у тома 4 коробки, и в каждой коробке 4 монеты; всего 16 монет.
5 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
6 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
у ивана 2 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
3 students are in the class, and 3 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
4 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books; the class has 16 books.
5 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book. how many books does the class have? the class has 5 books.
peter has 1 toy and bought another toy; peter has 2 toys.
2 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
у ани 3 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
4 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
5 students are in the class, and 5 students have a key; all students have a key.
у петра 5 книг, и 5 книг прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
6 students are in the class, and every student has 1 book; the class has 6 books.
ivan has 2 cups; ivan drank 1 cup and keeps the other cup.
у ани 3 коробки, и в каждой коробке 3 яблока; всего 9 яблок.
5 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
5 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
у маши 6 книг, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
2 students are in the class, and 2 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
3 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books; the class has 9 books.
4 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 16 books.
ira has 1 page and bought another page; ira has 2 pages.
6 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
у ивана 2 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
3 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
4 students are in the class, and 4 students have a key; all students have a key.
у иры 5 книг, и 5 книг прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
5 students are in the class, and every student has 4 books; the class has 20 books.
mary has 2 pens; mary picked 1 pen and keeps the other pen.
у ивана 2 коробки, и в каждой коробке 2 чашки; всего 4 чашки.
4 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
5 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
у петра 5 книг, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
6 students are in the class, and 6 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
2 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books; the class has 4 books.
3 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 9 books.
tom has 1 coin and bought another coin; tom has 2 coins.
5 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
у маши 6 книг, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
2 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
3 students are in the class, and 3 students have a key; all students have a key.
у тома 4 книги, и 4 книги прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
5 students are in the class, and every student has 1 book; the class has 5 books.
peter has 2 toys; peter picked 1 toy and keeps the other toy.
у маши 6 коробок, и в каждой коробке 1 ручка; всего 6 ручек.
3 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
4 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
у иры 5 книг, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
5 students are in the class, and 5 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
6 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book; the class has 6 books.
2 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 4 books.
ann has 1 apple and bought another apple; ann has 2 apples.
5 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
у петра 5 книг, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
6 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
2 students are in the class, and 2 students have a key; both students have a key.
у ани 3 книги, и 3 книги прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
4 students are in the class, and every student has 4 books; the class has 16 books.
ira has 2 pages; ira read 1 page and keeps the other page.
у петра 5 коробок, и в каждой коробке 4 игрушки; всего 20 игрушек.
2 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
3 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
у тома 4 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
5 students are in the class, and 5 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
5 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books; the class has 20 books.
6 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book. how many books does the class have? the class has 6 books.
ivan has 1 cup and bought another cup; ivan has 2 cups.
4 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
у иры 5 книг, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.

there is 1 card on the table, and there are 6 cards on the table.
ira took 1 flower and 1 chair; ira took a flower and a chair.
there is 1 pencil in the box, and there are 2 pencils in the box.
1 ball and 4 balls make 5 balls in all.
there is 1 lamp in the box, and there are 7 lamps in the box.
1 shelf and 3 shelves make 4 shelves in all.
there is 1 pencil on the floor, and there are 5 pencils on the floor.
tom took 1 cup and 1 tree; tom took a cup and a tree.
there is 1 book in the box, and there are 6 books in the box.
1 toy and 2 toys make 3 toys in all.
there is 1 stone in the box, and there are 5 stones in the box.
1 plate and 7 plates make 8 plates in all.
ann waited a book and counted 1 book.
ann took 1 box and 1 egg; ann took a box and an egg.
1 page and 4 pages make 5 pages in all.
1 cup and 6 cups make 7 cups in all.
there is 1 cake in the box, and there are 3 cakes in the box.
1 note and 5 notes make 6 notes in all.
ann waited an hour and counted 1 hour.
ivan took 1 coin and 1 bag; ivan took a coin and a bag.
1 toy and 3 toys make 4 toys in all.
1 coin and 4 coins make 5 coins in all.
there is 1 bottle in the box, and there are 7 bottles in the box.
1 letter and 3 letters make 4 letters in all.
there is 1 hat in the box, and there are 6 hats in the box.
mary took 1 card and 1 ball; mary took a card and a ball.
1 flower and 2 flowers make 3 flowers in all.
1 pencil and 2 pencils make 3 pencils in all.
there is 1 ticket in the box, and there are 5 tickets in the box.
1 lamp and 7 lamps make 8 lamps in all.
there is 1 shirt in the box, and there are 4 shirts in the box.
peter took 1 pencil and 1 toy; peter took a pencil and a toy.
1 cup and 9 cups make 10 cups in all.
1 book and 6 books make 7 books in all.
there is 1 page in the box, and there are 3 pages in the box.
1 stone and 5 stones make 6 stones in all.
there is 1 basket in the box, and there are 2 baskets in the box.
ann waited a key and counted 1 key.
1 box and 8 boxes make 9 boxes in all.
1 страница и 4 страницы дают всего 5 страниц.
there is 1 flower in the box, and there are 7 flowers in the box.
1 cake and 3 cakes make 4 cakes in all.
there is 1 list in the box, and there are 6 lists in the box.
ann waited an apple and counted 1 apple.
1 coin and 7 coins make 8 coins in all.
1 игрушка и 3 игрушки дают всего 4 игрушки.
there is 1 box in the box, and there are 5 boxes in the box.
1 bottle and 7 bottles make 8 bottles in all.
there is 1 line in the box, and there are 4 lines in the box.
1 hat and 6 hats make 7 hats in all.
1 card and 6 cards make 7 cards in all.
1 цветок и 2 цветка дают всего 3 цветка.
there is 1 card in the box, and there are 3 cards in the box.
1 ticket and 5 tickets make 6 tickets in all.
there is 1 key in the box, and there are 2 keys in the box.
1 shirt and 4 shirts make 5 shirts in all.
1 pencil and 5 pencils make 6 pencils in all.
1 чашка и 9 чашек дают всего 10 чашек.
there is 1 pen in the box, and there are 7 pens in the box.
1 page and 3 pages make 4 pages in all.
there is 1 chair in the box, and there are 6 chairs in the box.
1 basket and 2 baskets make 3 baskets in all.
ann waited a ticket and counted 1 ticket.
1 коробка и 8 коробок дают всего 9 коробок.
there is 1 apple in the box, and there are 5 apples in the box.
1 flower and 7 flowers make 8 flowers in all.
there is 1 tree in the box, and there are 4 trees in the box.
1 list and 6 lists make 7 lists in all.
ann waited an egg and counted 1 egg.
1 монета и 7 монет дают всего 8 монет.
there is 1 page on the chair, and there are 4 pages on the chair.
1 box and 5 boxes make 6 boxes in all.
there is 1 egg in the box, and there are 2 eggs in the box.
1 line and 4 lines make 5 lines in all.
there is 1 stick in the box, and there are 7 sticks in the box.
1 карта и 6 карт дают всего 7 карт.
there is 1 toy on the shelf, and there are 3 toys on the shelf.
1 card and 3 cards make 4 cards in all.
there is 1 bag in the box, and there are 6 bags in the box.
1 key and 2 keys make 3 keys in all.
there is 1 shoe in the box, and there are 5 shoes in the box.
1 карандаш и 5 карандашей дают всего 6 карандашей.
there is 1 flower on the table, and there are 2 flowers on the table.
1 pen and 7 pens make 8 pens in all.
there is 1 ball in the box, and there are 4 balls in the box.
1 chair and 6 chairs make 7 chairs in all.
there is 1 shelf in the box, and there are 3 shelves in the box.
ann waited a letter and counted 1 letter.
there is 1 cup on the floor, and there are 9 cups on the floor.
1 apple and 5 apples make 6 apples in all.
there is 1 toy in the box, and there are 2 toys in the box.
1 tree and 4 trees make 5 trees in all.
there is 1 plate in the box, and there are 7 plates in the box.
ann waited an office and counted 1 office.
there is 1 box on the chair, and there are 8 boxes on the chair.
mary took 1 page and 1 line; mary took a page and a line.
there is 1 cup in the box, and there are 6 cups in the box.
1 egg and 2 eggs make 3 eggs in all.
there is 1 note in the box, and there are 5 notes in the box.
1 stick and 7 sticks make 8 sticks in all.
there is 1 coin on the shelf, and there are 7 coins on the shelf.
peter took 1 toy and 1 key; peter took a toy and a key.
there is 1 coin in the box, and there are 4 coins in the box.
1 bag and 6 bags make 7 bags in all.
there is 1 letter in the box, and there are 3 letters in the box.
1 shoe and 5 shoes make 6 shoes in all.

кто такие дети? мальчик и девочка вместе зовутся дети.
1 brother and 1 sister came to the shop; 2 children came to the shop in all.
продавец и покупатель вместе зовутся люди.
what are people? a worker and a driver together are called people.
a cat and a dog together are called animals.
what are animals? a hen and a duck together are called animals.
виноград и дыня вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие инструменты? нож и ножницы вместе зовутся инструменты.
a beet and a turnip together are called vegetables.
what are children? a grandson and a granddaughter together are called children.
the family has a mother, a father and a child; the family has 3 people.
6 teachers and 4 students came to the farm. how many people came to the farm? 10 people came to the farm in all.
кто такие люди? мать и отец вместе зовутся люди.
5 workers and 4 drivers came to the park; 9 people came to the park in all.
друг и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
кто такие животные? заяц и медведь вместе зовутся животные.
a orange and a lemon together are called fruits.
what are tools? a axe and a spade together are called tools.
лук и чеснок вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие дети? сын и дочь вместе зовутся дети.
fruits: apple, pear, plum, cherry, orange, lemon, banana, peach, grape, melon.
1 man and 1 woman came to the library; 2 people came to the library in all.
a brother and a sister together are called children.
4 doctors and 2 neighbours came to the station. how many people came to the station? 6 people came to the station in all.
кто такие люди? пекарь и фермер вместе зовутся люди.
what are animals? a cow and a horse together are called animals.
слива и вишня вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие инструменты? молоток и пила вместе зовутся инструменты.
a needle and a thimble together are called tools.
what are vegetables? a cucumber and a tomato together are called vegetables.
children: boy, girl, brother, sister, son, daughter, grandson, granddaughter, nephew, niece.
мальчик и девочка вместе зовутся дети.
what are people? a teacher and a student together are called people.
1 seller and 1 buyer came to the market; 2 people came to the market in all.
a worker and a driver together are called people.
кто такие животные? кошка и собака вместе зовутся животные.
a hen and a duck together are called animals.
what are fruits? a banana and a peach together are called fruits.
нож и ножницы вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие овощи? свёкла и репа вместе зовутся овощи.
a grandson and a granddaughter together are called children.
овощи: морковь, капуста, лук, чеснок, свёкла, репа, огурец, помидор, картофель, кабачок.
6 teachers and 4 students came to the farm; 10 people came to the farm in all.
мать и отец вместе зовутся люди.
what are people? a doctor and a neighbour together are called people.
1 friend and 1 neighbour came to the farm; 2 people came to the farm in all.
заяц и медведь вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие фрукты? апельсин и лимон вместе зовутся фрукты.
a axe and a spade together are called tools.
what are vegetables? a carrot and a cabbage together are called vegetables.
сын и дочь вместе зовутся дети.
животные: кошка, собака, корова, лошадь, лиса, волк, заяц, медведь, курица, утка.
5 men and 2 women came to the library. how many people came to the library? 7 people came to the library in all.
кто такие дети? брат и сестра вместе зовутся дети.
4 doctors and 2 neighbours came to the station; 6 people came to the station in all.
пекарь и фермер вместе зовутся люди.
a cow and a horse together are called animals.
what are fruits? a apple and a pear together are called fruits.
молоток и пила вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие инструменты? игла и напёрсток вместе зовутся инструменты.
a cucumber and a tomato together are called vegetables.
what are children? a nephew and a niece together are called children.
1 boy and 1 girl came to the park; 2 children came to the park in all.
a teacher and a student together are called people.
3 sellers and 5 buyers came to the market. how many people came to the market? 8 people came to the market in all.
кто такие люди? рабочий и водитель вместе зовутся люди.
кошка и собака вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие животные? курица и утка вместе зовутся животные.
a banana and a peach together are called fruits.
what are tools? a screwdriver and a pliers together are called tools.
свёкла и репа вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие дети? внук и внучка вместе зовутся дети.
vegetables: carrot, cabbage, onion, garlic, beet, turnip, cucumber, tomato, potato, marrow.
what are people? a man and a woman together are called people.
1 mother and 1 father came to the school; 2 people came to the school in all.
a doctor and a neighbour together are called people.
1 friend and 3 neighbours came to the farm. how many people came to the farm? 4 people came to the farm in all.
what are animals? a fox and a wolf together are called animals.
апельсин и лимон вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие инструменты? топор и лопата вместе зовутся инструменты.
a carrot and a cabbage together are called vegetables.
what are vegetables? a potato and a marrow together are called vegetables.
animals: cat, dog, cow, horse, fox, wolf, hare, bear, hen, duck.
5 men and 2 women came to the library; 7 people came to the library in all.
брат и сестра вместе зовутся дети.
what are people? a seller and a buyer together are called people.
1 baker and 1 farmer came to the library; 2 people came to the library in all.
кто такие животные? корова и лошадь вместе зовутся животные.
a apple and a pear together are called fruits.
what are fruits? a grape and a melon together are called fruits.
игла и напёрсток вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие овощи? огурец и помидор вместе зовутся овощи.
a nephew and a niece together are called children.
4 boys and 5 girls came to the park. how many children came to the park? 9 children came to the park in all.
кто такие люди? учитель и ученик вместе зовутся люди.
3 sellers and 5 buyers came to the market; 8 people came to the market in all.
рабочий и водитель вместе зовутся люди.
what are people? a friend and a neighbour together are called people.
курица и утка вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие фрукты? банан и персик вместе зовутся фрукты.
a screwdriver and a pliers together are called tools.
what are vegetables? a onion and a garlic together are called vegetables.
внук и внучка вместе зовутся дети.
инструменты: молоток, пила, топор, лопата, отвёртка, клещи, нож, ножницы, игла, напёрсток.
a man and a woman together are called people.
2 mothers and 3 fathers came to the school. how many people came to the school? 5 people came to the school in all.
кто такие люди? доктор и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
1 friend and 3 neighbours came to the farm; 4 people came to the farm in all.
a fox and a wolf together are called animals.
what are fruits? a plum and a cherry together are called fruits.
топор и лопата вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие овощи? морковь и капуста вместе зовутся овощи.
a potato and a marrow together are called vegetables.
люди: мужчина, женщина, учитель, ученик, мать, отец, продавец, покупатель, доктор, сосед, рабочий, водитель, пекарь, фермер, друг.
what are children? a boy and a girl together are called children.
1 brother and 1 sister came to the shop; 2 children came to the shop in all.
a seller and a buyer together are called people.
6 bakers and 1 farmer came to the library. how many people came to the library? 7 people came to the library in all.
корова и лошадь вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие фрукты? яблоко и груша вместе зовутся фрукты.
a grape and a melon together are called fruits.
what are tools? a knife and a scissors together are called tools.
огурец и помидор вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие дети? племянник и племянница вместе зовутся дети.
4 boys and 5 girls came to the park; 9 children came to the park in all.
учитель и ученик вместе зовутся люди.
what are people? a mother and a father together are called people.
1 worker and 1 driver came to the park; 2 people came to the park in all.
a friend and a neighbour together are called people.
what are animals? a hare and a bear together are called animals.
банан и персик вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие инструменты? отвёртка и клещи вместе зовутся инструменты.
a onion and a garlic together are called vegetables.
what are children? a son and a daughter together are called children.
tools: hammer, saw, axe, spade, screwdriver, pliers, knife, scissors, needle, thimble.
кто такие люди? мужчина и женщина вместе зовутся люди.
2 mothers and 3 fathers came to the school; 5 people came to the school in all.
доктор и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
what are people? a baker and a farmer together are called people.
кто такие животные? лиса и волк вместе зовутся животные.
a plum and a cherry together are called fruits.
what are tools? a hammer and a saw together are called tools.
морковь и капуста вместе зовутся овощи.
кто такие овощи? картофель и кабачок вместе зовутся овощи.
people: man, woman, teacher, student, mother, father, seller, buyer, doctor, neighbour, worker, driver, baker, farmer, friend.
a boy and a girl together are called children.
1 brother and 1 sister came to the shop. how many children came to the shop? 2 children came to the shop in all.
кто такие люди? продавец и покупатель вместе зовутся люди.
6 bakers and 1 farmer came to the library; 7 people came to the library in all.
what are animals? a cat and a dog together are called animals.
яблоко и груша вместе зовутся фрукты.
кто такие фрукты? виноград и дыня вместе зовутся фрукты.
a knife and a scissors together are called tools.
what are vegetables? a beet and a turnip together are called vegetables.
племянник и племянница вместе зовутся дети.
в семье мать, отец и ребёнок; в семье 3 человека.
1 teacher and 1 student came to the farm; 2 people came to the farm in all.
a mother and a father together are called people.
5 workers and 4 drivers came to the park. how many people came to the park? 9 people came to the park in all.
кто такие люди? друг и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
a hare and a bear together are called animals.
what are fruits? a orange and a lemon together are called fruits.
отвёртка и клещи вместе зовутся инструменты.
кто такие овощи? лук и чеснок вместе зовутся овощи.
a son and a daughter together are called children.
фрукты: яблоко, груша, слива, вишня, апельсин, лимон, банан, персик, виноград, дыня.
мужчина и женщина вместе зовутся люди.
what are children? a brother and a sister together are called children.
1 doctor and 1 neighbour came to the station; 2 people came to the station in all.
a baker and a farmer together are called people.
лиса и волк вместе зовутся животные.
кто такие фрукты? слива и вишня вместе зовутся фрукты.
a hammer and a saw together are called tools.
what are tools? a needle and a thimble together are called tools.
картофель и кабачок вместе зовутся овощи.
дети: мальчик, девочка, брат, сестра, сын, дочь, внук, внучка, племянник, племянница.

ivan worked on 2 days of 10 days; ivan worked twice.
маша работала 1 день из 10; маша работала один раз.
mary worked on 1 day of 10 days; mary worked once.
пётр работал 0 дней из 10; пётр никогда не работал.
peter worked on 0 days of 10 days; peter never worked.
ира считала карандашей один раз и потом ещё раз; всего ира считала два раза.
ira counted the pencils once and counted the pencils again; ira counted the pencils twice in all.
том считал ручек один раз и потом ещё раз; всего том считал два раза.
tom counted the pens once and counted the pens again; tom counted the pens twice in all.
аня считала книг один раз и потом ещё раз; всего аня считала два раза.
ann counted the books once and counted the books again; ann counted the books twice in all.
иван считал яблок один раз и потом ещё раз; всего иван считал два раза.
ivan counted the apples once and counted the apples again; ivan counted the apples twice in all.
том работал 10 дней из 10; том работал всегда.
tom worked on 10 days of 10 days; tom always worked.
аня работала 7 дней из 10; аня работала часто.
ann worked on 7 days of 10 days; ann often worked.
иван работал 2 дня из 10; иван работал два раза.

mary counted 19 cups; 19 cups are nearly 20 cups.
ira counted 21 balls; 21 balls are about 20 balls.
аня насчитала 39 игрушек; это почти 40 игрушек.
маша насчитала 21 чашка; это примерно 20 чашек.
peter counted 48 boxes; 48 boxes are nearly 50 boxes.
tom counted 52 pages; 52 pages are about 50 pages.
иван насчитал 28 цветков; это почти 30 цветков.
пётр насчитал 52 коробки; это примерно 50 коробок.
ira counted 19 balls; 19 balls are nearly 20 balls.
ann counted 41 toys; 41 toys are about 40 toys.
маша насчитала 19 чашек; это почти 20 чашек.
ира насчитала 21 шарик; это примерно 20 шариков.
tom counted 48 pages; 48 pages are nearly 50 pages.
ivan counted 32 flowers; 32 flowers are about 30 flowers.
пётр насчитал 48 коробок; это почти 50 коробок.
том насчитал 52 страницы; это примерно 50 страниц.
ann counted 39 toys; 39 toys are nearly 40 toys.
mary counted 21 cups; 21 cups are about 20 cups.
ира насчитала 19 шариков; это почти 20 шариков.
аня насчитала 41 игрушка; это примерно 40 игрушек.
ivan counted 28 flowers; 28 flowers are nearly 30 flowers.
peter counted 52 boxes; 52 boxes are about 50 boxes.
том насчитал 48 страниц; это почти 50 страниц.
иван насчитал 32 цветка; это примерно 30 цветков.

why does ivan have 9 apples? because ivan bought 7 apples and then 2 apples more.
в коробке лежат монета, чашка и коробка; в коробке лежат 3 предмета.
ivan bought tea, coffee and milk at the store; ivan bought 3 things in all.
почему у ани 5 карандашей? потому что аня купила 2 карандаша, а потом ещё 3 карандаша.
why does peter have 10 boxes? because peter bought 5 boxes and then 5 boxes more.
ira bought water, cake and bread at the store; ira bought 3 things in all.
why does ira have 9 toys? because ira bought 4 toys and then 5 toys more.
почему у маши 7 игрушек? потому что маша купила 6 игрушек, а потом ещё 1 игрушка.
в сумке лежат ручка, монета и чашка; в сумке лежат 3 предмета.
mary bought sugar, tea and coffee at the shop; mary bought 3 things in all.
why does ann have 5 pencils? because ann bought 2 pencils and then 3 pencils more.
в сумке лежат коробка, игрушка и карта; в сумке лежат 3 предмета.
tom bought milk, water and cake at the shop; tom bought 3 things in all.
почему у тома 7 коробок? потому что том купил 3 коробки, а потом ещё 4 коробки.
why does mary have 7 toys? because mary bought 6 toys and then 1 toy more.
в корзине лежат книга, ручка и монета; в корзине лежат 3 предмета.
peter bought salt, sugar and tea at the market; peter bought 3 things in all.
почему у ивана 9 яблок? потому что иван купил 7 яблок, а потом ещё 2 яблока.
в корзине лежат чашка, коробка и игрушка; в корзине лежат 3 предмета.
ann bought coffee, milk and water at the market; ann bought 3 things in all.
why does tom have 7 boxes? because tom bought 3 boxes and then 4 boxes more.
почему у петра 10 коробок? потому что пётр купил 5 коробок, а потом ещё 5 коробок.
в коробке лежат цветок, книга и ручка; в коробке лежат 3 предмета.
почему у иры 9 игрушек? потому что ира купила 4 игрушки, а потом ещё 5 игрушек.

ira bought 3 cards and 4 coins at the shop; ira bought 7 things in all: 3 + 4 = 7.
маша купила 6 яблок и 4 игрушки в библиотеке. сколько предметов купила маша? всего маша купила 10 предметов: 6 + 4 = 10.
маша купила 5 коробок и 4 игрушки на вокзале; всего маша купила 9 предметов: 5 + 4 = 9.
ira bought 3 cards and 4 coins at the shop. how many things did ira buy? ira bought 7 things in all: 3 + 4 = 7.
ivan bought 7 books and 7 balls at the school; ivan bought 14 things in all: 7 + 7 = 14.
маша купила 5 коробок и 4 игрушки на вокзале. сколько предметов купила маша? всего маша купила 9 предметов: 5 + 4 = 9.
ира купила 3 карты и 4 монеты в лавке; всего ира купила 7 предметов: 3 + 4 = 7.
ivan bought 7 books and 7 balls at the school. how many things did ivan buy? ivan bought 14 things in all: 7 + 7 = 14.
ivan bought 6 cups and 7 balls at the library; ivan bought 13 things in all: 6 + 7 = 13.
ира купила 3 карты и 4 монеты в лавке. сколько предметов купила ира? всего ира купила 7 предметов: 3 + 4 = 7.
иван купил 7 книг и 7 шариков в школе; всего иван купил 14 предметов: 7 + 7 = 14.
ivan bought 6 cups and 7 balls at the library. how many things did ivan buy? ivan bought 13 things in all: 6 + 7 = 13.
peter bought 4 coins and 7 cups at the store; peter bought 11 things in all: 4 + 7 = 11.
иван купил 7 книг и 7 шариков в школе. сколько предметов купил иван? всего иван купил 14 предметов: 7 + 7 = 14.
иван купил 6 чашек и 7 шариков в библиотеке; всего иван купил 13 предметов: 6 + 7 = 13.
peter bought 4 coins and 7 cups at the store. how many things did peter buy? peter bought 11 things in all: 4 + 7 = 11.
ann bought 8 pens and 4 books at the park; ann bought 12 things in all: 8 + 4 = 12.
иван купил 6 чашек и 7 шариков в библиотеке. сколько предметов купил иван? всего иван купил 13 предметов: 6 + 7 = 13.
пётр купил 4 монеты и 7 чашек в магазине; всего пётр купил 11 предметов: 4 + 7 = 11.
ann bought 8 pens and 4 books at the park. how many things did ann buy? ann bought 12 things in all: 8 + 4 = 12.
mary bought 6 apples and 4 toys at the library; mary bought 10 things in all: 6 + 4 = 10.
пётр купил 4 монеты и 7 чашек в магазине. сколько предметов купил пётр? всего пётр купил 11 предметов: 4 + 7 = 11.
аня купила 8 ручек и 4 книги в парке; всего аня купила 12 предметов: 8 + 4 = 12.
mary bought 6 apples and 4 toys at the library. how many things did mary buy? mary bought 10 things in all: 6 + 4 = 10.
mary bought 5 boxes and 4 toys at the station; mary bought 9 things in all: 5 + 4 = 9.
аня купила 8 ручек и 4 книги в парке. сколько предметов купила аня? всего аня купила 12 предметов: 8 + 4 = 12.
маша купила 6 яблок и 4 игрушки в библиотеке; всего маша купила 10 предметов: 6 + 4 = 10.
mary bought 5 boxes and 4 toys at the station. how many things did mary buy? mary bought 9 things in all: 5 + 4 = 9.

коробка на полке.
дверь не в письме: письмо не на пути от двери до городка.
the lamp is on the table, and the table is in the kitchen. where is the lamp? the lamp is in the kitchen.
комната в доме, а дом на улице; значит комната на улице.
the ticket is in the bag.
the bed is not on the mountain: the mountain is not on the path from the bed to the town.
класс в школе, а школа на улице. где класс? класс на улице.
the house is on the street, and the street is in the town; so the house is in the town.
парковка на улице.
рубашка не на тарелке: тарелка не на пути от рубашки до городка.
the wall is in the room, and the room is in the house. where is the wall? the wall is in the house.
коробка на полке, а полка в кухне; значит коробка в кухне.
the flower is in the garden.
the lamp is not on the chair: the chair is not on the path from the lamp to the town.
комната в доме, а дом на улице. где комната? комната на улице.
the ticket is in the bag, and the bag is on the chair; so the ticket is on the chair.
кровать в комнате.
класс не на камне: камень не на пути от класса до городка.
the house is on the street, and the street is in the town. where is the house? the house is in the town.
парковка на улице, а улица в городке; значит парковка в городке.
the stone is in the field.
the wall is not in the store: the store is not on the path from the wall to the town.
коробка на полке, а полка в кухне. где коробка? коробка в кухне.
the flower is in the garden, and the garden is in the house; so the flower is in the house.
лампа на столе.
комната не на стене: стена не на пути от комнаты до городка.
the ticket is in the bag, and the bag is on the chair. where is the ticket? the ticket is on the chair.
кровать в комнате, а комната в доме; значит кровать в доме.
the door is on the wall.
the house is not on the hat: the hat is not on the path from the house to the town.
парковка на улице, а улица в городке. где парковка? парковка в городке.
the stone is in the field, and the field is on the farm; so the stone is on the farm.
стена в комнате.
коробка не на дереве: дерево не на пути от коробки до городка.
the flower is in the garden, and the garden is in the house. where is the flower? the flower is in the house.
лампа на столе, а стол в кухне; значит лампа в кухне.
the shirt is on the bed.
the ticket is not in the store: the store is not on the path from the ticket to the town.
кровать в комнате, а комната в доме. где кровать? кровать в доме.
the door is on the wall, and the wall is in the room; so the door is in the room.
дом на улице.
парковка не на столе: стол не на пути от парковки до городка.
the stone is in the field, and the field is on the farm. where is the stone? the stone is on the farm.
стена в комнате, а комната в доме; значит стена в доме.
the class is in the school.
the flower is not in the book: the book is not on the path from the flower to the town.
лампа на столе, а стол в кухне. где лампа? лампа в кухне.
the shirt is on the bed, and the bed is in the room; so the shirt is in the room.
билет в сумке.
кровать не на горе: гора не на пути от кровати до городка.
the door is on the wall, and the wall is in the room. where is the door? the door is in the room.
дом на улице, а улица в городке; значит дом в городке.
the room is in the house.
the stone is not on the plate: the plate is not on the path from the stone to the village.
стена в комнате, а комната в доме. где стена? стена в доме.
the class is in the school, and the school is on the street; so the class is on the street.
цветок в саду.
лампа не на стуле: стул не на пути от лампы до городка.
the shirt is on the bed, and the bed is in the room. where is the shirt? the shirt is in the room.
билет в сумке, а сумка на стуле; значит билет на стуле.
the box is on the shelf.
the door is not in the letter: the letter is not on the path from the door to the town.
дом на улице, а улица в городке. где дом? дом в городке.
the room is in the house, and the house is on the street; so the room is on the street.
камень в поле.
стена не в магазине: магазин не на пути от стены до городка.
the class is in the school, and the school is on the street. where is the class? the class is on the street.
цветок в саду, а сад в доме; значит цветок в доме.
the parking lot is on the street.
the shirt is not on the plate: the plate is not on the path from the shirt to the town.
билет в сумке, а сумка на стуле. где билет? билет на стуле.
the box is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen; so the box is in the kitchen.
дверь на стене.
дом не на шляпе: шляпа не на пути от дома до городка.
the room is in the house, and the house is on the street. where is the room? the room is on the street.
камень в поле, а поле на ферме; значит камень на ферме.
the bed is in the room.
the class is not on the stone: the stone is not on the path from the class to the town.
цветок в саду, а сад в доме. где цветок? цветок в доме.
the parking lot is on the street, and the street is in the town; so the parking lot is in the town.
рубашка на кровати.
билет не в магазине: магазин не на пути от билета до городка.
the box is on the shelf, and the shelf is in the kitchen. where is the box? the box is in the kitchen.
дверь на стене, а стена в комнате; значит дверь в комнате.
the lamp is on the table.
the room is not on the wall: the wall is not on the path from the room to the town.
камень в поле, а поле на ферме. где камень? камень на ферме.
the bed is in the room, and the room is in the house; so the bed is in the house.
класс в школе.
цветок не в книге: книга не на пути от цветка до городка.
the parking lot is on the street, and the street is in the town. where is the parking lot? the parking lot is in the town.
рубашка на кровати, а кровать в комнате; значит рубашка в комнате.
the wall is in the room.
the box is not on the tree: the tree is not on the path from the box to the town.
дверь на стене, а стена в комнате. где дверь? дверь в комнате.
the lamp is on the table, and the table is in the kitchen; so the lamp is in the kitchen.
комната в доме.
камень не на тарелке: тарелка не на пути от камня до деревни.
the bed is in the room, and the room is in the house. where is the bed? the bed is in the house.
класс в школе, а школа на улице; значит класс на улице.
the house is on the street.
the parking lot is not on the table: the table is not on the path from the parking lot to the town.
рубашка на кровати, а кровать в комнате. где рубашка? рубашка в комнате.
the wall is in the room, and the room is in the house; so the wall is in the house.

the morning comes before the night.
the night comes after the evening.
today comes before tomorrow.
mary worked in the morning and ivan rested in the morning; mary worked while ivan rested.
the night comes after the morning.
peter worked during the evening and rested during the night; peter worked before peter rested.
tomorrow comes after today.
mary left home in the morning and arrived at the station in the day; mary left home before mary arrived at the station.
tom worked during the morning and rested during the night; tom worked before tom rested.
вечер раньше ночи.
сегодня раньше, чем завтра.
маша ушла из дома утром, а пришла на вокзале днём; значит маша ушла раньше, чем пришла.
утро раньше ночи.
ночь позже вечера.
mary works now and rests later; mary works before mary rests.
маша работала утром, а иван отдыхал утром; они делали это в одно время.
ночь позже утра.
пётр работал вечером, а отдыхал ночью; значит пётр работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
mary worked in the morning and ivan rested in the morning; mary worked while ivan rested.
the week has 7 days and the weekend has 2 days; the week has 5 days more than the weekend.
том работал утром, а отдыхал ночью; значит том работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
the day comes next after the morning.
mary left home in the morning and arrived at the school in the day; mary left home before mary arrived at the school.
в неделе 7 дней, а в выходных 2 дня; в неделе на 5 дней больше.
the day comes before the evening.
what comes before the day? the morning comes before the day.
маша ушла из дома утром, а пришла в школе днём; значит маша ушла раньше, чем пришла.
the morning comes before the day.
the evening comes after the day.
что раньше дня? утро раньше дня.
маша работала утром, а иван отдыхал утром; они делали это в одно время.
the day comes after the morning.
tom worked during the day and rested during the evening; tom worked before tom rested.
the evening comes next after the day.
ann works now and rests later; ann works before ann rests.
ivan worked during the morning and rested during the day; ivan worked before ivan rested.
день раньше вечера.
what comes before the evening? the day comes before the evening.
ann worked in the day and tom rested in the day; ann worked while tom rested.
утро раньше дня.
вечер позже дня.
что раньше вечера? день раньше вечера.
ann left home in the day and arrived at the market in the evening; ann left home before ann arrived at the market.
день позже утра.
том работал днём, а отдыхал вечером; значит том работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
the night comes next after the evening.
аня ушла из дома днём, а пришла на рынке вечером; значит аня ушла раньше, чем пришла.
иван работал утром, а отдыхал днём; значит иван работал раньше, чем отдыхал.
the day comes before the night.
what comes before the night? the evening comes before the night.
аня работала днём, а том отдыхал днём; они делали это в одно время.
the morning comes before the evening.
the night comes after the day.
что раньше ночи? вечер раньше ночи.
ira works now and rests later; ira works before ira rests.
the evening comes after the morning.
ira worked in the day and rested in the night; ira worked before ira rested.
the morning comes first and the night comes last.
ira worked in the evening and peter rested in the evening; ira worked while peter rested.
ann worked in the morning and rested in the evening; ann worked before ann rested.
день раньше ночи.
the morning comes early and the night comes late.
ira left home in the evening and arrived at the office in the night; ira left home before ira arrived at the office.
утро раньше вечера.
ночь позже дня.
yesterday comes before today.
ира ушла из дома вечером, а пришла в конторе ночью; значит ира ушла раньше, чем пришла.
вечер позже утра.
ира работала днём, а отдыхала ночью; значит ира работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
today comes after yesterday.
ира работала вечером, а пётр отдыхал вечером; они делали это в одно время.
аня работала утром, а отдыхала вечером; значит аня работала раньше, чем отдыхала.
the evening comes before the night.
вчера раньше, чем сегодня.
mary works now and rests later; mary works before mary rests.

today mary finds a key; yesterday mary found a key.
today ann works in the office. what is the past of work? the past of work is worked.
the past of pay is paid.
today ira and peter see the door; yesterday ira and peter saw the door.
today ann carries a basket; yesterday ann carried a basket.
глагол «читать» в прошедшем даёт «читал».
сегодня маша хранит рубашку; вчера маша хранила рубашку.
today ann and tom give coins; yesterday ann and tom gave coins.
today mary eats an apple; yesterday mary ate an apple.
today ann empties a basket. what is the past of empty? the past of empty is emptied.
the past of say is said.
today ira and peter leave the house; yesterday ira and peter left the house.
сегодня ира пишет письмо; вчера ира писала письмо.
глагол «решать» в прошедшем даёт «решал».
сегодня маша понимает ответ; вчера маша понимала ответ.
today ann and tom count the apples; yesterday ann and tom counted the apples.
today mary finishes a note; yesterday mary finished a note.
today ann needs a key. what is the past of need? the past of need is needed.
the past of hear is heard.
today ira and peter stop at the door; yesterday ira and peter stopped at the door.
сегодня ира рассказывает историю; вчера ира рассказывала историю.
глагол «уходить» в прошедшем даёт «уходил».
the past of write is wrote.
today ann and tom work in the office; yesterday ann and tom worked in the office.
today mary pays a coin; yesterday mary paid a coin.
today ann asks a question. what is the past of ask? the past of ask is asked.
the past of return is returned.
глагол «считать» в прошедшем даёт «считал».
сегодня ира ест яблоко; вчера ира ела яблоко.
today mary buys a book. what is the past of buy? the past of buy is bought.
the past of run is ran.
today ann and tom empty baskets; yesterday ann and tom emptied baskets.
today mary says the answer; yesterday mary said the answer.
today ann decides the answer. what is the past of decide? the past of decide is decided.
сегодня аня даёт монету; вчера аня давала монету.
глагол «слышать» в прошедшем даёт «слышал».
сегодня ира зарабатывает рубли; вчера ира зарабатывала рубли.
today mary finds a key. what is the past of find? the past of find is found.
the past of wait is waited.
today ann and tom need keys; yesterday ann and tom needed keys.
today mary hears the answer; yesterday mary heard the answer.
today ann carries a basket. what is the past of carry? the past of carry is carried.
сегодня аня отвечает на вопрос; вчера аня отвечала на вопрос.
глагол «носить» в прошедшем даёт «носил».
today ira writes a letter; yesterday ira wrote a letter.
today mary eats an apple. what is the past of eat? the past of eat is ate.
the past of spend is spent.
today ann and tom ask questions; yesterday ann and tom asked questions.
today mary returns to the village; yesterday mary returned to the village.
глагол «находить» в прошедшем даёт «находил».
сегодня аня играет во дворе; вчера аня играла во дворе.
today mary and ivan buy books; yesterday mary and ivan bought books.
today ira runs to the park; yesterday ira ran to the park.
today mary finishes a note. what is the past of finish? the past of finish is finished.
the past of know is knew.
today ann and tom decide the answer; yesterday ann and tom decided the answer.
сегодня маша покупает книгу; вчера маша покупала книгу.
глагол «знать» в прошедшем даёт «знал».
сегодня аня копит монеты; вчера аня копила монеты.
today mary and ivan find keys; yesterday mary and ivan found keys.
today ira waits at the station; yesterday ira waited at the station.
today mary pays a coin. what is the past of pay? the past of pay is paid.
the past of see is saw.
today ann and tom carry baskets; yesterday ann and tom carried baskets.
сегодня маша ждёт на вокзале; вчера маша ждала на вокзале.
глагол «хранить» в прошедшем даёт «хранил».
the past of give is gave.
today mary and ivan eat apples; yesterday mary and ivan ate apples.
today ira spends a coin; yesterday ira spent a coin.
today mary says the answer. what is the past of say? the past of say is said.
the past of leave is left.
глагол «писать» в прошедшем даёт «писал».
сегодня маша начинает список; вчера маша начинала список.
глагол «понимать» в прошедшем даёт «понимал».
the past of count is counted.
today mary and ivan finish notes; yesterday mary and ivan finished notes.
today ira knows the answer; yesterday ira knew the answer.
today mary hears the answer. what is the past of hear? the past of hear is heard.
the past of stop is stopped.
глагол «рассказывать» в прошедшем даёт «рассказывал».
сегодня маша опустошает корзину; вчера маша опустошала корзину.
today ira writes a letter. what is the past of write? the past of write is wrote.
the past of work is worked.
today mary and ivan pay coins; yesterday mary and ivan paid coins.
today ira sees the door; yesterday ira saw the door.
today mary returns to the village. what is the past of return? the past of return is returned.
сегодня ира читает страницу; вчера ира читала страницу.
глагол «есть» в прошедшем даёт «ел».
today ann gives a coin; yesterday ann gave a coin.
today ira runs to the park. what is the past of run? the past of run is ran.
the past of empty is emptied.
today mary and ivan say the answer; yesterday mary and ivan said the answer.
today ira leaves the house; yesterday ira left the house.
глагол «давать» в прошедшем даёт «давал».
сегодня ира решает задачу; вчера ира решала задачу.
глагол «зарабатывать» в прошедшем даёт «зарабатывал».
today ann counts the apples; yesterday ann counted the apples.
today ira waits at the station. what is the past of wait? the past of wait is waited.
the past of need is needed.
today mary and ivan hear the answer; yesterday mary and ivan heard the answer.
today ira stops at the door; yesterday ira stopped at the door.
глагол «отвечать» в прошедшем даёт «отвечал».
сегодня ира уходит из дома; вчера ира уходила из дома.
today ira and peter write letters; yesterday ira and peter wrote letters.
today ann works in the office; yesterday ann worked in the office.
today ira spends a coin. what is the past of spend? the past of spend is spent.
the past of ask is asked.
today mary and ivan return to the village; yesterday mary and ivan returned to the village.
сегодня аня считает яблоки; вчера аня считала яблоки.
глагол «играть» в прошедшем даёт «играл».
the past of buy is bought.
today ira and peter run to the park; yesterday ira and peter ran to the park.
today ann empties a basket; yesterday ann emptied a basket.
today ira knows the answer. what is the past of know? the past of know is knew.
the past of decide is decided.
глагол «покупать» в прошедшем даёт «покупал».
сегодня аня слышит ответ; вчера аня слышала ответ.
глагол «копить» в прошедшем даёт «копил».
the past of find is found.
today ira and peter wait at the station; yesterday ira and peter waited at the station.
today ann needs a key; yesterday ann needed a key.
today ira sees the door. what is the past of see? the past of see is saw.
the past of carry is carried.
глагол «ждать» в прошедшем даёт «ждал».
сегодня аня носит корзину; вчера аня носила корзину.
today ann gives a coin. what is the past of give? the past of give is gave.
the past of eat is ate.
today ira and peter spend coins; yesterday ira and peter spent coins.
today ann asks a question; yesterday ann asked a question.
today ira leaves the house. what is the past of leave? the past of leave is left.
сегодня маша находит ключ; вчера маша находила ключ.
глагол «начинать» в прошедшем даёт «начинал».
today mary buys a book; yesterday mary bought a book.
today ann counts the apples. what is the past of count? the past of count is counted.
the past of finish is finished.
today ira and peter know the answer; yesterday ira and peter knew the answer.
today ann decides the answer; yesterday ann decided the answer.
today ira stops at the door. what is the past of stop? the past of stop is stopped.
сегодня маша знает ответ; вчера маша знала ответ.
глагол «опустошать» в прошедшем даёт «опустошал».

mary has 12 flowers, and ivan has 6 flowers; the total comes to 18 flowers altogether.
ivan has 14 toys, and ann has 7 toys; the two counts are different.
ann has 4 pages, and tom has 2 pages; tom has half the pages of ann.
tom has 6 balls, and ira has 3 balls; tom has double the balls of ira.
ira has 7 apples, peter has 4 apples and mary has 1 apple; ira has the most apples and mary has the least apples.
peter has 9 books, and mary has 9 books; peter has the same number of books as mary.
mary has 11 pens, and ivan has 6 pens; mary has 5 more pens than ivan.
у маши 11 ручек, а у ивана 6 ручек. на сколько ручек больше у маши? у маши на 5 ручек больше, чем у ивана.
mary has 12 flowers, and ivan has 6 flowers. how many more flowers does mary have than ivan? mary has 6 more flowers than ivan.
ann has 7 toys, and ivan has 14 toys; ann has 7 fewer toys than ivan.
у ивана 14 игрушек, а у ани 7 игрушек; у ивана вдвое больше, чем у ани.
у ани 3 страницы, а у тома 2 страницы; вместе у них 5 страниц.
у иры 3 шарика, а у тома 5 шариков; у иры на 2 шарика меньше, чем у тома.
ira and peter gave 4 apples to each other; ira gave 4 apples to peter, and peter gave 4 apples to ira.
peter has 9 books, and mary has 5 books; the total comes to 14 books altogether.
mary has 11 pens, and ivan has 6 pens; the two counts are different.
ira bought 5 loaves of bread, and ivan bought 4 loaves of bread; ivan bought less bread than ira.
mary bought 12 flowers, but ivan bought just 6 flowers; 6 flowers are fewer than 12 flowers, and ivan bought less than mary.
ivan has 14 toys, and ann has 7 toys; together they have 21 toys, and apart they have 14 toys and 7 toys.
ann has 3 pages, and tom has 3 pages; the two counts are equal.
tom has 9 balls, and ira has 3 balls; tom has triple the balls of ira.
ira has 8 apples, and peter has 4 apples; ira has twice as many apples as peter.
peter has 9 books, and mary has 5 books. how many more books does peter have than mary? peter has 4 more books than mary.
ivan has 6 pens, and mary has 11 pens; ivan has 5 fewer pens than mary.
у маши 12 ручек, а у ивана 6 ручек; у маши вдвое больше, чем у ивана.
mary has 12 flowers, ivan has 6 flowers and ann has 1 flower; mary has the most flowers and ann has the least flowers.
ivan has 14 toys, and ann has 14 toys; ivan has the same number of toys as ann.
ann has 3 pages, and tom has 2 pages; ann has 1 more page than tom.
у ани 3 страницы, а у тома 2 страницы. на сколько страниц больше у ани? у ани на 1 страница больше, чем у тома.
у тома 5 шариков, и у иры 5 шариков; у них поровну шариков.
у иры 7 яблок, а у петра 4 яблока; у иры на 3 яблока больше, чем у петра.
peter bought 9 books, but mary bought just 5 books; 5 books are fewer than 9 books, and mary bought less than peter.
mary has 11 pens, and ivan has 6 pens; together they have 17 pens, and apart they have 11 pens and 6 pens.
ира купила 5 коробок хлеба, а иван купил 4 коробки хлеба; у ивана хлеба меньше, чем у иры.
mary and ivan gave 6 flowers to each other; mary gave 6 flowers to ivan, and ivan gave 6 flowers to mary.
ivan has 14 toys, and ann has 7 toys; the total comes to 21 toys altogether.
ann has 3 pages, and tom has 2 pages; the two counts are different.
tom has 6 balls, and ira has 3 balls; ira has half the balls of tom.
ira has 8 apples, and peter has 4 apples; ira has double the apples of peter.
peter has 9 books, mary has 5 books and ivan has 1 book; peter has the most books and ivan has the least books.
mary has 11 pens, and ivan has 11 pens; mary has the same number of pens as ivan.
mary bought 6 cups of tea, and tom bought 5 cups of tea; tom bought less tea than mary.
mary has 12 flowers, and ivan has 6 flowers; mary has twice as many flowers as ivan.
ivan has 14 toys, and ann has 7 toys. how many more toys does ivan have than ann? ivan has 7 more toys than ann.
tom has 2 pages, and ann has 3 pages; tom has 1 fewer page than ann.
у ани 4 страницы, а у тома 2 страницы; у ани вдвое больше, чем у тома.
у тома 5 шариков, а у иры 3 шарика; вместе у них 8 шариков.
у петра 4 яблока, а у иры 7 яблок; у петра на 3 яблока меньше, чем у иры.
peter and mary gave 5 books to each other; peter gave 5 books to mary, and mary gave 5 books to peter.
mary has 11 pens, and ivan has 6 pens; the total comes to 17 pens altogether.
peter bought 8 bags of sugar, and ann bought 5 bags of sugar; ann bought less sugar than peter.
у маши 12 цветков, а у ивана 6 цветков; у маши на 6 цветков больше, чем у ивана.
ivan bought 14 toys, but ann bought just 7 toys; 7 toys are fewer than 14 toys, and ann bought less than ivan.
ann has 3 pages, and tom has 2 pages; together they have 5 pages, and apart they have 3 pages and 2 pages.
tom has 5 balls, and ira has 5 balls; the two counts are equal.
ira has 12 apples, and peter has 4 apples; ira has triple the apples of peter.
peter has 10 books, and mary has 5 books; peter has twice as many books as mary.
mary has 11 pens, and ivan has 6 pens. how many more pens does mary have than ivan? mary has 5 more pens than ivan.
маша купила 6 чашек чая, а том купил 5 чашек чая; у тома чая меньше, чем у маши.
mary has 12 flowers, and ivan has 6 flowers; mary has double the flowers of ivan.
ivan has 14 toys, ann has 7 toys and tom has 1 toy; ivan has the most toys and tom has the least toys.
ann has 3 pages, and tom has 3 pages; ann has the same number of pages as tom.
tom has 5 balls, and ira has 3 balls; tom has 2 more balls than ira.
у тома 5 шариков, а у иры 3 шарика. на сколько шариков больше у тома? у тома на 2 шарика больше, чем у иры.
у иры 7 яблок, и у петра 7 яблок; у них поровну яблок.
у петра 9 книг, а у маши 5 книг; у петра на 4 книги больше, чем у маши.
mary bought 11 pens, but ivan bought just 6 pens; 6 pens are fewer than 11 pens, and ivan bought less than mary.
пётр купил 8 коробок сахара, а аня купила 5 коробок сахара; у ани сахара меньше, чем у петра.
у ивана 6 цветков, а у маши 12 цветков; у ивана на 6 цветков меньше, чем у маши.
ivan and ann gave 7 toys to each other; ivan gave 7 toys to ann, and ann gave 7 toys to ivan.
ann has 3 pages, and tom has 2 pages; the total comes to 5 pages altogether.
tom has 5 balls, and ira has 3 balls; the two counts are different.
ira has 8 apples, and peter has 4 apples; peter has half the apples of ira.
peter has 10 books, and mary has 5 books; peter has double the books of mary.
mary has 11 pens, ivan has 6 pens and ann has 1 pen; mary has the most pens and ann has the least pens.
ivan bought 4 cups of coffee, and ira bought 1 cup of coffee; ira bought less coffee than ivan.
mary has 18 flowers, and ivan has 6 flowers; mary has triple the flowers of ivan.
ivan has 14 toys, and ann has 7 toys; ivan has twice as many toys as ann.
ann has 3 pages, and tom has 2 pages. how many more pages does ann have than tom? ann has 1 more page than tom.
ira has 3 balls, and tom has 5 balls; ira has 2 fewer balls than tom.
у тома 6 шариков, а у иры 3 шарика; у тома вдвое больше, чем у иры.
у иры 7 яблок, а у петра 4 яблока; вместе у них 11 яблок.
у маши 5 книг, а у петра 9 книг; у маши на 4 книги меньше, чем у петра.
mary and ivan gave 6 pens to each other; mary gave 6 pens to ivan, and ivan gave 6 pens to mary.
mary bought 2 bags of salt, and tom bought 1 bag of salt; tom bought less salt than mary.
у маши 12 цветков, и у ивана 12 цветков; у них поровну цветков.
у ивана 14 игрушек, а у ани 7 игрушек; у ивана на 7 игрушек больше, чем у ани.
ann bought 3 pages, but tom bought just 2 pages; 2 pages are fewer than 3 pages, and tom bought less than ann.
tom has 5 balls, and ira has 3 balls; together they have 8 balls, and apart they have 5 balls and 3 balls.
ira has 7 apples, and peter has 7 apples; the two counts are equal.
peter has 15 books, and mary has 5 books; peter has triple the books of mary.
mary has 12 pens, and ivan has 6 pens; mary has twice as many pens as ivan.
иван купил 4 чашки кофе, а ира купила 1 чашка кофе; у иры кофе меньше, чем у ивана.
mary has 12 flowers, and ivan has 6 flowers; ivan has half the flowers of mary.
ivan has 14 toys, and ann has 7 toys; ivan has double the toys of ann.
ann has 3 pages, tom has 2 pages and ira has 1 page; ann has the most pages and ira has the least pages.
tom has 5 balls, and ira has 5 balls; tom has the same number of balls as ira.
ira has 7 apples, and peter has 4 apples; ira has 3 more apples than peter.
у иры 7 яблок, а у петра 4 яблока. на сколько яблок больше у иры? у иры на 3 яблока больше, чем у петра.
у петра 9 книг, и у маши 9 книг; у них поровну книг.
у маши 11 ручек, а у ивана 6 ручек; у маши на 5 ручек больше, чем у ивана.
маша купила 2 коробки соли, а том купил 1 коробка соли; у тома соли меньше, чем у маши.
у маши 12 цветков, а у ивана 6 цветков; вместе у них 18 цветков.
у ани 7 игрушек, а у ивана 14 игрушек; у ани на 7 игрушек меньше, чем у ивана.
ann and tom gave 2 pages to each other; ann gave 2 pages to tom, and tom gave 2 pages to ann.
tom has 5 balls, and ira has 3 balls; the total comes to 8 balls altogether.
ira has 7 apples, and peter has 4 apples; the two counts are different.
peter has 10 books, and mary has 5 books; mary has half the books of peter.
mary has 12 pens, and ivan has 6 pens; mary has double the pens of ivan.
ann bought 3 bottles of milk, and peter bought 2 bottles of milk; peter bought less milk than ann.
mary has 12 flowers, and ivan has 12 flowers; the two counts are equal.
ivan has 21 toys, and ann has 7 toys; ivan has triple the toys of ann.
ann has 4 pages, and tom has 2 pages; ann has twice as many pages as tom.
tom has 5 balls, and ira has 3 balls. how many more balls does tom have than ira? tom has 2 more balls than ira.
peter has 4 apples, and ira has 7 apples; peter has 3 fewer apples than ira.
у иры 8 яблок, а у петра 4 яблока; у иры вдвое больше, чем у петра.
у петра 9 книг, а у маши 5 книг; вместе у них 14 книг.
у ивана 6 ручек, а у маши 11 ручек; у ивана на 5 ручек меньше, чем у маши.
mary has 12 flowers, and ivan has 6 flowers; mary has 6 more flowers than ivan.
у маши 12 цветков, а у ивана 6 цветков. на сколько цветков больше у маши? у маши на 6 цветков больше, чем у ивана.
у ивана 14 игрушек, и у ани 14 игрушек; у них поровну игрушек.
у ани 3 страницы, а у тома 2 страницы; у ани на 1 страница больше, чем у тома.
tom bought 5 balls, but ira bought just 3 balls; 3 balls are fewer than 5 balls, and ira bought less than tom.
ira has 7 apples, and peter has 4 apples; together they have 11 apples, and apart they have 7 apples and 4 apples.
peter has 9 books, and mary has 9 books; the two counts are equal.
mary has 18 pens, and ivan has 6 pens; mary has triple the pens of ivan.
аня купила 3 чашки молока, а пётр купил 2 чашки молока; у петра молока меньше, чем у ани.
mary has 12 flowers, and ivan has 6 flowers; the two counts are different.
ivan has 14 toys, and ann has 7 toys; ann has half the toys of ivan.
ann has 4 pages, and tom has 2 pages; ann has double the pages of tom.
tom has 5 balls, ira has 3 balls and peter has 1 ball; tom has the most balls and peter has the least balls.
ira has 7 apples, and peter has 7 apples; ira has the same number of apples as peter.
peter has 9 books, and mary has 5 books; peter has 4 more books than mary.
у петра 9 книг, а у маши 5 книг. на сколько книг больше у петра? у петра на 4 книги больше, чем у маши.
у маши 11 ручек, и у ивана 11 ручек; у них поровну ручек.
ivan has 6 flowers, and mary has 12 flowers; ivan has 6 fewer flowers than mary.
у маши 12 цветков, а у ивана 6 цветков; у маши вдвое больше, чем у ивана.
у ивана 14 игрушек, а у ани 7 игрушек; вместе у них 21 игрушка.
у тома 2 страницы, а у ани 3 страницы; у тома на 1 страница меньше, чем у ани.
tom and ira gave 3 balls to each other; tom gave 3 balls to ira, and ira gave 3 balls to tom.
ira has 7 apples, and peter has 4 apples; the total comes to 11 apples altogether.
peter has 9 books, and mary has 5 books; the two counts are different.
mary has 12 pens, and ivan has 6 pens; ivan has half the pens of mary.
tom bought 6 bottles of water, and mary bought 3 bottles of water; mary bought less water than tom.
mary has 12 flowers, and ivan has 6 flowers; together they have 18 flowers, and apart they have 12 flowers and 6 flowers.
ivan has 14 toys, and ann has 14 toys; the two counts are equal.
ann has 6 pages, and tom has 2 pages; ann has triple the pages of tom.
tom has 6 balls, and ira has 3 balls; tom has twice as many balls as ira.
ira has 7 apples, and peter has 4 apples. how many more apples does ira have than peter? ira has 3 more apples than peter.
mary has 5 books, and peter has 9 books; mary has 4 fewer books than peter.
у петра 10 книг, а у маши 5 книг; у петра вдвое больше, чем у маши.
у маши 11 ручек, а у ивана 6 ручек; вместе у них 17 ручек.
mary has 12 flowers, and ivan has 12 flowers; mary has the same number of flowers as ivan.
ivan has 14 toys, and ann has 7 toys; ivan has 7 more toys than ann.
у ивана 14 игрушек, а у ани 7 игрушек. на сколько игрушек больше у ивана? у ивана на 7 игрушек больше, чем у ани.
у ани 3 страницы, и у тома 3 страницы; у них поровну страниц.
у тома 5 шариков, а у иры 3 шарика; у тома на 2 шарика больше, чем у иры.
ira bought 7 apples, but peter bought just 4 apples; 4 apples are fewer than 7 apples, and peter bought less than ira.
peter has 9 books, and mary has 5 books; together they have 14 books, and apart they have 9 books and 5 books.
mary has 11 pens, and ivan has 11 pens; the two counts are equal.
том купил 6 чашек воды, а маша купила 3 чашки воды; у маши воды меньше, чем у тома.

у ивана было 25 шариков, иван израсходовал 7 шариков; осталось 18 шариков.
ira had 20 flowers and used 6 flowers; ira keeps the remaining 14 flowers.
mary had 20 flowers and used 5 flowers; the rest are 15 flowers.
у ани было 10 ручек, аня израсходовала 2 ручки. сколько ручек осталось? осталось 8 ручек.
peter had 25 balls and used 1 ball. how many balls remain? 24 balls remain.
ivan had 25 balls and used 7 balls; 18 balls are left over.
ira had 20 flowers and used 6 flowers; 14 flowers remain.
у маши было 10 ручек, маша израсходовала 3 ручки; осталось 7 ручек.
ann had 10 pens and used 2 pens; ann keeps the remaining 8 pens.
peter had 25 balls and used 1 ball; the rest are 24 balls.
у маши было 20 цветков, маша израсходовала 5 цветков. сколько цветков осталось? осталось 15 цветков.
tom had 15 coins and used 4 coins. how many coins remain? 11 coins remain.
mary had 10 pens and used 3 pens; 7 pens are left over.
ann had 10 pens and used 2 pens; 8 pens remain.
у иры было 20 цветков, ира израсходовала 6 цветков; осталось 14 цветков.
mary had 20 flowers and used 5 flowers; mary keeps the remaining 15 flowers.
tom had 15 coins and used 4 coins; the rest are 11 coins.
у петра было 25 шариков, пётр израсходовал 1 шарик. сколько шариков осталось? осталось 24 шарика.
ivan had 25 balls and used 7 balls. how many balls remain? 18 balls remain.
ira had 20 flowers and used 6 flowers; 14 flowers are left over.
mary had 20 flowers and used 5 flowers; 15 flowers remain.
у ани было 10 ручек, аня израсходовала 2 ручки; осталось 8 ручек.
peter had 25 balls and used 1 ball; peter keeps the remaining 24 balls.
ivan had 25 balls and used 7 balls; the rest are 18 balls.
у тома было 15 монет, том израсходовал 4 монеты. сколько монет осталось? осталось 11 монет.
mary had 10 pens and used 3 pens. how many pens remain? 7 pens remain.
ann had 10 pens and used 2 pens; 8 pens are left over.
peter had 25 balls and used 1 ball; 24 balls remain.
у маши было 20 цветков, маша израсходовала 5 цветков; осталось 15 цветков.
tom had 15 coins and used 4 coins; tom keeps the remaining 11 coins.
mary had 10 pens and used 3 pens; the rest are 7 pens.
у ивана было 25 шариков, иван израсходовал 7 шариков. сколько шариков осталось? осталось 18 шариков.
ira had 20 flowers and used 6 flowers. how many flowers remain? 14 flowers remain.
mary had 20 flowers and used 5 flowers; 15 flowers are left over.
tom had 15 coins and used 4 coins; 11 coins remain.
у петра было 25 шариков, пётр израсходовал 1 шарик; осталось 24 шарика.
ivan had 25 balls and used 7 balls; ivan keeps the remaining 18 balls.
ira had 20 flowers and used 6 flowers; the rest are 14 flowers.
у маши было 10 ручек, маша израсходовала 3 ручки. сколько ручек осталось? осталось 7 ручек.
ann had 10 pens and used 2 pens. how many pens remain? 8 pens remain.
peter had 25 balls and used 1 ball; 24 balls are left over.
ivan had 25 balls and used 7 balls; 18 balls remain.
у тома было 15 монет, том израсходовал 4 монеты; осталось 11 монет.
mary had 10 pens and used 3 pens; mary keeps the remaining 7 pens.
ann had 10 pens and used 2 pens; the rest are 8 pens.
у иры было 20 цветков, ира израсходовала 6 цветков. сколько цветков осталось? осталось 14 цветков.
mary had 20 flowers and used 5 flowers. how many flowers remain? 15 flowers remain.
tom had 15 coins and used 4 coins; 11 coins are left over.
mary had 10 pens and used 3 pens; 7 pens remain.

корзина вмещает 17 цветков; иван положил туда 1 цветок; не хватает ещё 16 цветков.
ira emptied the box of 4 flowers; the box keeps 0 flowers now.
the basket holds 17 flowers; ivan fills the basket with 1 flower and needs 16 flowers more.
том освободил чашка: было 3 карты, теперь там 0 карт.
mary empties the box of 5 cards; the box keeps 0 cards then.
the cup holds 9 cards and tom filled the cup with 3 cards. how many cards does the cup need? the cup needs 6 cards more.
the box holds 14 cards; mary filled the box with 5 cards; the box needs 9 cards more.
сумка вмещает 6 яблок; аня положила туда 2 яблока; не хватает ещё 4 яблока.
peter emptied the basket of 5 apples; the basket keeps 0 apples now.
the bag holds 6 apples; ann fills the bag with 2 apples and needs 4 apples more.
ира освободила коробка: было 4 цветка, теперь там 0 цветков.
ivan empties the basket of 1 flower; the basket keeps 0 flowers then.
the box holds 12 flowers and ira filled the box with 4 flowers. how many flowers does the box need? the box needs 8 flowers more.
the basket holds 17 flowers; ivan filled the basket with 1 flower; the basket needs 16 flowers more.
чашка вмещает 9 карт; том положил туда 3 карты; не хватает ещё 6 карт.
mary emptied the box of 5 cards; the box keeps 0 cards now.
the cup holds 9 cards; tom fills the cup with 3 cards and needs 6 cards more.
пётр освободил корзина: было 5 яблок, теперь там 0 яблок.
ann empties the bag of 2 apples; the bag keeps 0 apples then.
the basket holds 15 apples and peter filled the basket with 5 apples. how many apples does the basket need? the basket needs 10 apples more.
the bag holds 6 apples; ann filled the bag with 2 apples; the bag needs 4 apples more.
коробка вмещает 12 цветков; ира положила туда 4 цветка; не хватает ещё 8 цветков.
ivan emptied the basket of 1 flower; the basket keeps 0 flowers now.
the box holds 12 flowers; ira fills the box with 4 flowers and needs 8 flowers more.
маша освободила коробка: было 5 карт, теперь там 0 карт.
tom empties the cup of 3 cards; the cup keeps 0 cards then.
the box holds 14 cards and mary filled the box with 5 cards. how many cards does the box need? the box needs 9 cards more.
the cup holds 9 cards; tom filled the cup with 3 cards; the cup needs 6 cards more.
корзина вмещает 15 яблок; пётр положил туда 5 яблок; не хватает ещё 10 яблок.
ann emptied the bag of 2 apples; the bag keeps 0 apples now.
the basket holds 15 apples; peter fills the basket with 5 apples and needs 10 apples more.
иван освободил корзина: было 1 цветок, теперь там 0 цветков.
ira empties the box of 4 flowers; the box keeps 0 flowers then.
the basket holds 17 flowers and ivan filled the basket with 1 flower. how many flowers does the basket need? the basket needs 16 flowers more.
the box holds 12 flowers; ira filled the box with 4 flowers; the box needs 8 flowers more.
коробка вмещает 14 карт; маша положила туда 5 карт; не хватает ещё 9 карт.
tom emptied the cup of 3 cards; the cup keeps 0 cards now.
the box holds 14 cards; mary fills the box with 5 cards and needs 9 cards more.
аня освободила сумка: было 2 яблока, теперь там 0 яблок.
peter empties the basket of 5 apples; the basket keeps 0 apples then.
the bag holds 6 apples and ann filled the bag with 2 apples. how many apples does the bag need? the bag needs 4 apples more.
the basket holds 15 apples; peter filled the basket with 5 apples; the basket needs 10 apples more.

tom shared 20 cups among 5 friends; each friend got 4 cups.
иван разделил 9 монет между 3 друзьями; каждому досталось по 3 монеты.
mary shared 10 cards among 2 friends. how many cards did each friend get? each friend got 5 cards.
peter shares 15 toys among 3 friends; every friend gets 5 toys.
ira shared 4 flowers among 2 friends; each friend got 2 flowers.
аня разделила 24 коробки между 4 друзьями; каждому досталось по 6 коробок.
ivan shared 9 coins among 3 friends. how many coins did each friend get? each friend got 3 coins.
mary shares 10 cards among 2 friends; every friend gets 5 cards.
peter shared 15 toys among 3 friends; each friend got 5 toys.
том разделил 20 чашек между 5 друзьями; каждому досталось по 4 чашки.
ann shared 24 boxes among 4 friends. how many boxes did each friend get? each friend got 6 boxes.
ivan shares 9 coins among 3 friends; every friend gets 3 coins.
mary shared 10 cards among 2 friends; each friend got 5 cards.
ира разделила 4 цветка между 2 друзьями; каждому досталось по 2 цветка.
tom shared 20 cups among 5 friends. how many cups did each friend get? each friend got 4 cups.
ann shares 24 boxes among 4 friends; every friend gets 6 boxes.
ivan shared 9 coins among 3 friends; each friend got 3 coins.
пётр разделил 15 игрушек между 3 друзьями; каждому досталось по 5 игрушек.
ira shared 4 flowers among 2 friends. how many flowers did each friend get? each friend got 2 flowers.
tom shares 20 cups among 5 friends; every friend gets 4 cups.
ann shared 24 boxes among 4 friends; each friend got 6 boxes.
маша разделила 10 карт между 2 друзьями; каждому досталось по 5 карт.
peter shared 15 toys among 3 friends. how many toys did each friend get? each friend got 5 toys.
ira shares 4 flowers among 2 friends; every friend gets 2 flowers.

tom earned 30 coins and paid 1 coin for a ticket; tom saved 29 coins.
иван заработал 22 рубля и заплатил 2 рубля за билет; иван отложил 20 рублей.
mary earned 18 coins and paid 5 coins for a ticket. how many coins did mary save? mary saved 13 coins.
peter earns 13 coins and pays 5 coins for a ticket; peter saves 8 coins.
ira earned 9 coins and paid 3 coins for a ticket; ira saved 6 coins.
аня заработала 26 рублей и заплатила 4 рубля за билет; аня отложила 22 рубля.
ivan earned 22 coins and paid 2 coins for a ticket. how many coins did ivan save? ivan saved 20 coins.
mary earns 18 coins and pays 5 coins for a ticket; mary saves 13 coins.
peter earned 13 coins and paid 5 coins for a ticket; peter saved 8 coins.
том заработал 30 рублей и заплатил 1 рубль за билет; том отложил 29 рублей.
ann earned 26 coins and paid 4 coins for a ticket. how many coins did ann save? ann saved 22 coins.
ivan earns 22 coins and pays 2 coins for a ticket; ivan saves 20 coins.
mary earned 18 coins and paid 5 coins for a ticket; mary saved 13 coins.
ира заработала 9 рублей и заплатила 3 рубля за билет; ира отложила 6 рублей.
tom earned 30 coins and paid 1 coin for a ticket. how many coins did tom save? tom saved 29 coins.
ann earns 26 coins and pays 4 coins for a ticket; ann saves 22 coins.
ivan earned 22 coins and paid 2 coins for a ticket; ivan saved 20 coins.
пётр заработал 13 рублей и заплатил 5 рублей за билет; пётр отложил 8 рублей.
ira earned 9 coins and paid 3 coins for a ticket. how many coins did ira save? ira saved 6 coins.
tom earns 30 coins and pays 1 coin for a ticket; tom saves 29 coins.
ann earned 26 coins and paid 4 coins for a ticket; ann saved 22 coins.
маша заработала 18 рублей и заплатила 5 рублей за билет; маша отложила 13 рублей.
peter earned 13 coins and paid 5 coins for a ticket. how many coins did peter save? peter saved 8 coins.
ira earns 9 coins and pays 3 coins for a ticket; ira saves 6 coins.

mary has 2 apples; mary ate 1 apple and keeps the other apple.
3 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у тома 4 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
5 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book; the class has 5 books.
peter has 1 book and bought another book; peter has 2 books.
у ивана 2 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
3 students are in the class, and 3 students have a key; all students have a key.
4 students are in the class, and every student has 4 books; the class has 16 books.
у иры 5 коробок, и в каждой коробке 1 цветок; всего 5 цветков.
6 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
2 students are in the class, and 2 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
3 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 9 books.
5 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
6 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
у маши 6 книг, и 6 книг прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
ivan has 2 coins; ivan picked 1 coin and keeps the other coin.
4 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у иры 5 книг, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
6 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books; the class has 12 books.
mary has 1 apple and bought another apple; mary has 2 apples.
у ани 3 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
4 students are in the class, and 4 students have a key; all students have a key.
5 students are in the class, and every student has 1 book; the class has 5 books.
у петра 6 коробок, и в каждой коробке 2 книги; всего 12 книг.
2 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
3 students are in the class, and 3 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
4 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 16 books.
6 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
6 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
у ивана 2 книги, и 2 книги прочитаны; обе книги прочитаны.
ann has 2 pages; ann read 1 page and keeps the other page.
5 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у петра 6 книг, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
6 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book; the class has 6 books.
ivan has 1 coin and bought another coin; ivan has 2 coins.
у тома 4 книги, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
5 students are in the class, and 5 students have a key; all students have a key.
6 students are in the class, and every student has 2 books; the class has 12 books.
у маши 6 коробок, и в каждой коробке 1 яблоко; всего 6 яблок.
3 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
4 students are in the class, and 4 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
5 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book. how many books does the class have? the class has 5 books.
6 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
2 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
у ани 3 книги, и 3 книги прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
tom has 2 pencils; tom picked 1 pencil and keeps the other pencil.
6 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у маши 6 книг, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
2 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books; the class has 4 books.
ann has 1 page and bought another page; ann has 2 pages.
у иры 5 книг, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
6 students are in the class, and 6 students have a key; all students have a key.
6 students are in the class, and every student has 1 book; the class has 6 books.
у ивана 2 коробки, и в каждой коробке 2 монеты; всего 4 монеты.
4 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
5 students are in the class, and 5 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
6 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 12 books.
2 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
3 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
у тома 4 книги, и 4 книги прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
ira has 2 flowers; ira planted 1 flower and keeps the other flower.
6 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у ивана 2 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
3 students are in the class, and each student has 3 books; the class has 9 books.
tom has 1 pencil and bought another pencil; tom has 2 pencils.
у петра 6 книг, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
6 students are in the class, and 6 students have a key; all students have a key.
2 students are in the class, and every student has 2 books; the class has 4 books.
у ани 3 коробки, и в каждой коробке 3 страницы; всего 9 страниц.
5 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
6 students are in the class, and 6 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
6 students are in the class, and each student has 1 book. how many books does the class have? the class has 6 books.
3 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
4 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
у иры 5 книг, и 5 книг прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.
peter has 2 books; peter read 1 book and keeps the other book.
2 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no one in the class has a key.
у ани 3 книги, и 1 книга прочитаны; некоторые книги прочитаны.
4 students are in the class, and each student has 4 books; the class has 16 books.
ira has 1 flower and bought another flower; ira has 2 flowers.
у маши 6 книг, и 0 книг прочитаны; ни одна книга не прочитана.
2 students are in the class, and 2 students have a key; both students have a key.
3 students are in the class, and every student has 3 books; the class has 9 books.
у тома 4 коробки, и в каждой коробке 4 карандаша; всего 16 карандашей.
6 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; some students have a key.
6 students are in the class, and 6 students have a key; everyone in the class has a key.
2 students are in the class, and each student has 2 books. how many books does the class have? the class has 4 books.
4 students are in the class, and 0 students have a key; no students have a key.
5 students are in the class, and 1 student has a key; someone in the class has a key.
у петра 6 книг, и 6 книг прочитаны; все книги прочитаны.

there is 1 cup on the floor, and there are 9 cups on the floor.
1 шарик и 5 шариков дают всего 6 шариков.
there is 1 toy in the box, and there are 3 toys in the box.
1 stone and 6 stones make 7 stones in all.
there is 1 shelf in the box, and there are 4 shelves in the box.
mary took 1 card and 1 ticket; mary took a card and a ticket.
there is 1 toy on the shelf, and there are 3 toys on the shelf.
1 pencil and 3 pencils make 4 pencils in all.
there is 1 bag in the box, and there are 7 bags in the box.
1 letter and 4 letters make 5 letters in all.
there is 1 stick in the box, and there are 2 sticks in the box.
ann took 1 box and 1 cake; ann took a box and a cake.
there is 1 ball on the floor, and there are 5 balls on the floor.
1 cup and 7 cups make 8 cups in all.
there is 1 tree in the box, and there are 5 trees in the box.
1 plate and 2 plates make 3 plates in all.
ann waited a ticket and counted 1 ticket.
ira took 1 flower and 1 lamp; ira took a flower and a lamp.
there is 1 pen in the box, and there are 2 pens in the box.
1 ball and 5 balls make 6 balls in all.
there is 1 key in the box, and there are 3 keys in the box.
1 shoe and 6 shoes make 7 shoes in all.
1 coin and 7 coins make 8 coins in all.
mary took 1 page and 1 note; mary took a page and a note.
there is 1 box in the box, and there are 6 boxes in the box.
1 egg and 3 eggs make 4 eggs in all.
there is 1 list in the box, and there are 7 lists in the box.
ann waited an office and counted 1 office.
1 cup and 9 cups make 10 cups in all.
1 apple and 6 apples make 7 apples in all.
there is 1 page in the box, and there are 4 pages in the box.
1 chair and 7 chairs make 8 chairs in all.
there is 1 shirt in the box, and there are 5 shirts in the box.
1 карта и 6 карт дают всего 7 карт.
1 toy and 3 toys make 4 toys in all.
1 card and 4 cards make 5 cards in all.
there is 1 bottle in the box, and there are 2 bottles in the box.
1 line and 5 lines make 6 lines in all.
ann waited an hour and counted 1 hour.
1 коробка и 8 коробок дают всего 9 коробок.
1 ball and 5 balls make 6 balls in all.
1 flower and 2 flowers make 3 flowers in all.
there is 1 stone in the box, and there are 6 stones in the box.
1 basket and 3 baskets make 4 baskets in all.
there is 1 card on the table, and there are 6 cards on the table.
1 цветок и 2 цветка дают всего 3 цветка.
there is 1 pencil in the box, and there are 3 pencils in the box.
1 ticket and 6 tickets make 7 tickets in all.
there is 1 letter in the box, and there are 4 letters in the box.
1 hat and 7 hats make 8 hats in all.
there is 1 box on the chair, and there are 8 boxes on the chair.
1 страница и 4 страницы дают всего 5 страниц.
there is 1 cup in the box, and there are 7 cups in the box.
1 cake and 4 cakes make 5 cakes in all.
there is 1 plate in the box, and there are 2 plates in the box.
ann waited a key and counted 1 key.
there is 1 flower on the table, and there are 2 flowers on the table.
1 book and 7 books make 8 books in all.
there is 1 ball in the box, and there are 5 balls in the box.
1 lamp and 2 lamps make 3 lamps in all.
there is 1 shoe in the box, and there are 6 shoes in the box.
ivan took 1 coin and 1 bottle; ivan took a coin and a bottle.
there is 1 page on the chair, and there are 4 pages on the chair.
1 coin and 5 coins make 6 coins in all.
there is 1 egg in the box, and there are 3 eggs in the box.
1 note and 6 notes make 7 notes in all.
ann waited an egg and counted 1 egg.
tom took 1 cup and 1 stone; tom took a cup and a stone.
there is 1 apple in the box, and there are 6 apples in the box.
1 toy and 3 toys make 4 toys in all.
there is 1 chair in the box, and there are 7 chairs in the box.
1 shelf and 4 shelves make 5 shelves in all.
1 card and 6 cards make 7 cards in all.
peter took 1 toy and 1 letter; peter took a toy and a letter.
there is 1 card in the box, and there are 4 cards in the box.
1 bag and 7 bags make 8 bags in all.
there is 1 line in the box, and there are 5 lines in the box.
1 stick and 2 sticks make 3 sticks in all.
1 box and 8 boxes make 9 boxes in all.
ivan took 1 ball and 1 plate; ivan took a ball and a plate.
there is 1 flower in the box, and there are 2 flowers in the box.
1 tree and 5 trees make 6 trees in all.
there is 1 basket in the box, and there are 3 baskets in the box.
ann waited a letter and counted 1 letter.
1 flower and 2 flowers make 3 flowers in all.
1 pen and 2 pens make 3 pens in all.
there is 1 ticket in the box, and there are 6 tickets in the box.
1 key and 3 keys make 4 keys in all.
there is 1 hat in the box, and there are 7 hats in the box.
1 монета и 7 монет дают всего 8 монет.
1 page and 4 pages make 5 pages in all.
1 box and 6 boxes make 7 boxes in all.
there is 1 cake in the box, and there are 4 cakes in the box.
1 list and 7 lists make 8 lists in all.
ann waited a book and counted 1 book.
1 чашка и 9 чашек дают всего 10 чашек.
there is 1 book in the box, and there are 7 books in the box.
1 page and 4 pages make 5 pages in all.
there is 1 lamp in the box, and there are 2 lamps in the box.
1 shirt and 5 shirts make 6 shirts in all.
there is 1 coin on the shelf, and there are 7 coins on the shelf.
1 игрушка и 3 игрушки дают всего 4 игрушки.
there is 1 coin in the box, and there are 5 coins in the box.
1 bottle and 2 bottles make 3 bottles in all.
there is 1 note in the box, and there are 6 notes in the box.
ann waited an apple and counted 1 apple.

a man and a woman together are called people.
мать и отец вместе зовутся люди.
6 workers and 2 drivers came to the library. how many people came to the library? 8 people came to the library in all.
what are people? a friend and a neighbour together are called people.
a hen and a duck together are called animals.
кто такие фрукты? виноград и дыня вместе зовутся фрукты.
игла и напёрсток вместе зовутся инструменты.
what are vegetables? a cucumber and a tomato together are called vegetables.
people: man, woman, teacher, student, mother, father, seller, buyer, doctor, neighbour, worker, driver, baker, farmer, friend.
6 men and 5 women came to the farm; 11 people came to the farm in all.
a brother and a sister together are called children.
доктор и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
2 friends and 1 neighbour came to the shop. how many people came to the shop? 3 people came to the shop in all.
кто такие животные? заяц и медведь вместе зовутся животные.
банан и персик вместе зовутся фрукты.
what are tools? a screwdriver and a pliers together are called tools.
a beet and a turnip together are called vegetables.
кто такие дети? племянник и племянница вместе зовутся дети.
1 boy and 1 girl came to the library; 2 children came to the library in all.
2 brothers and 4 sisters came to the school; 6 children came to the school in all.
a seller and a buyer together are called people.
пекарь и фермер вместе зовутся люди.
лиса и волк вместе зовутся животные.
what are fruits? a plum and a cherry together are called fruits.
a axe and a spade together are called tools.
кто такие овощи? лук и чеснок вместе зовутся овощи.
внук и внучка вместе зовутся дети.
овощи: морковь, капуста, лук, чеснок, свёкла, репа, огурец, помидор, картофель, кабачок.
1 teacher and 1 student came to the shop; 2 people came to the shop in all.
4 sellers and 3 buyers came to the station; 7 people came to the station in all.
a worker and a driver together are called people.
what are animals? a cat and a dog together are called animals.
a apple and a pear together are called fruits.
кто такие инструменты? молоток и пила вместе зовутся инструменты.
морковь и капуста вместе зовутся овощи.
what are vegetables? a potato and a marrow together are called vegetables.
fruits: apple, pear, plum, cherry, orange, lemon, banana, peach, grape, melon.
кто такие люди? мужчина и женщина вместе зовутся люди.
1 mother and 1 father came to the market; 2 people came to the market in all.
6 workers and 2 drivers came to the library; 8 people came to the library in all.
a friend and a neighbour together are called people.
кто такие животные? курица и утка вместе зовутся животные.
виноград и дыня вместе зовутся фрукты.
what are tools? a knife and a scissors together are called tools.
a cucumber and a tomato together are called vegetables.
дети: мальчик, девочка, брат, сестра, сын, дочь, внук, внучка, племянник, племянница.
what are children? a boy and a girl together are called children.
кто такие дети? брат и сестра вместе зовутся дети.
1 doctor and 1 neighbour came to the park; 2 people came to the park in all.
2 friends and 1 neighbour came to the shop; 3 people came to the shop in all.
заяц и медведь вместе зовутся животные.
what are fruits? a orange and a lemon together are called fruits.
a screwdriver and a pliers together are called tools.
кто такие овощи? свёкла и репа вместе зовутся овощи.
племянник и племянница вместе зовутся дети.
5 boys and 3 girls came to the library. how many children came to the library? 8 children came to the library in all.
what are people? a teacher and a student together are called people.
кто такие люди? продавец и покупатель вместе зовутся люди.
1 baker and 1 farmer came to the farm; 2 people came to the farm in all.
what are animals? a cow and a horse together are called animals.
a plum and a cherry together are called fruits.
кто такие инструменты? топор и лопата вместе зовутся инструменты.
лук и чеснок вместе зовутся овощи.
what are children? a son and a daughter together are called children.
vegetables: carrot, cabbage, onion, garlic, beet, turnip, cucumber, tomato, potato, marrow.
1 teacher and 2 students came to the shop. how many people came to the shop? 3 people came to the shop in all.
what are people? a mother and a father together are called people.
кто такие люди? рабочий и водитель вместе зовутся люди.
a cat and a dog together are called animals.
кто такие фрукты? яблоко и груша вместе зовутся фрукты.
молоток и пила вместе зовутся инструменты.
what are tools? a needle and a thimble together are called tools.
a potato and a marrow together are called vegetables.
животные: кошка, собака, корова, лошадь, лиса, волк, заяц, медведь, курица, утка.
мужчина и женщина вместе зовутся люди.
3 mothers and 1 father came to the market. how many people came to the market? 4 people came to the market in all.
what are people? a doctor and a neighbour together are called people.
кто такие люди? друг и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
курица и утка вместе зовутся животные.
what are fruits? a banana and a peach together are called fruits.
a knife and a scissors together are called tools.
кто такие овощи? огурец и помидор вместе зовутся овощи.
children: boy, girl, brother, sister, son, daughter, grandson, granddaughter, nephew, niece.
a boy and a girl together are called children.
брат и сестра вместе зовутся дети.
5 doctors and 5 neighbours came to the park. how many people came to the park? 10 people came to the park in all.
what are people? a baker and a farmer together are called people.
what are animals? a fox and a wolf together are called animals.
a orange and a lemon together are called fruits.
кто такие инструменты? отвёртка и клещи вместе зовутся инструменты.
свёкла и репа вместе зовутся овощи.
what are children? a grandson and a granddaughter together are called children.
5 boys and 3 girls came to the library; 8 children came to the library in all.
a teacher and a student together are called people.
продавец и покупатель вместе зовутся люди.
1 baker and 4 farmers came to the farm. how many people came to the farm? 5 people came to the farm in all.
a cow and a horse together are called animals.
кто такие фрукты? слива и вишня вместе зовутся фрукты.
топор и лопата вместе зовутся инструменты.
what are vegetables? a carrot and a cabbage together are called vegetables.
a son and a daughter together are called children.
инструменты: молоток, пила, топор, лопата, отвёртка, клещи, нож, ножницы, игла, напёрсток.
1 teacher and 2 students came to the shop; 3 people came to the shop in all.
a mother and a father together are called people.
рабочий и водитель вместе зовутся люди.
кто такие животные? кошка и собака вместе зовутся животные.
яблоко и груша вместе зовутся фрукты.
what are fruits? a grape and a melon together are called fruits.
a needle and a thimble together are called tools.
кто такие овощи? картофель и кабачок вместе зовутся овощи.
animals: cat, dog, cow, horse, fox, wolf, hare, bear, hen, duck.
1 man and 1 woman came to the farm; 2 people came to the farm in all.
3 mothers and 1 father came to the market; 4 people came to the market in all.
a doctor and a neighbour together are called people.
друг и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
what are animals? a hare and a bear together are called animals.
a banana and a peach together are called fruits.
кто такие инструменты? нож и ножницы вместе зовутся инструменты.
огурец и помидор вместе зовутся овощи.
what are children? a nephew and a niece together are called children.
кто такие дети? мальчик и девочка вместе зовутся дети.
1 brother and 1 sister came to the school; 2 children came to the school in all.
5 doctors and 5 neighbours came to the park; 10 people came to the park in all.
a baker and a farmer together are called people.
a fox and a wolf together are called animals.
кто такие фрукты? апельсин и лимон вместе зовутся фрукты.
отвёртка и клещи вместе зовутся инструменты.
what are vegetables? a onion and a garlic together are called vegetables.
a grandson and a granddaughter together are called children.
в семье мать, отец и ребёнок; в семье 3 человека.
кто такие люди? учитель и ученик вместе зовутся люди.
1 seller and 1 buyer came to the station; 2 people came to the station in all.
1 baker and 4 farmers came to the farm; 5 people came to the farm in all.
кто такие животные? корова и лошадь вместе зовутся животные.
слива и вишня вместе зовутся фрукты.
what are tools? a hammer and a saw together are called tools.
a carrot and a cabbage together are called vegetables.
кто такие дети? сын и дочь вместе зовутся дети.
tools: hammer, saw, axe, spade, screwdriver, pliers, knife, scissors, needle, thimble.
what are people? a man and a woman together are called people.
кто такие люди? мать и отец вместе зовутся люди.
1 worker and 1 driver came to the library; 2 people came to the library in all.
кошка и собака вместе зовутся животные.
what are animals? a hen and a duck together are called animals.
a grape and a melon together are called fruits.
кто такие инструменты? игла и напёрсток вместе зовутся инструменты.
картофель и кабачок вместе зовутся овощи.
люди: мужчина, женщина, учитель, ученик, мать, отец, продавец, покупатель, доктор, сосед, рабочий, водитель, пекарь, фермер, друг.
6 men and 5 women came to the farm. how many people came to the farm? 11 people came to the farm in all.
what are children? a brother and a sister together are called children.
кто такие люди? доктор и сосед вместе зовутся люди.
1 friend and 1 neighbour came to the shop; 2 people came to the shop in all.
a hare and a bear together are called animals.
кто такие фрукты? банан и персик вместе зовутся фрукты.
нож и ножницы вместе зовутся инструменты.
what are vegetables? a beet and a turnip together are called vegetables.
a nephew and a niece together are called children.
мальчик и девочка вместе зовутся дети.
2 brothers and 4 sisters came to the school. how many children came to the school? 6 children came to the school in all.
what are people? a seller and a buyer together are called people.
кто такие люди? пекарь и фермер вместе зовутся люди.
кто такие животные? лиса и волк вместе зовутся животные.
апельсин и лимон вместе зовутся фрукты.
what are tools? a axe and a spade together are called tools.
a onion and a garlic together are called vegetables.
кто такие дети? внук и внучка вместе зовутся дети.
the family has a mother, a father and a child; the family has 3 people.
учитель и ученик вместе зовутся люди.
4 sellers and 3 buyers came to the station. how many people came to the station? 7 people came to the station in all.
what are people? a worker and a driver together are called people.
корова и лошадь вместе зовутся животные.
what are fruits? a apple and a pear together are called fruits.
a hammer and a saw together are called tools.
кто такие овощи? морковь и капуста вместе зовутся овощи.
сын и дочь вместе зовутся дети.
фрукты: яблоко, груша, слива, вишня, апельсин, лимон, банан, персик, виноград, дыня.

tom counted the coins once and counted the coins again; tom counted the coins twice in all.
том считал монет один раз и потом ещё раз; всего том считал два раза.
ira counted the boxes once and counted the boxes again; ira counted the boxes twice in all.
ира считала коробок один раз и потом ещё раз; всего ира считала два раза.
peter counted the cups once and counted the cups again; peter counted the cups twice in all.
пётр считал чашек один раз и потом ещё раз; всего пётр считал два раза.
mary worked on 0 days of 10 days; mary never worked.
маша работала 0 дней из 10; маша никогда не работала.
ivan worked on 1 day of 10 days; ivan worked once.
иван работал 1 день из 10; иван работал один раз.
ann worked on 2 days of 10 days; ann worked twice.
аня работала 2 дня из 10; аня работала два раза.
tom worked on 7 days of 10 days; tom often worked.
том работал 7 дней из 10; том работал часто.
ira worked on 10 days of 10 days; ira always worked.
ира работала 10 дней из 10; ира работала всегда.
ann counted the cards once and counted the cards again; ann counted the cards twice in all.
аня считала карт один раз и потом ещё раз; всего аня считала два раза.

tom counted 48 pencils; 48 pencils are nearly 50 pencils.
иван насчитал 32 книги; это примерно 30 книг.
маша насчитала 19 яблок; это почти 20 яблок.
peter counted 32 coins; 32 coins are about 30 coins.
ira counted 19 cards; 19 cards are nearly 20 cards.
аня насчитала 41 ручка; это примерно 40 ручек.
иван насчитал 28 книг; это почти 30 книг.
mary counted 21 apples; 21 apples are about 20 apples.
peter counted 28 coins; 28 coins are nearly 30 coins.
том насчитал 52 карандаша; это примерно 50 карандашей.
аня насчитала 39 ручек; это почти 40 ручек.
ivan counted 32 books; 32 books are about 30 books.
mary counted 19 apples; 19 apples are nearly 20 apples.
ира насчитала 21 карта; это примерно 20 карт.
том насчитал 48 карандашей; это почти 50 карандашей.
ann counted 41 pens; 41 pens are about 40 pens.
ivan counted 28 books; 28 books are nearly 30 books.
пётр насчитал 32 монеты; это примерно 30 монет.
ира насчитала 19 карт; это почти 20 карт.
tom counted 52 pencils; 52 pencils are about 50 pencils.
ann counted 39 pens; 39 pens are nearly 40 pens.
маша насчитала 21 яблоко; это примерно 20 яблок.
пётр насчитал 28 монет; это почти 30 монет.
ira counted 21 cards; 21 cards are about 20 cards.

mary bought coffee, milk and water at the shop; mary bought 3 things in all.
почему у тома 4 монеты? потому что том купил 3 монеты, а потом ещё 1 монета.
why does ivan have 11 balls? because ivan bought 7 balls and then 4 balls more.
в корзине лежат цветок, книга и ручка; в корзине лежат 3 предмета.
ira bought bread, salt and sugar at the store; ira bought 3 things in all.
почему у петра 8 шариков? потому что пётр купил 5 шариков, а потом ещё 3 шарика.
why does tom have 4 coins? because tom bought 3 coins and then 1 coin more.
почему у маши 9 цветков? потому что маша купила 6 цветков, а потом ещё 3 цветка.
в коробке лежат карта, цветок и книга; в коробке лежат 3 предмета.
tom bought cake, bread and salt at the shop; tom bought 3 things in all.
why does peter have 8 balls? because peter bought 5 balls and then 3 balls more.
почему у ани 7 ручек? потому что аня купила 2 ручки, а потом ещё 5 ручек.
why does mary have 9 flowers? because mary bought 6 flowers and then 3 flowers more.
в сумке лежат игрушка, карта и цветок; в сумке лежат 3 предмета.
ann bought water, cake and bread at the market; ann bought 3 things in all.
почему у иры 6 цветков? потому что ира купила 4 цветка, а потом ещё 2 цветка.
why does ann have 7 pens? because ann bought 2 pens and then 5 pens more.
в коробке лежат ручка, монета и чашка; в коробке лежат 3 предмета.
в корзине лежат коробка, игрушка и карта; в корзине лежат 3 предмета.
ivan bought milk, water and cake at the store; ivan bought 3 things in all.
why does ira have 6 flowers? because ira bought 4 flowers and then 2 flowers more.
почему у ивана 11 шариков? потому что иван купил 7 шариков, а потом ещё 4 шарика.
в сумке лежат книга, ручка и монета; в сумке лежат 3 предмета.
peter bought salt, sugar and tea at the market; peter bought 3 things in all.
