Axonal Injury in the PNS and the CNS

The previous chapter dealt with the impact that micro-organisms had on the health of neurons. This chapter outlines the differing roles of the PNS and CNS following injury and in recovery. It has long been known that following damage to axons, that the neurons within the PNS can undergo outgrowth and can recover (i.e. undergo regeneration) while neurons within the CNS do not seem capable of doing so.


What are the key differences?

Although it is possible that there are inherent properties that make neurons in the CNS somehow different from those in the PNS, it is more likely that external factors and cells account for the differences in their abilities to regenerate following damage. As shown in Figure 1. above, within the CNS, following axonal injury, the site of damage distal to injury (i.e. further away from damage) often undergoes degeneration and the distal axon degenerates and eventually disappears. Although there are several reasons that this is thought to occur, most notably this is believed to involve a lack of macrophage clearing of damaged myelin as well as the formation of a glial scar via activated astrocytes that cause a physical barrier to their re-growth. Additionally, molecules that are unique to the CNS (see chapter in this Unit on Multiple Sclerosis) also are believed to be up-regulated within the CNS following damage that prevent regeneration. These molecules are associated with the CNS specific glial cells, oligodendrocytes that provide myelination, and these cells increase the production of Nogo, MAG (Myelin Associated Glycoprotein) and OGmp (Oligodendroctye myelin glycoprotein) among others.

In contrast, PNS neurons (bottom panel of figure 1) show significant clearing of damaged axons via macrophages (not observed in the CNS) and then axonal outgrowth and repair across the bridge of Schwann cells that occurs following a process known as Wallerian degeneration (the loss of the axon distal to the injury).


Pathophysiological implications – TBI (Traumatic Brain Injury)

You might be asking yourself, where do these types of axonal injuries occur with the brain and CNS? Increasingly researchers and clinicians are finding that there is specific axonal injury that could occur following traumatic brain injury (TBI) or concussion related injuries. One of the ways in which axons within the brain become damaged include the process of coup/contre-coup where the brain (and its neurons) are first compressed (coup) and then stretched (contre-coup). The mechanical forces on the neuron on the brain may result in varying degrees of damage to the neurons.

As illustrated in Figure 2., depending on the area of the brain being impacted, a number of different types of damage can occur along the length of the axon including stretching/pulling of axons which may affect myelination and localization of axonal channel proteins, and both tearing and shearing which will cause loss of axonal integrity. This type of diffuse axonal injury will have effects on both the structure of the grey matter of the brain and the white matter axonal tracts. Ultimately these types of injuries often go undetected and the most common methods used are clinical assessments using variations of the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) that examine the severity of the loss of consciousness as these injuries, although structural are undetectable by either MRI or CT-scans.

Did you know?

Did you know that there is still controversy between TBI/concussions and the development of a neurodegenerative disorder known as Chronic Traumatic Encephalopahty (CTE) which is thought to cause behavioral changes in athletes in sports with contact/impact?

Although there are likely structural changes as indicated above, most often the diagnosis of post-concussion or TBI related disturbances occur because of functional changes in cognitive function and possible mood disorder changes (depression etc.). Although there are likely structural changes as indicated above, most often the diagnosis of post-concussion or TBI related disturbances occur because of functional changes in cognitive function and possible mood disorder changes (depression etc.). Did you know that one of the chief complaints following TBI/concussions is the inability to concentrate and focus on computer/TV screens? Individuals with concussion injuries require not just physical rest but cognitive rest, and typical LCD screens refresh at a 60 Hz rate. Most individuals are capable of processing and fusing these high frequency images without a cognitive load, but following concussions, individuals will have higher critical flicker frequencies such that staring at a screen will increase cognitive fatigue and eyestrain. We don’t understand why this happens yet but perhaps there is a Nobel Prize in it for an aspiring neurobiologist!


2.2 Stroke and Loss of Blood Flow as an Acute Injury to the Brain

The lack of blood flow to an area of the brain known as Ischemia. This is dangerous to the brain as a lack of circulating blood deprives the neurons of oxygen and nourishment. This ischemia that underlies stroke can occur in 2 different ways, hemorrhage: release of blood from blood vessels after the vessel rupture causes damage by cutting off connecting pathways, resulting in local or generalized pressure injury as well as impaired blood flow to the brain, and blocking a blood vessel causing a lack of blood flow to that region of the brain as shown in Figure 1.

Depending on the area of the brain where this lack of blood flow has occurred, functions that the specific area of the brain normally performs such as movement, sensation, or emotions, speech etc. may be affected and the loss of function varies with location and extent of damage.

Most forms of ischemia in stroke involve the thrombotic or embolic types of blockage, and a much smaller percentage involve hemorrhage. Although both are serious, all strokes have a therapeutic window that allows for neurons that are undergoing ischemia to be rescued.


Cellular Mechanisms underlying ischemia induced cell death

The brain requires a continuous supply of O2 and glucose for neurons to function. If the cerebral blood flow is interrupted, then individual neuronal metabolism can be affected within 30 seconds and will completely stop within 2 minutes of deprivation. If left unchecked, neuronal cell death occurs in 5 minutes. During this time period these neurons will no longer be able to maintain their resting membrane potentials and when they die, will release K+ ions causing other nearby cells to depolarize. In addition, as Na+/K+ATP dependent pumps will no longer have ATP production to drive their activity, the neurons will also start to depolarize and fire action potentials inappropriately. This leads to the glutamate excitotoxicity theory proposed by John Olney and may be the basis of why pyramidal neurons that are found in the hippocampus and Purkinje cells in the cerebellum that rely on glutamate neurotransmission are particularly vulnerable and die following ischemia.

Following ischemia to a region of neurons, the increased release of glutamate and its decreased uptake without ATP production produces an excess of glutamate which impacts downstream neurons. Glutamate will impact a number of glutamate specific receptors such as the AMPA, NMDA and metabotropic type receptors which in turn will cause activation of voltage gated Ca2+ channels, all of which result in the increase in intracellular Ca2+ levels. In turn, this will activate the protease activated receptor PAR4 which will activate the pro-apoptotic proteins BAX/BAD that will then form a complex with the mitochondrial factor cytochrome c which is released from the mitochondrial matrix as the intracellular ATP stores fail. This complex in turn will then activate Caspase 9 and the downstream and ultimate factor Caspase 3 which is involved in the apoptotic DNA fragmentation and eventual death of the neuron. As this is a programmable/apoptotic form of cell death, there are a number of therapeutic interventions that may prevent this stroke and ischemia induced form of cell death.

A number of different animal models of stroke have been developed. Most involve interruptions in blood flow such as the intraparenchymal (i.e. directly into the brain tissue) injection of drugs such as endothelin-1 (Et-1) which induces vasospasms of the blood vessels creating ischemia, of the introduction of coagulants such as thrombin injection that will block blood vessels (Figure 4. Animal models of stroken). Most methods will involve blockade of normal blood flow to an area of the brain to produce ischemia whether through occlusion of a blood vessel such as the middle cerebral artery (MCA) or the chemical methods described here. These animal models have proved invaluable in understanding the role of different factors such as cytochrome c or BAD/BAX in excitotoxicity and hold the promise of developing therapeutic interventions.


2.3 Demyelinating diseases with an emphasis on Multiple Sclerosis

Myelin is produced from the cell membranes of either Schwann cells (for neurons in the PNS) or oligodendroglia/oligodendrocytes (for neurons in the CNS). As such, myelin is enriched with membrane lipids and proteins that are found within these cells. Normally myelin functions to increase nerve cell conduction by increasing the biophysical property of the membrane resistance (i.e. a neuron cell membrane’s leakiness). Myelin reduces membrane leakiness by preventing open channels and as a result, increasing how far a single electrical impulse within the axon will travel. Importantly this also increases how quickly an action potential will travel down an axon – myelin greatly increases the conduction velocity of a neuron.


Myelin helps neurons to cheat

Various factors help to determine how fast an action potential travels down an axon (called the conduction velocity). The biophysical features of a neuron including how big its axonal diameter is and the membrane leakiness, help scientists to determine what is known as the length or space constant (lambda or λ) for each neuron. Why is this λ value important? λ is directly proportional to the conduction velocity – so the factors that determine λ also determine a neuron’s conduction velocity. Let’s not forget –speed thrills within the CNS and brain, and the faster a signal gets there, the more the brain likes it.

Another reason for myelination includes having a lot of neurons so space is a premium. Although the length constant is inversely related to the axonal diameter (i.e. bigger diameter axons have bigger length constants), we need to pack as many neurons into a small space as possible. So within the brain, faster communication means myelination is key.

Large vertebrate nerve fibers are wrapped in myelin sheaths formed by central oligodendroglial cells or Schwann cells in the periphery but the myelin only wraps the axon at specific locations. Myelin is interrupted at regularly spaced intervals, or nodes. This helps the neuron, because during action potential propagation the excitatory signal jumps from one node to the next, and we call this saltatory conduction which is much faster than passive electronic spread. In addition, myelin also helps Rm (leakiness or membrane resistance) because it only directs voltage-sensitive Na+ channels to highly concentrated areas known as the nodes of Ranvier. So in many ways myelin helps the neuron “cheat’ by limiting leakiness (i.e. open channels to specific areas). As shown in Figure 2., Before glial ensheathment, sodium channels are distributed uniformly, and at low density. At the time of glial ensheathment but before the formation of compact myelin, loose clusters of sodium channels develop at sites that will eventually become nodes. Following the formation of compact myelin and mature paranodal axon-glial cell junctions, well-defined nodal clusters of voltage gated sodium channels are established, and sodium channels are eliminated from the axon membrane beneath the myelin sheath.

Demyelinating diseases are prevalent – and in Canada Multiple Sclerosis affects many

Demyelinating diseases remain one of the most common disorders where 1:500 to 1:1000 adult individuals in North America are affected, but these diseases tend to affect women more frequently than males. As the name suggests, within these diseases, the myelin described above is lost and the axons which previously have been myelinated no longer have myelin, changing their conduction velocities.


Multiple Sclerosis: Overview

Within this disease, the myelin is destructively removed from around the axon which slows down nerve impulses. As axons are demyelinated, these result in inflammatory patches called lesions and it is thought that this disorder is an autoimmune disease. As the disease progresses, oligodendrocytes and, ultimately, the axons themselves are destroyed. There is very compelling evidence that the destruction is caused by selective activation of the cellular immune system and inflammatory molecules.


Potential causes and theories

Currently there is no known cause for multiple sclerosis although many different hypotheses have been put forward. Surprisingly, there are no known associative genes that have been implicated in causing multiple sclerosis and scientists believe there might be a complex interaction between genes and environmental factors to produce demyelination observed in multiple sclerosis. The most common theories about the cause(s) of multiple sclerosis include:

Viral infection and resulting autoimmune reaction where evidence from Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis mouse models suggest a strong link

Genetic factors: inherited predisposition possibly through the immune system, although a mutation in a gene has not been discovered

Environmental factor(s) which might work with genetics such as low vitamin D levels or smoking.

Although this is a well characterized disorder, we still don’t know much about its causes.


Diagnosis, loss of function, and pathology

Typically an individual with demyelination in multiple sclerosis may have functional deficits that result from reduced speed of conduction which might include loss of vision, different atypical sensations in the periphery and findings on an MRI that include hyperintensities, bright patches on structural MRIs, around sites like the lateral ventricle, optic nerve, brainstem, spinal cord, cerebellum and other areas.

Multiple sclerosis also presents itself differently including having acute phases where the condition has been associated with relapsing/remitting where symptoms may not appear for periods of time and a chronic phase which is associated with progressive forms of multiple sclerosis where the individual progressively becomes worse and the symptoms become more severe.


Animal models of multiple sclerosis

Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE): one of the best studied models of autoimmune diseases. This model produces inflammation of both the brain and spinal cord. This is a good validity model for multiple sclerosis, as EAE is believed to be mediated by T cells and can be induced in many animal models following immunization with a myelin specific protein such as myelin basic protein (MBP) or protolipid protein (PLP) in complete Freund’s adjuvant (or CFA which helps to produce a specific immune response). Within weeks animals develop cellular inflammatory cell infiltration of the myelin sheaths of the central nervous system which then result in demyelination or paralysis.


The cuprizone model of multiple sclerosis

Cuprizone treatment is one of the most frequently used toxin-induced multiple sclerosis models. Other toxins such as lysolecithin or ethidium bromide require stereotaxic microinjections into brain areas and result in only localized focal demyelination but cuprizone models are advantageous in that oral administration of cuprizone produces a global damage. Following cuprizone ingestion, the mouse often exhibits impaired divalent ion (Cu2+, Zn2+) homeostasis and results in the loss of Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase activity within the brain’s tanycytes resulting in the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) which activate M1 macrophages in the brain to increase the production and release of pro-inflammatory molecules as highlighted in Figure 5.


Alpha-Synucleinopathies and Parkinson’s Disease

The current model for most neurodegenerative conditions is that neurons die via apoptosis or a programmed form of cell death. This has very important clinical implications as turning on or turning off specific genes/proteins is a method to stop or possibly reverse neurodegeneration. Neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s Disease and Alzheimer’s Disease and others are all believed to use apoptotic pathways and additionally suggest that there is a component protein that is aberrantly folded to produce apoptosis.


Parkinson’s Disease: Overview

Most cases of this disorder appear to be sporadic (i.e. non-genetic in origin). A very few cases seem to have a genetic origin (for example the genes most often associated with DJ-1, Parkin (Ubiquitin E3 ligase) and alpha synuclein genes). Parkinson’s Disease is most often associated with loss of “pigmented” nuclei in the brain and typically involve the loss of a group of neurons found in the Substantia Nigra. The substantia nigra neurons are dopaminergic and are pigmented because they contain the protein melanin.

The typical onset for Parkinson’s Disease is middle to later stages of life (i.e. 50 and beyond) although a small percentage of individuals who have known genetic mutations in Parkin or alpha-synuclein develop symptoms earlier.

Loss of these cells affect the processing and execution of voluntary movement in individuals with Parkinson’s Disease. Similar to Multiple Sclerosis, once diagnosed, the symptoms become continuous and progressive – i.e. the symptoms worsen over time. Again, there are many similarities with Multiple Sclerosis, and there is no known cure for Parkinson’s Disease and the disease remains idiopathic although there are some known causes of Parkinson’s Disease including loss of movement following cerebral atherosclerosis, viral encephalitis, and as the result of side effects from drugs such as phenothiazides and reserpine.


“Classic” symptoms associated with Parkinson’s Disease

Bradykinesia: Slowness in Initiation and Execution of Voluntary Movements

Rigidity: Increase Muscle Tone and Increase Resistance to Movement (Arms and Legs Stiff) – as severity increases produce cogwheel rigidity

Tremor: Usually Tremor at Rest; When person sits, arm shakes; Tremor Stops when person attempts to grab something (pill rolling tremor)

Postural Instability: abnormal fixation of posture (stoop when standing), problems with equilibrium, and righting reflex

Dystonia (inappropriate and continuous muscle contraction)

Alpha-synuclein is a naturally occurring protein within neurons. Mutations in the PARK1 and PARK4 genes which normally encodes for alpha-synuclein, have been associated with Parkinson’s Disease. As such, many animal models of Parkinson’s Disease look for the production of the fibrillary form of alpha-synuclein as it misfolds and then accumulates within the substantia nigral neurons known as Lewy bodies. The misfolding and accumulation of alpha-synuclein has been hypothesized to be the reason that neurons undergo apoptosis, although the exact mechanism for how this occurs remains to be elucidated.


Animal Models of Parkinson’s Disease

The lack of candidate genes (except for alpha-synuclein, Parkin and DJ-1) has meant that most scientists have looked at toxin models. Most of the toxins that produce features that resemble changes in movement as well as Lewy-body like formation use catecholaminergic destruction. In fact, most of these toxins are incredibly powerful and dangerous mitochondrial complex inhibitors such as reserpine, MPTP, methamphetamine, 6-OH-dopamine, rotenone, and paraquat). In fact one toxin, MPTP is a by-product of synthetic heroin production suggesting that there may be a synthetic substance that causes Parkinson’s Disease and some epidemiological studies show a correlation with pesticide (such as paraquat and rotenone) usage and Parkinson’s Disease.


Alzheimer’s Disease: Overview and General Pathology

Another neurodegenerative condition is Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). This neurodegenerative condition is a form of dementia characterized the most common symptoms associated with Alzheimer’s Disease notably memory loss, problems with communication and difficulty finding words, attention problems, confusion and spatial disorientation, decreased or poor judgement, changes in mood and personality.

Affected areas explain the AD pathology, which is characterized by memory loss due to shrinkage of the hippocampus, and other problems which include higher level thinking and performance which are controlled by the cortex. Brain atrophy typically begins in the medial temporal lobe (i.e. hippocampus), moves on to the association cortices and therefore affects sensory and motor areas. It also affects the Nucleus Basalis of Meynert which has multiple cholinergic projections to the cortex (and is thought to be responsible for control of sleep, attention, and consciousness) as highlighted in Figure 3.


Cellular Pathology

The typical AD brain is characterized by the loss of neurons, progressive loss of synapses and cholinergic projections, the accumulation of extracellular β-amyloid (Aβ) plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). With increased time and pathology this will often correlate with the formation of a glial scar (involving reactive astrocytes). There is also very strong evidence that this disorder may also have a strong immune component as there is often the infiltration of microglial cells in the Alzheimer’s Disease brain.


β-amyloid (Aβ) plaques: βA Cascade hypothesis

One of the hallmark histopathological and molecular features of Alzheimer’s Disease is the presence of extracellular aggregates that include -amyloid plaques. These plaques are believed to induce cytotoxicity by disrupting normal neuronal functions, ion concentrations, action potential generation. As with the modern theory of neurodegeneration, these plaques are composed of the cleaved form of amyloid precursor protein (APP).

APP can be processed via two different pathways:

Non-amyloidogenic pathway (cleaved by α- and γ-secretases)


Neurofibrillary Tangles (NFTs)

Another feature of the Alzheimer’s Diseased brain is the appearance of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) that are composed of hyper-phosphorylated tau protein. Normally within neurons (and in fact most cells), tau binds to and stabilizes microtubules (MTs), however, when this is phosphorylated by kinases, tau loses its affinity to MTs and dissociates from the MT complex. This causes the microtubules in turn to disassemble which interferes with proper axonal transport and eventually leads to loss of neuronal integrity. As such the Phospho-tau proteins form intracellular aggregates (NFTs) that become another defining feature of this disease as well as a potential target for therapeutic intervention.


Genetics of Alzheimer’s Disease

While sporadic AD cases account for the majority of AD patients, familial AD (FAD) accounts for only 5% of them. The familial form, FAD manifests earlier (around 40-50 years of age) compared to >65 years of age in sporadic cases. Despite this drastic difference in disease onset, symptoms are identical. Only 50% of FAD cases can be explained by known mutations in genes encoding APP and presenilins 1 and 2.

APP mutations are relatively rare and is characterized by individuals showing symptoms with an average age onset in their early 50’s. The conclusion that APP mutations might cause Alzheimer’s Disease is based on the observation that most Down Syndrome patients also develop AD after age 40 since they have an extra copy of Ch21 (which codes for APP). However, most inherited forms of APP mutations alter APP processing to:

therefore, lead to production of peptides with higher fibrillogenic potential


Overview of Cellular Methods

Since we have learned that neurons contain channels, receptors and transporters in Unit 1, one of the most useful parameters that neuroscientists examine, involves determining the movement of ions and the resultant modulation of neuronal membrane potential. Specifically, electrophysiological techniques used in excitable tissues rely on the ionic conductance of ion-channels and how these influence changes in the membrane potential of the cell being examined. Various electrophysiology techniques have been developed to detect and manipulate ion-channel function and/or action potential generation. Determining when to use each electrophysiological technique depends on many different factors including the biophysical properties of the recorded cell, the type of tissue being examined, the use of current- and/or voltage-clamp, whether the intra- and/or extracellular environments will be modulated in the experiments, and most importantly whether a single channel or several ion channels will be recorded.


Patch-clamp Electrophysiology

The most common method used to assess ion-channel function is known as the patch-clamp electrophysiological technique that was developed in the 1970s by Nobel Prize Laureates Erwin Neher and Bert Sakmann. The patch-clamp technique allows a researcher to measure the biophysical properties of ion-channels on millisecond timescales. Patch clamp requires the initial formation of a Giga-ohm (GΩ) seal between the plasma membrane and the blunt tip (0.5–2 μm in diameter) of a heat-polished glass or quartz micropipette (electrode). Once a Giga-ohm seal has been created, this ‘cell-attached configuration” maintains the integrity of the plasma membrane (i.e. the membrane seal is not ruptured) preventing the intracellular solution inside the micropipette from dialyzing into the cell. However, this also restricts electrical access to the cell intracellular space resulting in an inability to control the membrane potential of the cell. In this configuration, only the patch membrane potential relative to the cell’s resting potential can be directly controlled. By altering either the magnitude of the seal resistance (a loose seal vs. tight seal) and/or whether the recording electrode is current- vs. voltage-clamped, the cell-attached configuration can be used to measure single channel currents, spontaneous neuronal cell firing and synaptic potentials as well as evoked action potentials within the cell. The other main advantage of this configuration is that although it is limited for the reasons outlined above, this configuration is the starting point for the majority of the types of patch-clamp recordings.

To increase electrical access to the cell interior, two different methods are used. First, the internal pipette solution contains antibiotic or antifungal agents (e.g., nystatin, gramicidin, amphotericin-B), these agents form small, monovalent ion-permeable pores that ‘perforate’ the membrane allowing access to the entire cell. Importantly, these pores do not allow passage of proteins thus ensuring that the intracellular contents remain intact preserving intracellular signaling pathways. However, this perforated patch technique has several limitations including higher electrical noise, loss of single channel resolution and patch instability. Additionally, creating a perforated patch requires a significantly long period of time.

An alternative approach to the perforated patch technique is to apply a strong suction, or brief voltage transient, after Giga-ohm seal formation in order to rupture the intact plasma membrane. Upon rupture, a low-resistance electrical and physical continuity is established between the pipette and the cell interior and this new configuration is known as the whole-cell configuration. Accordingly, this configuration permits direct measurements of the cell’s membrane potential (via current-clamp) and its manipulation (via voltage-clamp). Due to the physical continuity between the cell interior and the pipette solution, the cytosolic contents can be reasonably controlled. Furthermore, unlike the perforated patch, pharmacological or ionic manipulations of both the intracellular and extracellular environment can lead to the eulicidation of individual ion-currents. However, this physical continuity between the pipette lumen and cytosol may also dialyze out and/or alter the activity of endogenous second messenger systems. Thus, whole cell recordings are vulnerable to this limitation and it is critical to assess current ‘rundown’ of the system and cells within these types of whole-cell recording systems.

It is also possible to create ‘Cell-free’ variations of patch-clamp techniques also exist. For instance, upon giga-seal formation, the electrode can be gently retracted pulling the membrane patch into the bath solution. This arrangement, known as the inside-out configuration, enables the complete manipulation of the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane via the bath perfusion – a feature not possible in the cell-attached configuration. As a result, inside-out patches allow for the manipulation the immediate environment of the inner membrane face. Unfortunately, this arrangement suffers from the loss of intracellular signaling pathways acting on the ion-channels following patch excision; a particularly important consideration when examining altered channel activity.

Similarly, an outside-out patch also requires the gentle retraction of the patch electrode from the whole-cell configuration. However, in this situation the pipette retraction forces the plasma membrane surrounding the electrode tip to detach from the cell and reseal forming a cell-independent patch whose extracellular membrane is facing the bathing solution. This allows an experimenter to have complete control over the intracellular environment and can rapidly exchange different external physiological or pharmacologic drugs over the same patch.


Precision Targeting of Neurons

Neurons don’t work in isolation and they typically make synaptic connections that resemble circuits. Most investigations of behaviour and development have relied on mapping the neural circuits within the brain and CNS. Understanding the connectivity of these circuits allow neuroscientists to understand behaviour and pathologies. In the past, this has meant lesioning or destroying parts of these circuits, or electrophysiologically stimulating these circuits and examining the resulting behaviour. These older methods have allowed us to dissect the detailed workings of the neural circuits underlying natural behavior, and have also enabled us to understand how some neural circuits become dysfunctional in disease states such as Parkinson’s disease or epilepsy.

The vertebrate brain (mice, rats, primates and humans), contains many different cell types with distinct molecular expression patterns, physiological activity, and topological connectivity, which are intermingled in a highly heterogeneous network. Studying specific groups of neurons in this milieu becomes very challenging and scientists using lesion, stimulation and tracing studies were never sure about the spatial (i.e. were only specific neurons affected) and temporal (i.e. can the lesion be reversed, allowing for reversal of behaviour).

The questions around specificity and temporal reversibility changed with the introduction of optogenetics. Since the late 2000s, optogenetics has ushered in a new era of potent and targeted control over multiple aspects of neural function. Genetic and optical methods applied together allow tight spatial and temporal control of the activity of specific kinds of neurons in the living brain, a revolutionary advance that will allow us to achieve an unprecedented understanding of neural circuit function in behaving animals. Using this technique, neurons are first genetically engineered (using a variety of mechanisms, described later) to express light-sensitive proteins (opsins). When these neurons are then illuminated with light of the correct frequency they will be transiently activated or inhibited or their signaling pathways will be modulated, depending on the particular kind of opsin that was chosen for expression. Cell type–specific expression is typically achieved with transgenic animals, viral vectors, or a combination, and spatially restricted light application allows for further refinement in targeting to specific brain regions. Light can be applied in a variety of temporal patterns in order to optimally influence neuronal function (permitting experimental control of spike frequency and burstiness, among other parameters), and may be restricted to specific short behavioral periods of examination.


Optogenics: The Basics


What Are Optogenetic Actuators?

Optogenetic actuators are proteins that modify the activity of the cell in which they are expressed when that cell is exposed to light. These actuators can be used to induce single or multiple action potentials (which can be organized into regular spike trains or which can be pseudo-random at a user-controlled rate), suppress neural activity, or modify biochemical signaling pathways, with millisecond control over the timing of events. The most powerful and widely used actuators are opsins—naturally occurring light-sensitive transmembrane proteins—that are found in a variety of organisms ranging from microbes to primates, and that can be used as found in nature or engineered to optimize functioning. Naturally occurring opsins can be broadly categorized into two major classes: microbial opsins (Type I) and vertebrate opsins (Type II). Type I opsins are found in prokaryotic and eukaryotic microbial organisms, including bacteria, archaea, and algae, and are composed of a single membrane–bound protein component that functions as a pump or channel. These opsins are used by their host microorganisms for a variety of functions, including navigation towards sources of energy and away from hazardous environments, and control the intracellular concentrations of a variety of ions and the beating of flagella.

Type I opsins were used in the first optogenetics experiments to control neuronal function, both because of the ease of genetic engineering using a single component protein and because of their faster kinetics, and remain the primary (but not exclusive) source for new natural and engineered opsins.


How Do Optogenetic Actuators Work?

Opsins of both types require retinal, a form of vitamin A that isomerizes upon absorption of a photon, in order to function. When retinal binds to the opsin the retinal-opsin complex becomes light sensitive, and if a photon strikes the retinal in this state its resulting photoisomerization will induce a conformational change in the opsin. This leads to channel opening or pump activation, a change in membrane potential, and ultimately the activation or inhibition of neuronal activity. Therefore, retinal must be present in order for optogenetic actuators to function. Fortunately, particularly for the early proof-of-principle experiments, retinal is already present in sufficient quantities in mammalian neural tissue to permit the use of optogenetic tools without exogenous retinal supplementation. However, invertebrate model systems such as Drosophila do need retinal supplementation through their diet in order for optogenetic effectors to function. Here we review the different classes of optogenetic actuators, grouped by their effect on neural activity or signaling.


Optogenetic Stimulation of Neural Activity: How to Turn Neurons “On”


Channelrhodopsins

Channelrhodopsins (ChRs) are light-gated ion channels discovered in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a unicellular green alga. The first use of a microbial opsin to control the spiking activity of neurons utilized Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2), one of two channelrhodopsins expressed by this organism. ChR2 is a light-gated nonspecific cation channel which, when illuminated with blue light, opens and allows the passage of cations and the subsequent depolarization of the cell. In 2005 ChR2 was introduced into cultured hippocampal neurons and successfully used to control spiking activity with fine temporal precision. As demonstrated by this pioneering paper, very brief (millisecond) pulses of blue light can be used to induce single action potentials in ChR2-expressing neurons, and spiking activity driven by the activation of this opsin can be controlled with high precision at frequencies approaching 30 spikes per second.


Optogenetic Inhibition of Neuronal Activity: How to Turn Neurons “Off”


Chloride Pumps

Inhibiting neuronal activity in neural circuits can complement excitatory tools by allowing investigators to test the role of individual neuronal circuit components. One of the most efficient and widely used optogenetic inhibitory opsins, NpHR, is a halorhodopsin from the archaeon Natronomonas pharaonis. NpHR pumps chloride ions into the cell upon long wavelength light activation, resulting in hyperpolarization. Genetic engineering has led to a series of revisions producing eNpHR3.0, an opsin with improved surface membrane localization and a larger photocurrent. With an excitation maximum at 590nm, eNpHR3.0 can be driven by green, yellow, or red wavelengths of light, enabling the use of less expensive laser systems.


Proton Pumps

Proton pumps can also be used to inhibit neurons through hyperpolarization, by pumping protons out of the cell, and have some features that make them desirable alternatives to chloride pumps, which include fast recovery from inactivation and larger sized currents following activation. Arch (archaerhodopsin-3 from Halorubrum sodomense), Mac (from the fungus Leptosphaeria maculans), ArchT (an archaerhodopsin from Halorubrum strain TP009), and eBR (an enhanced version of bacteriorhodopsin from Halobacterium salinarum) are proton pumps that show robust efficiency in inhibition. Recent work has demonstrated that inhibition of eNpHR3.0-expressing neurons may render the inhibited neuron transiently more excitable due to a chloride-driven shift in the type-A γ-aminobutyric acid (GABAA) receptor reversal potential which may point towards a proton pump inhibitor as the opsin of choice for some experiments especially involving this system.


3.4 Chemogenetic Methods to Examine the Brain and Behaviour

Although optogenetics provides a superior level of temporal (it’s quick – you flash on pulses of light to elicit immediate activity) and spatial control of a neuronal circuit, it requires specialized fibre optic cables (also called optrodes), lasers and actuators. As such, this can lead to higher than expected costs as well as a significant investment of time and training.

Another precision method for examining the function of specific groups of neurons within a known circuit to alter behaviour is known as chemogenetics or pharmacogenetics. Instead of using light, unique and specific drugs can activate exogenously expressed receptors. The most popular of these precision pharmacogenetic techniques is known as DREADDs. This is an acronym for Designer Receptor Exclusively Activated by a Designer Drug and as mentioned above this requires the incorporation of a synthetic receptor (from the hMxDx family from the Acetylcholinergic muscarinic receptor) into an animal’s genome and the neuronal function is controlled by the synthetic ligand clozapine-N-oxide (CNO). As with optogenetics, the experimenter decides which neurons (or other cells within the nervous system) have the machinery to express the receptor and once expressed, DREADDs may be used to tightly control neuronal activity.

Similar to optogenetics, different DREADDs, once expressed on the appropriate groups of neurons can both cause excitation (HM3D) of the neurons or their inhibition (HM4D) in the presence of CNO. Importantly CNO can be injected into the test animal or be added to their drinking water so there is no requirement for any additional equipment. As CNO is a compound that is designed to work specifically on DREADDs, it was thought that there would be no activation of any endogenous receptors that were not genetically engineered.

However, a recent report in 2017 by Gomez et al., in the journal Science (ref), suggested that CNO was metabolized in peripheral tissues and formed the metabolite clozapine. Clozapine can bind to a number of different serotonergic, dopaminergic and adrenergic receptors within the brain, and it was suggested by Gomez et al., that care should be taken when interpreting behavioural data using the CNO-DREADD system.


What is the Cre-lox system and why do we need it?

In the previous chapters we have examined the use of recombinant molecular techniques that help neurobiologists to understand the role of specific neurons within a brain circuit in a complex behaviour. However, we haven’t yet examined how to ensure delivery to specific neurons to ensure that the construct (i.e.ChR2, hM3DR or other constructs) is not inappropriately expressed in other cell types nor other neurons. Instead of relying only on the cells internal machinery being driven by cell specific gene promoters, the Cre-lox system is often used in neuroscience. This is a powerful method to selectively manipulate gene expression in specific subsets of tissues. There are 2 elements to make this system work effectively; loxP sequences that are created de novo and the presence of Cre-recombinase (an exogenous nuclease). Importantly neither the nuclease enzyme Cre recombinase nor loxP sequences are normally found in mammal systems, so their introduction has no functional consequences to the DNA nor to the neurons. Genetically engineered loxP sites are 34 bp DNA sequences that bind to the protein Cre-recombinase (and the nuclease always needs to bind to 2 loxP sites). Interestingly, as shown in Figure 1, when loxP sites are in the same orientation (5’ to 3’) and Cre-recombinase binds to both, this causes deletion of the DNA sequence between the loxP sites while leaving one loxP. This type of “floxing” reaction is known as excision. If the loxP sites are in the opposite orientation then the sequence between them is inverted or “flipped”.


Cre-driver lines: A special type of transgenic mouse

As Cre-recombinase has no effect on DNA except for those that contain loxP sites (which are never found in mammalian DNA), generating transgenic Cre-recombinase mouse models was a logical step in examining specific expression of genetic tools (optogenetic, chemogenetic or other) in neurons. As different neurons have different cellular machinery to activate and express certain genes, Cre-recombinase was targeted to specific neuronal (or other brain cell types) with this in mind. As the Cre-recombinase expression was being “driven” by the machinery specific to a cell type, the term Cre-driver lines has become embedded within neurobiology. As shown in Figure 2 below, different types of neurons, whether inhibitory, excitatory or other have specific proteins and therefore genes that would allow for the specific expression of the exogenous Cre-recombinase. For example the TH::IRES-Cre-recombinase mouse only expresses Cre-recombinase within dopaminergic neurons as TH (Tyrosine Hydroxylase) is the synthetic enzyme that converts the amino acid tyrosine to dopamine in neurons. In the same vein, VGAT::IRES-Cre-Recombinase would be a transgenic mouse line that would be used to investigate inhibitory GABAergic neurons. A list of different genes/protein products is found in both Figure 2 and the following table.


3.6 Viral Mediated Delivery of Genes to Neurons

There are a number of ways to deliver DNA (or other genetic information) to neurons including transfection, electroporation, biolistic delivery, and nanoparticles, but within an intact biological system like the brain is challenging. Luckily, neurons are very easily infected by viruses (see Unit 1). Neurobiologists will therefore package genetic material that they want to be expressed within specific groups of neurons inside different types of viruses.

In fact, as molecular neurobiologists, we often have a number of different viral vectors that we can use to our benefit. Some viruses for example package only a small amount of genetic material (AAV for example) while others like HSV will be able to package up to 150 kb worth of genetic material (and this is a lot) into the virus. Speed of expression and how long the expression of the recombinant genetic material will persist for, are often considerations on the choice of viral vector.

One technical consideration that is often overlooked – how are viruses containing the gene of interest that we hope to express in neurons generated? Viruses aren’t truly alive so how does this work? We often use a cell line like the HEK293 cell which is a non-neuronal cell line. We transfect 3 separate plasmids into the HEK293 cells in culture. 2 of the plasmids are viral (pVSV-G and packaging plasmids for example for lentiviruses, and the last one is the construct that we want to specifically deliver. Figure 2. shows the workflow for production of lentiviruses (upper panel) and AAV viruses (lower panel). In both cases, viral particles are released from the transfected HEK293 cells and the virus is collected from the cells and spun on a gradient using ultracentrifugation and a final purification step. The purified fluid then contains live virus that can infect neurons.


3.7 A Very Interesting Transgenic Mouse for Neuroscience

One of the very exciting aspects of neuroscience is the use of transgenic mice to aid in our understanding of behaviour. One particular mouse, not originally intended for use in neuroscience was the Rosa or iDTR mouse. The Rosa or iDTR (for inducible Diphtheria Toxin Receptor) mouse utilizes a transgene very similar to the Cre-driver lines. In this mouse (shown in Figure 1 below) all cells throughout the mouse’s body carries the DNA sequence for the Diphtheria Toxin Receptor DTR). Note that this DTR DNA sequence is preceded by a STOP codon that is flanked by loxP sites. If Cre-recombinase was introduced by vector injection then the STOP codon is removed and the DTR is now transcribed and translated in the area or tissue where the Cre-recombinase was injected. Normally this does not present a problem as the mouse has had no exposure to diphtheria toxin. However, we can inject the toxin systemically into the mouse and only those cells expressing the receptor will undergo apoptotic cell death.


3.8 Molecular Biological Measures of Neuronal Activity: “CatFish”

Although electrophysiological techniques allow researchers to examine the activity of neurons, it is often challenging to know a priori, which neurons will respond during a particular behaviour. At the cellular level, neuronal activity can now be visualized using compartment analysis of temporal activity by fluorescence in situ hybridization (catFISH), can map the distribution of neurons activated during two discrete behaviours by visualizing the sub-cellular localization of various immediate early gene (IEG) mRNA. The catFISH method examines the activity history of neurons at two different time points and estimates the numbers of neurons active based on the staining of particular IEG mRNAs during a distinct behavioural episode. This makes the technique similar to electrophysiological estimates under comparable conditions (i.e. before and after stimulation) and researchers typically measure “active” neurons by looking for the expression of c-fos or Arc mRNA before and after stimulation/behaviour etc.


Labeling the Living Brain

Owing to the complexity of the mammalian brain, it has remained a major challenge to decipher the patterns of connectivity made onto and by newborn neurons as they integrate into circuits of the adult brain. With major advances in both molecular genetics and light microscopy, our ability to query not only neuronal morphologies, but also the molecular and cellular composition of individual neurons and their associated synaptic networks has become possible.

Arguably, one of the most influential contributions to contemporary neuroscience has been the use of fluorescent proteins (FPs) and their targeted expression in living neurons of the mammalian brain tissue. The wide array of FPs available provides an ever-expanding toolbox of vital reporters and gene expression tags. Applications for these proteins range from vital reporters expressed throughout the cytoplasm to subcellular protein fusion tags, which together can be used to monitor the process of circuit integration in vivo using both electrophysiological methods and fluorescent imaging.

Beyond merely marking cells for identification, a number of other methods have been developed to exploit the vital properties of FPs to investigate neuronal properties. For example, superecliptic pHluorin, which fluoresces at neutral pH but is quenched at acidic pH, can be used to monitor the trafficking and exchange of intracellular compartments within neurons. This variant allows direct imaging of membrane dynamics, exocytosis and endocytosis of synaptic receptors, and neurotransmitter release in vitro and in vivo. More recently, a new method termed GFP reconstitution across synaptic partners (GRASP) shows promise for revealing synaptic interactions between contacting neurons. By tethering split GFP fragments to separate pre- and post-synaptic proteins, reconstitution of GFP fluorescence can be observed when genetically targeted cells form synaptic pairs. Although this technology has been successfully applied to reveal invertebrate synapses, it has yet to be demonstrated in rodents (Gordon and Scott, 2009).

The range of FP reporters for visualizing neuronal morphologies, cellular dynamics, and synapse function continues to expand. However, perhaps the single-most limiting factor for using FPs in neuroscience is our incomplete knowledge of neuronal gene regulation. Often transgenic reporters fail to recapitulate endogenous patterns of gene expression, or such patterns are too broad to identify neuronal subtypes with cellular precision.


Trans-Synaptic Circuit Tracing

A major goal toward understanding mechanisms of neuronal development, synapse formation, and circuit wiring has been to elucidate nodes and patterns of synaptic connectivity. A creative angle to address this challenge has been the incorporation of genes encoding FPs and FP-fusion proteins into neurotropic viral vectors, which show the innate ability to infect neurons and trans-synaptically spread throughout the nervous system (Kuypers and Ugolini, 1990; Callaway, 2008).

Two types of viruses that have been broadly employed for this purpose include rabies and herpes. Herpes viruses belong to a family of double-stranded DNA viruses, while rabies belongs to a family of negative-strand RNA viruses (Voyles, 1993). Although evolutionarily different, they are both endowed with the unique ability to bind to and infect neuronal cells. This cell type-specific infectivity is conferred to the viruses via their mature enveloped coat particles, which are made of both host membrane and virally encoded glycoproteins. The composite envelope proteins are the determinants that mediate neuronal membrane recognition and subsequent neuron-to-neuron infection by binding to membrane surface receptors.

Herpes viruses have been used to label neural circuits for years. Two common tracing strains are herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1; Lilley et al., 2001) and pseudorabies virus (PRV; Enquist, 2002). Both of these variants predominantly spread in a retrograde direction, and each has been effectively applied to dissect synapse and circuit connections in the rodent brain (Callaway, 2008). However, one limitation to using the herpes viruses for circuit analysis is polysynaptic spreading. Due to the vast cohort of cell types within brain tissue, the number of synapses formed on each of those cells, and the high degree of interconnectivity in intact neural circuits, this approach still poses a challenge to dissect precise patterns of neural connectivity. To simplify trans-synaptic circuit analysis, Wickersham et al. (2007b) devised a clever coat protein complementation strategy that allows for monosynaptic tracing of neuronal connections using a pseudotyped rabies virus (RV). Not to be confused with PRV (which as stated above is actually a herpes virus), pseudotyping a viral particle refers to synthetically modifying the viral envelope to recognize a foreign receptor not normally present on the membranes of mammalian neurons. The strategy will be briefly discussed below, and for further reference also see Wickersham et al. (2007a), Arenkiel and Ehlers (2009), Hasenstaub and Callaway (2010).

The RV gene encoding its glycoprotein (termed G) has been the primary target for genetic modification and RV vector engineering. Removal of G from the RV genome renders the virus both incapable of generating infective particles and replication incompetent. However, even in the absence of the native glycoprotein gene, RV is still capable of expressing its genome. Thus, G can be replaced with sequences encoding FPs or FP-tagged biomolecules to generate RV vectors for vital reporter expression (Wickersham et al., 2007a). To make these replication incompetent viruses useful for circuit tracing studies, they must be “armed” by providing an envelope in trans by propagating and packaging the particles in vitro using cell lines engineered to synthesize the required glycoprotein.

To perform monosynaptic circuit tracing and target FP-expressing RV to desired neuronal subsets, the particles can first be pseudotyped with the foreign coat protein EnvA from avian sarcoma leukosis virus, which specifically binds to a class of avian membrane proteins called TVA receptors (Barnard et al., 2006). Genetic targeting of neuronal subsets for TVA expression directs RV infection to only those neurons. To facilitate monosynaptic tracing, Wickersham et al. (2007a) added a clever twist on this approach. By introducing a plasmid that encodes the wildtype RV G-protein, the disarmed EGFP-expressing virus is now able to undergo one round of subsequent infection to presynaptic partners of TVA-targeted neurons. Since only the initially infected neuron contains G, viral spread ceases after one round of monosynaptic jumping. Including a plasmid encoding a red FP allows the cell originally targeted for infection to be identified amongst the monosynaptic network of GFP labeled cells. Of course it must be considered that true monosynaptic tracing is dependent on targeting individual neurons for the expression of G. If for example synaptically coupled cells both harbor G, but only one of them serves as the primary source cell of TVA-mediated infection, then viral spread can become multisynaptic through subsequent rounds of viral packaging in presynaptic partners. Monosynaptic tracing control thus depends directly upon the precision of neuronal targeting for the RV tracing components.


3.10 – in vitro Neuronal Models

A variety of in vitro models can be used to examine circuits as well as to test many of the techniques mentioned in this unit and to help understand development of the nervous system. Often these in vitro models have been developed to provide a simplified understanding of the much more complex in vivo condition. These reduced complexity models allow for a simplified approach to studying key neuronal processes on both the cellular and molecular level. At the same time, some tissue preparations suffer several limitations due to their simplicity, reducing direct in vivo comparisons.


Expression systems and immortalized cell lines

The simplest in vitro electrophysiological models include heterologous and recombinant expression systems which are cells/cell lines that can be maintained in culture for an extended period of time. The cells/cell lines typically used as heterologous (e.g., Xenopus oocytes; or recombinant expression systems (e.g., human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK-293) cells, Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells)) that are easily maintained, allow for manual and automated electrophysiological techniques and express high levels of desired protein within a short period of time that can be consistently observed. As such, these systems have been used extensively to evaluate the pharmacological properties and structure-function relationships of multiple neuron ion-channels. However, despite their simplicity and ubiquitous use, these cells lack many of the complexities associated with neuronal function within the intact brain (e.g. network associations, glial interactions, and developmental regulation) — a disadvantage when modeling the brain. Furthermore, these cells are typically of a non-neuronal origin and thus lack the same sophisticated level of cellular architecture, sub-cellular organization or biochemistry associated with native neuronal preparations.

Early efforts to address these non-neuronal concerns focused on neuronal cells derived from mouse neuroblastoma C-1300 tumor (e.g. N1E-115)) or the human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell line. However, subsequent advances in molecular biology enable the use of neural stem cells (NSCs). NSCs are uncommitted cells with self-renewal potential and the ability to differentiate into cells of all neural lineages. These cells can be derived from several sources such as pluripotent embryonic stem cells isolated from the blastocyst, human umbilical cord blood, induced pluripotent stem cells and multipotent somatic progenitors derived from several tissues including the CNS. Electrophysiologically, these cells possess Na+, K+ and Ca2+ currents that resemble the known patterns described for their in vivo neuronal counterparts, even at early stages of differentiation. Furthermore, these cells are also capable of forming rudimentary, yet functional, glutamatergic and GABAergic synapses in culture. Limitations in the use of cells obtained from adults offer limited neural lineage potential and senesce after only a few passages (Jakel, Schneider, & Svendsen, 2004). Moreover, NSC cultures may possess mixtures of both undifferentiated and differentiated neurons, for which some neurons are developmentally immature, and thus hinder extrapolation of data to the adult in vivo condition.


Dissociated neuronal primary cultures

Increasing in complexity, dissociated neuronal primary cultures represent another common tissue preparation. These cultures are mechanically and enzymatically dissociated from various brain regions (e.g., hippocampus, cortex, cerebellum, striatum, midbrain, superior cervical ganglion, etc.) and consist of either one predominant neuronal cell type, a co-mixture of different neuronal populations or mixed neuronal–glial cultures. Dissociated neurons and astrocytes retain much of their functional capacity in vitro enabling these preparations to address many important processes observed in the in vivo condition such as network dynamics and neuronal-glial interactions but dissociated neurons cannot be maintained in culture for extended periods of time and thus are required to be freshly isolated and grown on a regular basis.


Three-dimensional (3D) neuronal organoid models

The 3D neuronal model represents the next level of complexity for CNS in vitro models. Like the two-dimensional (2D) preparations discussed above, 3D brain cell cultures can consist of a co-mixture of different neuronal and non-neuronal populations. Interestingly, instead of being cultured in a traditional planar monolayer, 3D brain cultures are created up to 10 cell diameters thick within reaggregate or spherical cultures (i.e. spheroids), hydrogel/scaffold cultures or rotary bioreactor cultures with cell aggregates or microcarriers. When grown in a 3D environment, neural cells demonstrate better survivability and behave differently when compared to traditional 2D-models. As such, these models promote better development of native voltage-gated ion-channel functionality, resting membrane potentials, intracellular Ca2 + dynamics, Na+/H+ exchange, enhanced neurogenesis and differentiation, synapse formation, neuronal mobility and axon myelination (Lancaster & Knoblich, 2014; Lancaster et al., 2013; LaPlaca et al., 2010; van Vliet et al., 2007).


Unit 4 - Emergent Topics in Neuroscience


4.1 The Gut Microbiome and its Impact on the Brain

Previously it was believed that micro-organisms were solely responsible for the production of disease/pathology. However, more recently many different researchers and scientists have begun to re-evaluate this concept that microbes were only present or only useful in studying diseases.

Scientists have known for a very long period of time that there are a number of microbiota which consists of all of the bacteria, viruses and eukaryotes (i.e. fungi) that either grow in and or on the body (1014 bacteria internally; 1010 bacteria on skin; and an estimate quadrillion viruses). Since the microbiota are present on humans throughout almost our entire lifetime, current theories now highlight the possibility that the microbiota might also play a role in health, not only in disease. Conceptually, the genes encoded by all of the microbiota are known collectively as the microbiome. As the number of bacteria within the gut far exceeds all of the other microbiota, most research has started to investigate the role that the gut microbiome might have in health and disease, and more importantly in brain health and disease.

Specifically, within all fields of biology there is an emerging theme that an organ (such as skin) can be colonized by different types of microbes and this colonization does not have to be homogeneous across a particular organ. Although many of these gut bacteria can be treated pharmacologically in order for them to be eliminated, this may not be always be the best treatment. From a research perspective then, one key question that dominates, can controlling our gut microbiome produce changes in our biology, physiology and even behaviour?


What factors affect the gut microbiome?

Many factors have now been identified to affect the gut microbiome. As shown in Figure 1, an individual’s genetics, the types of drugs or antibiotics they are taking, hygiene, physical activity and other factors, all play a role in either mainintaining or, if changed, altering the gut microbiome.


The “Normal” Gut Microbiome

As the intestine is an anaerobic environment, the majority of the gut bacteria species have been found to be anaerobic. Between 500-1000 different bacterial species have been identified in the gut through genetic sequencing, although these species belong to a very small number of phyla. In most healthy adult individuals, the most abundant phyla include Bacteriodetes (Gram rods) and Firmicutes (Gram(+)) although other phyla such as Proteobacteria, Verrumicrobia, and Actinobacteria have also been identified.

Frequently, researchers not only measure the typical bacteria living in various parts of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract but also measure the microbial density within various regions of the gut. As shown in Figure 2., the types of resident or commensal bacteria found in the lumen of the gut regions as well as the density of bacteria (numbers on the right) show the density. Not surprisingly, the numbers as well as the complexity of bacteria increases distally down the length of the GI tract. This complexity started at birth and continues throughout development into adulthood.


But what types of bacteria dominate?

The gut microbiota is dominated by bacteria of which the major divisions of bacteria consist primarily of Bacteriodetes and Firmicutes. As mentioned previously there seems to be variation in bacteria between individuals although there is a suggestion that individuals normally have gut microbiota that dominate (the dominating bacterial fingerprint of each individual is referred to as an enterotype). The dominating bacterial enterotypes in a healthy individual typically consists of the genera of Bacteroides, Prevotella or Ruminococcus (everyone has all 3 bacteria genera but the ratios between each individual will differ from having more or less of each genera).


Changes to the gut microbiota and the gut microbiome

Interestingly, although everyone has a common “core” group of bacteria as outlined in the previous section, lifestyle effects on microbiota (i.e. changes in diet and physiological status) seem to have the ability to quickly modify the types and numbers of bacteria living in the gut. This offers both a therapeutic opportunity by introducing new bacteria that may be beneficial through probiotics that contain bacteria capable of colonizing the gut.

From the earliest developmental age, our but show large changes in the bacterial genera and their numbers 2 during development, changes again depending on lifestyle changes and ageing. The stability of the gut microbiota and the changes in the types of bacteria is emerging as an important factor that has increasingly been implicated in impacting our health status and may be contributing to neurodegenerative processes (and other changes to the brain) as shown in Chapter 2.

As shown in Figure 3. above, early bacterial gut colonizers such as Lactobacilli etc. are aerobic and most likely come from maternal sources – these are almost entirely unique and different by the first year of life. Bacteroides and Enterobacteria are anaerobic bacteria and tend to dominate later between 1-6 months of age. One of the most interesting aspects of gut colonization is that the source of bacteria is dependent on the environment as babies born via C-section tend to have colonization by Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium, Propionibacterium spp etc. which are normally found on the skin. This differs from the bacteria found in the gut of babies born through vaginal delivery as Lactobacilli, Prevotella and Sneathia dominate early on. Note that regardless of origin and initial colonization, that stability within the gut is reached around 1-2 years of age and is maintained into adulthood – where a unique balance between Bacterioidetes and Firmicutes exist while an individual stays healthy but can be altered by allergies, obesity, drugs and others to change this balance as shown in Figure 3.


Dysbiosis: The Basics

Dysbiosis represents an imbalance in the normal microbial community within your body. Experiments show that in adults, the bacteria, viruses and eukaryotes populations stay relatively stable. However, this stability occurs only in healthy individuals and these populations can change with diet, disease, treatment and environmental effects. For example, gut viromes (an extension of viral genomes) have been shown to have >95% stability in their sequences over the course of a year in healthy individuals – however this changes with alterations in an individual’s diet.

The effect of diet on the gut microbiome

In mice models – shifting diet from low-fat, plant-polysaccharide rich to high-fat, high sugar (Westernized) diet able to change the bacterial content within a day (Turnbaugh et al., 2009 Science Translational Medicine)

In human studies – similar changes in gut microbiota observed within 24 hours (Wu et al, 2011 Science).

This study showed that diet correlates with changing bacteria – high fat diet Bacteroides dominate, carbohydrate rich diet Prevotella dominate

In diet induced animal models of obesity there is a shift in dominant gut phyla with a decrease in Bacteroidetes and increase in Firmicutes. Similar results have been shown in human twin studies with decrease in Bacteroidetes but increase in Actinobacteria. The shift between these two phyla results in increased capacity for increasing energy from food but also results in inflammatory responses. By altering the gut microbiota in animal models, this seems to be sufficient to induce obesity as a phenotype (Turnbaugh et al., 2006 and 2008). These data suggest that the gut microbiota is capable of not only responding to changes in diet but can also induce phenotypes such as obesity.


Dysbiosis

As previously outlined in Chapter 1, a state of microbial imbalance inside the body known as dysbiosis, has recently been linked to the development of many diseases and disorders. These include obesity, colorectal cancer, and cardiovascular disease. There is therefore increasing and substantial evidence that homeostasis of the gut microbiota is essential to human health. Exercise, diet, antibiotic use, and personal hygiene are all important factors in maintaining this balance.

There are several ways in which the gut microbiota interacts with the brain. Components of bacteria, such as lipopolysaccharides, activate the innate immune system. In dysbiosis, the innate immune system is overactive, which may result in inflammation of the central nervous system. Certain bacterially-derived metabolites, such as D-lactic acid and ammonia, have also been found to have neurotoxic effects. In addition to these metabolites, many gut bacteria interact with the brain through the production of neurotransmitters, such as serotonin and dopamine. Finally, the gut microbiota communicates with the brain through the vagus nerve, which connects the brainstem to the heart, lungs, and digestive tract (Galland, 2014).

Dysbiosis has also been found to play a role in several neurological and psychiatric disorders, such as Major Depressive Disorder, Parkinson’s Disease, and Alzheimer’s Disease. Many of these diseases and disorders are often comorbid with gastrointestinal disorders. In some cases (e.g. Parkinson’s Disease), it is possible to induce disease in a healthy animal by exposing it to the gut microbiota of a diseased human. The gut and the brain have been shown to communicate bidirectionally, but this link and the mechanism behind it are not fully understood.

Case study: Gut Microbiome, the Brain and Parkinson’s Disease

Evidence for interactions between the gut and brain

Traditionally, neurological diseases have been studied solely through the lens of issues occurring within the CNS, although taking in to account that peripheral influences have been implicated in the onset and/or progression of diseases that impact the brain. One of these peripheral influences that has been gaining increasing interested in the impact that the gut microbiome has on the brain (Dinan and Cryan, 2015). Emerging data suggest bidirectional communication between the gut and the brain in anxiety, depression, nociception, and autism spectrum disorder (ASD).

Gastrointestinal (GI) physiology and motility are influenced by signals arising both locally within the gut and from the CNS suggesting that such a synergistic interplay could exist. Neurotransmitters, immune signaling, hormones, and neuropeptides produced within the gut may, in turn, impact the brain (Selkrig et al., 2014, Wall et al., 2014) but still remain largely unknown.

Research is beginning to uncover the profound impacts that microbiota can have on neurodevelopment and the CNS (Sharon et al., 2016). Germ-free (GF) mice and antibiotic-treated specific-pathogen-free (SPF) mice exhibit altered in hippocampal neurogenesis, resulting in impaired spatial and object recognition (Möhle et al., 2016). The gut microbiota have been shown to regulate expression of the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor (5-HT1A), brain-derived neurotropic factor (BDNF), and NMDA receptor subunit 2 (NR2A) (Bercik et al., 2011, Diaz Heijtz et al., 2011, Sudo et al., 2004). The microbiota promotes enteric and circulating serotonin production in mice (Yano et al., 2015) and affects anxiety, hyperactivity, and cognition (Clarke et al., 2013, Diaz Heijtz et al., 2011, Neufeld et al., 2011, Selkrig et al., 2014).


Dysbiosis in Neurodegeneration

Dysbiosis of the human microbiome has been reported in subjects diagnosed with several neurological diseases. For example, fecal and mucosa-associated gut microbes have been found to be different between individuals with Parkinson’s Disease (PD) and healthy controls although it is not clear what this link is.

Individuals with PD also tend to exhibit intestinal inflammation, and GI abnormalities such as constipation which often precede clinical motor defects by many years (Braak et al., 2003, Verbaan et al., 2007). One theory (Braak’s hypothesis) has suggested that aberrant αSyn accumulation initiates first within the gut and then propagates via the vagus nerve to the brain in a mechanism that resembles prion diseases where infectious proteins spread from one area to the other (Del Tredici and Braak, 2008). A hallmark feature of PD involves αSyn (alpha Synuclein) inclusions, and these appear early in the enteric nervous system (ENS) and the glossopharyngeal and vagal nerves (Braak et al., 2003, Shannon et al., 2012).Interestingly, vagotomized individuals (where the vagus nerve has been surgical cut) are at reduced risk for PD (Svensson et al., 2015). This suggests that there is evidence that in PD an alteration in the gut microbiome might somehow produce neurodegeneration in the brain, and that this factor travels along the vagus nerve.

How would you prove this? What would a researcher need to do?

Can gut bacteria regulate the hallmark motor deficits and pathophysiology of synucleinopathies such as PD?

Are changes in the gut microbiota necessary to promote αSyn pathology, neuroinflammation, and characteristic motor features in a proper mouse model?

Try to prove that gut microbes may play a critical and functional role in the pathogenesis of synucleinopathies such as PD

Recent papers that answered all of the above lines of evidence used germ free mice to examine the effects of the gut microbiota on microglial activation in the brain. Furthermore it was found that the gut bacteria modulate microglia activation during viral infection through production of microbial metabolites, namely short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). To address whether SCFAs impact neuroimmune responses in a mouse model of PD, animals were treated with a mixture of the SCFAs acetate, propionate, and butyrate (while the animals remained microbiologically sterile). These results demonstrated that the gut microbiome and changes to the gut microbiome could alter production of SCFAs which in turn could signal to alter brain microglia and that this might be the mechanistic link between gut microbiomes, immune system activation and damage to the brain.

The main effect of the gut microbiota perturbations on the brain may occur at times of lower diversity and instability of the gut microbiota (infants and the elderly) and during brain development (perinatal and infant period). During the prenatal period, the developing brain is first exposed to maternal gut-derived metabolites and may be exposed to intrauterine microbes. During birth, the newborn’s gut microbiota is shaped by the maternal vaginal (or skin) microbiota (reviewed earlier). Even though the possibility that pre- and postnatal influences on the microbiota can affect brain development is intriguing, there has not been any research in humans characterizing the effect of maternal microbiota modulation on fetal brain development and adult sequelae of such modulation as might be suspected in autism spectrum disease. Again, it is intriguing to consider the possibilities associated with elderly changes in the gut microbiome and the onset of neurodegenerative conditions but further research is needed in this exciting new area of neuroscience research.


Overview

For centuries, researchers have sought to elucidate the mechanisms behind the axiom that a healthy body leads to a healthy mind. It has now been established that exercise, even among minimal commitment exercise routines, has an array of robust effects on the brain, such as enhanced memory, mood, cognitive functioning, plasticity, and learning capabilities (Erickson et al., 2011; Spalding et al., 2013; Phillips et al., 2014). Most notably, exercise has been implicated in having anti-depressant effects and counteracting disease or age-related mental impairment and atrophy, such as Alzheimer’s disease or dementia (Laurin et al., 2001). Yet, until recently, the intermediaries between exercise and its health benefits have not been well-understood.

However, it has been shown that—contrary to the age-old notion that the number of neurons in the brain remains static after prenatal and neonatal development—new neurons can be generated in the adult brain via a process known as neurogenesis, which can attenuate the deleterious effects of neurodegeneration (van Praag et al., 1999). This phenomenon has been linked to exercise, with a significant portion of subsequent neural growth occurring in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus (Cotman and Berchtold, 2002). Since the hippocampus is critical for memory consolidation and learning, the generation of new neurons and increased plasticity in this brain region may explain the improved cognition and emotional state that accompanies exercise (Gandy et al., 2017; Trinchero et al., 2017). Furthermore, preliminary research has suggested that neurogenesis may also occur in numerous other areas of the brain, including the amygdala and hypothalamus, which may explain the diversity of exercise-derived benefits (Fowler et al., 2008). However, this research is not as extensive or conclusive as hippocampal neurogenesis research, nor is the extent to which neurogenesis occurs in other brain regions as robust as it is in the hippocampus, with the exception of the olfactory bulb (Cotman et al., 2007). One key molecule, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), has been shown to modulate neurogenesis and exercise likely influences BDNF levels to alter areas of the brain.


Exercise and Hippocampal Neurogenesis

In rodents, hippocampal neurogenesis as a function of exercise has been extensively demonstrated and replicated. To test this, rodents are injected with bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), which signify actively mitotic cells and are incorporated by daughter cells, thereby allowing the tracing of cell division (del Rio and Soriano, 1989). In some of the earliest work in this field, it was shown that mice allowed to voluntarily exercise on a running wheel exhibited enhanced neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus. By utilizing BrdU as a tracing molecule, it was observed that exercise not only increased proliferation of the progenitor cells in the subgranular zone, but also increased their survival rate as they differentiated and matured (van Praag et al., 1999; Seri et al., 2001; for reviews of neural progenitors and lineage progression see Weissman et al., 2001; Seri et al., 2004; Göritz and Frisén, 2012).

Although it is much more difficult to study exercise-mediated neurogenesis in humans, there is significant evidence that neurogenesis occurs in the adult human brain, especially in the dentate gyrus. Indeed, exercise has been shown to increase the size of the hippocampus in human adults (Erickson et al., 2011). Through postmortem tissue analysis of cancer patients administered BrdU, it has been shown that mature granule neurons are continually generated from the subgranular zone, even in the later stages of life (Eriksson et al., 1998). Interestingly, the participants in this study were not assigned to exercise conditions, and since they were cancer patients near death, it is unlikely they participated in any exercise regimen. This suggests that the hippocampus has the capability to generate new neurons in adulthood independent of exercise. Later sections in this review, however, provide evidence that exercise accentuates neurogenesis in humans and addresses how the amount of exercise modulates the degree of neurogenesis.


BDNF Mediation of Hippocampal Neurogenesis

Given these early findings establishing a connection between exercise and hippocampal neurogenesis, researchers next turned to examining the biological underpinnings. One of the strongest candidates for bridging the gap between exercise and neurogenesis is BDNF, a growth factor categorized under the neurotrophin family widely expressed in the brain and throughout the rest of the central nervous system (Salehi et al., 2003). Early research on this molecule found that during development in mice, BDNF expression is low during prenatal development, but then increases during the first few weeks after being born and peaks during the shift from embryonic to adult neurogenesis (Bath et al., 2012). This provides key insight into its potential for facilitating neurogenesis, which then spurred much more research interest in its connection to neurogenesis.


BDNF

As a whole, the neurotrophin family polypeptides are vital to the regulation of the neural processes in neurogenesis, such as proliferation, differentiation, maturation, and plasticity. Within this family, BDNF exhibits the highest degree of expression in the brain, and is primarily synthesized there during exercise (Reichardt, 2006). BDNF can also enter the brain via freely diffusing across the blood brain barrier (Pan et al., 1998; Mousavi and Jasmin, 2006). Furthermore, during exercise, proteins and their metabolic derivatives secreted from peripheral muscles, such as cathepsin B and FNDC5/irisin, also cross the blood brain barrier to mediate BDNF expression in the hippocampus and subsequent neurogenesis and memory improvement (Wrann et al., 2013; Moon et al., 2016). Indeed, mice injected with skeletal muscle endurance factors had elevated levels of hippocampal neurogenesis and increased spatial memory (Kobilo et al., 2010).

BDNF functions by binding to tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB), which is largely expressed in hippocampal neurons. Upon binding, the BDNF-TrkB complex serves as a docking site for numerous signaling cascades, protein phosphorylation cascades, and secondary signaling systems (Huang and Reichardt, 2003; Nykjaer et al., 2005; Yoshii and Constantine-Paton, 2010). Through these pathways (shown in Figure 1), BDNF can exert significant regulatory control over many facets of a neuron’s function and thereby influence how these neurons function as a whole within the hippocampus.


Exercise and BDNF Expression

Thus far, both exercise and BDNF have been shown to be associated with increased neurogenesis. Further research has extended this to show that treadmill exercise in mice and aerobic exercise in humans increases BDNF expression by regulating BDNF gene expression in the hippocampus (Kim et al., 2015). This process is largely mediated by neurotransmitter and neuroendocrine systems, with extensive literature supporting acetylcholine (ACh) as a key regulator (Knipper et al., 1994).

In mice allowed to voluntarily engage in wheel running, an increase in BDNF mRNA levels in the dentate gyrus was observed after only a few days of exercise (Neeper et al., 1995). Surprisingly, these levels were maintained throughout several weeks of exercise and corresponded to proportional increases in BDNF protein expression (Russo-Neustadt et al., 1999). When the exercise conditions were supplemented with antibodies blocking TrkB, however, the mice had attenuated learning capabilities involving the hippocampus. Furthermore, these mice also lacked synaptic-specific proteins in the hippocampus, thereby demonstrating that BDNF signaling is necessary to allow the benefits of exercise to manifest (Vaynman et al., 2004, 2006).

Research has also shown that metrics of overall health quality in humans follow a dose-dependent relationship with the duration and intensity of exercise, with the best outcomes linked to moderate exercise (Larson et al., 2006). Further work illustrates that mice show greater improvements in acquisition and retention based learning in hippocampus-dependent tasks following long-term exercise rather than shorter regimes of exercise (Handschin and Spiegelman, 2008; Parachikova et al., 2008; Ploeger et al., 2009). It was found that in mice, even just one session of exercise increased BDNF levels. This effect, however, became amplified following a period of exercise in mice that regularly exercised, with an increased response in BDNF levels relative to mice after just a single session of exercise (Johnson et al., 2003; van Praag et al., 2005; Rasmussen et al., 2009). Consistent with these findings is a meta-analysis of 29 studies spanning 1,111 human participants that analyzed BDNF expression levels across various exercise paradigms. However, many of the studies only examined moderate exercise, and several studies did not report intensity level. Interestingly, considerable evidence from this meta-analysis suggests that humans also experience a dose-response relationship in which each session of exercise corresponds to a dose of increased BDNF expression. Furthermore, regular exercise in moderate amounts has been shown to increase the magnitude of BDNF expression following individual sessions of exercise (Szuhany et al., 2015).

There is not a perfect positive correlation, however, between the amount and intensity of exercise and BDNF expression levels and subsequent health benefits. Extreme exercise has been shown to disrupt a number of metabolic and physiological processes and lead to impaired cognitive performance in humans (Aguiló et al., 2005). Since oxygen is rapidly metabolized during physical exertion, reactive oxygen species (ROS) are naturally produced as a metabolic byproduct. When produced at high levels, such as during bouts of intense exercise, ROS can lead to oxidative damage and increased cellular mortality in both rodents and humans (Radak et al., 2016). Moderate levels of exercise enforce the human body’s antioxidant defense system, but extreme levels of exercise lead to the generation of more ROS than the antioxidant system can defend against, thereby allowing their accumulation as oxidative stress (Mastaloudis et al., 2001). In fact, when treated with hydrogen peroxide, a potent ROS, hippocampal cell cultures taken from rodents showed an inverse relationship between BDNF expression levels and hydrogen peroxide concentration (Kwon et al., 2013). The in vivo production of BDNF as a function of ROS production, however, is less clear and warrants further study.


Not all BDNF is created equal

In humans there are frequent polymorphisms in the BDNF gene which are typically found on position 66 that converts valine to a methionine. Previous work in the early 2000s suggested that somehow this gene was not working well in people with schizophrenia and that this Met66 polymorphism would be linked to disorders of the brain including schizophrenia.

When researchers examined the polymorphisms in the gene and schizophrenia and effect on hippocampal dysfunction in a study of 641 individuals reported in Cell 2003 by Egan et al. cohorts of schizophrenia, siblings and normal individuals were examined to see if there was a relationship. However, it turned out that this polymorphism had no difference on cognitive recall skills in individuals with schizophrenia but normal individuals (i.e. their siblings) who did not have symptoms showed dramatically reduced memory recall with the Met66 mutation. Later research showed that this polymorphism makes it harder to release BDNF, therefore affecting neuronal health. So even if an individual exercised, there is no guarantee that more BDNF will be released! The effectiveness of exercise is literally in your BDNF genes!


Introduction to Contemplative Science

Neuroplasticity is the innate property of the brain to alter its structure and function depending on our experiences. The theoretical framework of neuroplasticity is often associated with learning a new skill, such as how to juggle or speak a new language. A new field of scientific study, contemplative science, is concerned with how training the mind through meditation can induce neuroplasticity. In this chapter, we explore how contemplative practices, such as mindfulness meditation, influence neural activity and the architecture of the brain. Contemplative practices involve training a complex array of cognitive processing, including attentional and emotional regulation. In this chapter, we will take a closer look at the methodology used to understand the effects of meditation on the brain and behaviour, as well as the implementation of meditation in psychotherapy.


Meditation

The practice of meditation has rich roots that extend back to century old traditions of Eastern religions. In Western society, the practice of meditation has been adopted and utilized as a self-help tool for stress reduction (Cutshall et al., 2011). Both secular and non-secular forms of meditation involve the regulation of attention and emotions, utilizing the techniques of focused attention (FA) and open monitoring (OM). FA requires that individuals actively directs their attention to an object, sensation, or idea (i.e. a mantra). OM involves attending to the transiency of thoughts and bodily sensations as they change from moment-to-moment (Lutz et al., 2009).

The most widely practiced form of meditation is mindfulness meditation (MM), which is based on the concept that mindfulness is the ability to; pay attention, on purpose, to thoughts and sensations in the present moment, non-judgmentally (Kabat-Zinn,1994). Mindfulness meditation has been integrated into therapies used to treat psychiatric disorders such as major depression and anxiety (Shonin & Van Gordon, 2016).


Making the Connection Between Meditation and Neuroscience


Identifying Effects on Neural Activity

Initial research on meditation focused on identifying how long-term practice influenced cortical activity using electroencephalography (EEG). Seminal work by Lutz et al. (2004), uncovered that long-term Buddhist practitioners exhibited EEG patterns in the lateral frontoparietal area that were indicative of phase synchrony of gamma band oscillatory activity (25-70 Hz). This pattern of cortical activity has been associated with the integration of information across neural networks through short and long-term synaptic changes that underlie processes of cognitive and affective regulation. These findings suggest that the practice of meditation may promote functional changes of activity in the brain, consistent with the experience-dependent nature of neuroplasticity (Pascual-Leone et al. 2005; Travis & Arenander 2004).

Although these studies provided evidence for the meditation-brain connection, it is important to consider the limitations of utilizing EEG to characterize neural changes associated with meditation practice. EEG is a method that measures cortical activity by using electrodes placed on the scalp to detect extracellular currents produced by postsynaptic apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons. These electrical signals however, are distorted as they pass through the skull. As a result, using EEG makes it difficult to infer the source of observed cortical activity. To this point, it is also difficult to detect changes in neural activity in deeper cortical structures due to their distance from surface electrodes. These limitations are referred to as the inverse problem of EEG. The advantage of EEG is that the technique offers a high degree of temporal resolution, as it can be used to detect changes in cortical on the order of milliseconds (Grech et al. 2008).

To address the limitations of EEG, subsequent studies utilized techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to measure local changes in blood oxygenation as a level of neuronal activity, referred to as the BOLD response. It was found that individuals that practiced meditation exhibited reduced activity in the default mode network (DMN) during the practice of meditation compared to rest. The DMN is a collection of cortical structures including; the posterior cingulate cortex, medial prefrontal cortex, and the angular gyrus. The DMN has also been referred to as a task negative network as activity in these regions are associated with self-referential processing and mind wandering that divert attention while completing a task. Considering this, the practice of attentional regulation through meditation practice has been hypothesized to suppress activity of this network to improve focus on tasks outside of meditation practice (Garrison et al. 2015; Pagnoni 2012).


Identifying Effects on Cortical Grey Matter Structure
