The Developing Social Brain: Implications for Education

Sarah-Jayne Blakemore — Neuron, 2010. PMC2860242, CC BY 3.0.

This paper discusses the development of the human social brain. First, I will argue that social cognition is uniquely important and describe evidence that social interaction plays a critical role in early brain development. I will then discuss recent research demonstrating that the social brain undergoes protracted development and that adolescence in particular represents a period of reorganization of the social brain. Finally, I will attempt to draw out potential implications of this new research for education policy and for human wellbeing.


Main Text


Humans Are Exquisitely Social

Humans are an exquisitely social species. Take the photograph shown here, which shows an English soccer player, Michael Owen, having just missed a goal for Liverpool Football Club. The photograph beautifully illustrates two aspects of the social brain. First, it shows how rapid and instinctive social responses are. Within a split second of Michael Owen missing the goal, nearly everyone is making identical arm gestures and has the same expression on their face. The other aspect of the social brain this photograph illustrates is our ability to read other people's gestures and faces in terms of their underlying emotions and mental states. Without having to ask you have a good idea of what they are thinking and feeling at this precise moment in time.

We are constantly reading each others' actions, gestures and faces in terms of underlying mental states and emotions, in an attempt to figure out what other people are thinking and feeling, and what they are about to do next. This is known as theory of mind or mentalizing. Developmental psychology research on theory of mind has demonstrated that the ability to understand others' mental states develops over the first four or five years of life. While certain aspects of theory of mind are present in infancy (Baillargeon et al., 2010), it is not until around the age of four years that children begin explicitly to understand that someone else can hold a belief that differs from one's own and which can be false (Barresi and Moore, 1996). An understanding of others' mental states plays a critical role in social interaction because it enables us to work out what other people want and what they are about to do next and to modify our own behavior accordingly.


Social Cognition Is Special

It sounds obvious to say that interaction with other people is critical for normal neurocognitive development. However, there is a striking and surprising empirical example of the importance of social interaction for learning from research on language acquisition. It is well known that many Japanese people are unable to distinguish between R and L sounds. However, research in the 1980s revealed that Japanese babies are able to detect the difference between R and L, but only before about nine months (e.g., Werker, 1989). The Japanese language does not contain distinct R and L sounds, so Japanese babies are not exposed to the subtle difference between these sounds and eventually lose the ability to distinguish them by the age of nine months.

A key question is whether sounds that have been lost can be relearned. A study confirmed that infants older than nine months can learn to discriminate speech sounds to which they have not previously been exposed (Kuhl et al., 2003). Kuhl and colleagues studied American babies who had grown up hearing only English and had thus lost the ability to distinguish between certain Chinese Mandarin sounds. The authors trained three groups of nine-month-old American babies: one group interacted with a real native Chinese speaker, who played with and read to them; a second group saw movies of the same Chinese speaker; the third group heard the same Chinese speaker through headphones. The content and the time of exposure were identical in all three groups.

The group that had been exposed to a real live Chinese person significantly improved their ability to distinguish between the two sounds, performing at around the same level as native Chinese babies. In striking contrast, babies who had been exposed to the same amount of Chinese but in the form of video or sound recordings showed no learning, and their posttraining performance was the same as the American babies who had received no exposure.

There are two implications of this research. First, it shows that relearning is possible. Although zero to nine months represents a sensitive period for sound categorization, it is possible to relearn sounds after this window of opportunity has closed. Second, the training results show that social interaction is a critical and constraining factor. There appears to be something special about social interaction with a real live person that is not present from watching videos or hearing sound recordings of the same person. What is special about social interaction with a real person is not yet understood. One possibility is that social interaction increases infants' motivation through enhanced attention and arousal. Social interaction also directs the adult trainer to focus on the learner's individual needs and tailors the training content for the learner. In addition, by nine months, infants start to understand that pointing to, or looking in the direction of, an object indicates that this object is being referred to. This is one of the first building blocks of theory of mind.


The Social Brain

Over the past 15 years, a large number of independent studies have shown remarkable consistency in identifying the brain regions that are involved in theory of mind or mentalizing. These studies have employed a wide range of stimuli including stories, sentences, words, cartoons, and animations, each designed to elicit the attribution of mental states (see Amodio and Frith, 2006, for review). In each case, the mentalizing task resulted in the activation of a network of regions including the posterior STS at the temporoparietal junction (TPJ), the temporal poles and the dorsal medial PFC (mPFC; see Burnett and Blakemore, 2009). The agreement between neuroimaging studies in this area is remarkable, and the consistent localization of activity within a network of regions including the pSTS/TPJ and mPFC, as well as the temporal poles, suggests that these regions are key to the process of mentalizing.

Brain lesion studies have consistently demonstrated that the superior temporal lobes (e.g., Samson et al., 2004) and PFC (e.g., Stuss et al., 2001) are involved in mentalizing as damage to these brain areas impairs mentalizing abilities. Interestingly, one study reported a patient with large PFC damage whose mentalizing abilities were intact (Bird et al., 2004), suggesting that this region is not necessary for mentalizing. However, there are other explanations for this surprising and intriguing finding. It is possible that, due to plasticity, this patient used a different neural strategy in mentalizing tasks. Alternatively, it is possible that damage to this area at different ages has different consequences for mentalizing abilities. The patient described by Bird and colleagues had sustained her PFC lesion at a later age (62 years) than most previously reported patients who show impairments of mentalizing tasks. Perhaps mPFC lesions later in life spare mentalizing abilities, whereas damage that occurs earlier in life is detrimental. It is possible that mPFC is necessary for the acquisition of mentalizing but not essential for later implementation of mentalizing. Intriguingly, this is in line with recent data from developmental fMRI studies of mentalizing, which suggest that the mPFC contributes differentially to mentalizing at different ages.


Development of Mentalizing during Adolescence

A number of developmental fMRI studies of mental state attribution have consistently shown that mPFC cortex activity during mentalizing tasks decreases between adolescence and adulthood. Each of these studies compared brain activity in young adolescents and adults while they were performing a task that involved thinking about mental states (see for details of studies). In each of these studies, mPFC activity was greater in the adolescent group than in the adult group during the mentalizing task compared to the control task. In addition, there is evidence for differential functional connectivity between mPFC and other parts of the mentalizing network across age (Burnett and Blakemore, 2009).

To summarize, a number of developmental neuroimaging studies of social cognition have been carried out by different labs around the world, and there is striking consistency with respect to the direction of change in mPFC activity. It is not yet understood why mPFC activity decreases between adolescence and adulthood during mentalizing tasks, but two non-mutually exclusive explanations have been put forward (see Blakemore, 2008, for details). One possibility is that the cognitive strategy for mentalizing changes between adolescence and adulthood. A second possibility is that the functional change with age is due to neuroanatomical changes that occur during this period. Decreases in activity are frequently interpreted as being due to developmental reductions in gray matter volume, presumably related to synaptic pruning. However, there is currently no direct way to test the relationship between number of synapses, synaptic activity, and neural activity as measured by fMRI in humans (see Blakemore, 2008, for discussion). If the neural substrates for social cognition change during adolescence, what are the consequences for social cognitive behavior?


Online Mentalizing Usage Is Still Developing in Mid-adolescence

Most developmental studies of social cognition focus on early childhood, possibly because children perform adequately in even quite complex mentalizing tasks at around age four. This can be attributed to a lack of suitable paradigms: generally, in order to create a mentalizing task that does not elicit ceiling performance in children aged five and older, the linguistic and executive demands of the task must be increased. This renders any age-associated improvement in performance difficult to attribute solely to improved mentalizing ability. However, the protracted structural and functional development in adolescence and early adulthood of the brain regions involved in theory of mind might be expected to affect mental state understanding.

Recently, we adapted a task that requires the online use of theory of mind information when making decisions in a communication game and which produces large numbers of errors even in adults (Keysar et al., 2003). In our computerized version of the task, participants view a set of shelves containing objects, which they are instructed to move by a “Director,” who can see some but not all of the objects (Dumontheil et al., 2010). Correct interpretation of critical instructions requires participants to use the director's perspective and only move objects that the director can see. We tested participants aged between 7 and 27 years and found that, while performance in the director and a control condition followed the same trajectory until mid-adolescence, the mid-adolescent group made more errors than the adults in the director condition only. These results suggest that the ability to take another person's perspective to direct appropriate behavior is still undergoing development at this relatively late stage.


Implications for Education

Knowledge of how the brain develops and learns will have a profound impact on education in the future. Understanding the brain mechanisms that underlie learning and memory, and the effects of genetics, the environment, emotion, and age on learning could transform educational strategies and enable us to design programs that optimize learning for people of all ages and of all needs. Neuroscience can now offer some understanding of how the brain learns new information and processes this information throughout life (see Blakemore and Frith, 2005).

As described above, social interaction with a real live person is critical for at least some types of early learning (Kuhl et al., 2003), suggesting that, while not necessarily harmful, DVDs and CDs aimed at teaching babies and young children may not be associated with optimal learning. More importantly, the time spent watching DVDs is time that could otherwise be spent in social interaction with a real person, and denying the developing brain of this might have negative consequences. We need to ask whether online social networking, which is particularly popular with teenagers, is the same as real live interaction, or whether it might be denying the developing teenage brain of important real life interactions. There is as yet no research on this important question. What is the critical factor in social interaction that is so evidently missing from video conferencing, and which makes it incomparable to a meeting with real people? There is a growing industry for the development of robot nannies, robot carers, and robot companions for the elderly in aging societies such as Japan. But are robot companions the same as real friends? Does social interaction with robots determine happiness in the same way as social relationships with people (Argyle, 2001)? These are open questions, ripe for research.

Understanding the brain basis of social functioning and social development is crucial to the fostering of social competence inside and outside the classroom. Social functioning plays a role in shaping learning and academic performance (and vice versa), and understanding the neural basis of social behavior can contribute to understanding the origins and process of schooling success and failure. The finding that changes in brain structure continue into adolescence (and beyond) has challenged accepted views and has given rise to a recent spate of investigations into the way cognition (including social cognition) might change as a consequence. Research suggests that adolescence is a key time for the development of regions of the brain involved in social cognition and self-awareness. This is likely to be due to the interplay between a number of factors, including changes in the social environment and in puberty hormones, as well as structural and functional brain development and improvements in social cognition.

If early childhood is seen as a major opportunity—or a “sensitive period”—for teaching, so too should the teenage years. During both periods, particularly dramatic brain reorganization is taking place. The idea that teenagers should still go to school and be educated is relatively new. And yet the research on brain development suggests that education during the teenage years is vital. The brain is still developing during this period, is adaptable, and needs to be molded and shaped. Perhaps the aims of education for adolescents might change to include abilities that are controlled by the parts of the brain that undergo most change during adolescence. These abilities include internal control, multitasking, and planning—but also self-awareness and social cognitive skills such as the perspective-taking and the understanding of social emotions. Finally, it might be fruitful to include in the curriculum some teaching on the changes occurring in the brain during adolescence. Adolescents might be interested in, and could benefit from, learning about the changes that are going on in their own brains.


Genetic Advances in the Study of Speech and Language Disorders

D.F. Newbury, A.P. Monaco — Neuron, 2010. PMC2977079, CC BY 3.0.

Developmental speech and language disorders cover a wide range of childhood conditions with overlapping but heterogeneous phenotypes and underlying etiologies. This characteristic heterogeneity hinders accurate diagnosis, can complicate treatment strategies, and causes difficulties in the identification of causal factors. Nonetheless, over the last decade, genetic variants have been identified that may predispose certain individuals to different aspects of speech and language difficulties. In this review, we summarize advances in the genetic investigation of stuttering, speech-sound disorder (SSD), specific language impairment (SLI), and developmental verbal dyspraxia (DVD). We discuss how the identification and study of specific genes and pathways, including FOXP2, CNTNAP2, ATP2C2, CMIP, and lysosomal enzymes, may advance our understanding of the etiology of speech and language disorders and enable us to better understand the relationships between the different forms of impairment across the spectrum.


Main Text


Speech and Language Disorders

Developmental disorders of communication represent one of the most common reasons for pediatric referrals (Harel et al., 1996) and account for a large proportion of statements of educational need (Law et al., 2000). This clinical category includes many individuals in whom speech and language problems are symptomatic of a more global developmental condition, such as autistic spectrum disorder, learning disability, or hearing impairment. For others, the speech and language deficit occurs in an otherwise normal developmental trajectory and has no obvious cause (Bishop, 1994). Such primary speech and language disorders are currently classified into five distinct categories: expressive language disorder, mixed receptive-expressive language disorder, phonological disorder, stuttering, and communication disorder not-otherwise-specified (DSM-IV). Disorders of speech involve an impairment in the production of fluent and comprehensible speech and include stuttering, in which the fluency of speech is disrupted; phonological disorder (including speech-sound disorder [SSD]), in which the problem lies in the production and proper use of speech sounds; and developmental verbal dyspraxia, in which there is impairment in the coordination and motor control of the speech organs. Disorders of language are perhaps less perceptible but no less profound. They may involve problems with the correct formation of words (morphology) or sentences (syntax), the derivation of meaning (semantics), or the use of linguistic context (pragmatics) and may affect expressive and/or receptive language as well as nonverbal language (e.g., reading and writing—developmental dyslexia). The term specific language impairment (SLI) is often used as an umbrella term for expressive language disorder, mixed receptive-expressive language disorder, and sometimes phonological disorder.

Although many of these speech and language disorders are differentiated at a clinical level, they are highly comorbid with each other. Many children do not fall neatly into a single diagnostic cluster, and others may change between categories as their language develops. Approximately 15% of children with persistent speech disorders also have a language disorder and approximately 5% of children with SLI also experience speech difficulties (Shriberg et al., 1999). Over 60% of stutterers present with concurrent speech and language disorders, the most common of which is articulation disorder (Blood et al., 2003). Furthermore, although the diagnostic criteria for SLI necessitates the absence of explanatory medical conditions, studies have found that affected individuals are at an increased risk of associated developmental delays, cognitive impairment, social problems, literacy deficits, and behavioral difficulties (Conti-Ramsden and Botting, 1999; Conti-Ramsden et al., 2001; Law et al., 2000; Wadman et al., 2008). The exact relationship between speech and language deficits and these other developmental problems remains a matter of debate, and the etiological basis of these overlaps are unclear.

It is well documented that genetic factors contribute to susceptibility to speech and language impairments. Speech and language deficits are heritable and show strong familial aggregation (e.g., Barry et al., 2007; Clark et al., 2007; Conti-Ramsden et al., 2007; Lewis et al., 2007). Moreover, twin studies report an increase in monozygotic twin concordance rates over that of dizygotic twins, suggesting that much of this aggregation can be attributed to genetic influences (Bishop, 2002; Felsenfeld et al., 2000; Hayiou-Thomas, 2008). Nonetheless, it is generally thought that the genetic mechanisms underlying susceptibility to speech and language disorders are multifactorial in nature, involving complex interactions between several common genetic variants and environmental factors. Despite this complexity, researchers have recently begun to identify genetic factors that may play a role in the etiology of speech and language disorders (Kang et al., 2010; Newbury et al., 2009; Vernes et al., 2008). It is hoped that the identification of contributory genetic risk factors will allow the elucidation of biological pathways and neurological mechanisms that contribute to speech and language acquisition processes and play a critical role in the etiology of speech and language disorders. In turn, the investigation of identified genetic factors may help untangle the complex relationships between speech and language disorders and related developmental conditions.

In this review, we provide an overview of recent developments in the genetic study of spoken developmental speech and language disorders. We do not describe the study of developmental dyslexia as excellent reviews of this area have recently been published (Scerri and Schulte-Körne, 2010).


Methods for Identifying Contributory Genetic Variants

For some genetic disorders, it is possible to select candidate genes on the basis of their function alone. However, for speech and language disorders, in which the underlying biological mechanism is unclear, the identification of susceptibility genes usually starts with an unbiased screening approach. This step allows the identification of a candidate region and thus acts to reduce the number of possible contributory genes to a manageable size prior to a more in-depth investigation. These screening approaches usually take the form of genome-wide linkage or association studies (Elston and Anne Spence, 2006).

In a linkage study, one investigates families with members affected by the disorder under study. By genotyping polymorphic genetic markers spread across the genome, it is possible to generate measures of genetic identity between sibling pairs. Linkage studies look for regions of the human genome in which there is a correlation between the level of genetic identity and the level of phenotypic similarity for any given sib pair. Perhaps the most simple example of linkage analysis is provided by the study of single-gene disorders in large families. In such circumstances, one is able to identify specific chromosome segments that cosegregate with disease status between affected relative pairs. Nonetheless, as discussed below, the study of such pedigrees in complex disorders is the exception rather than the rule. Instead, the majority of linkage studies for complex disorders investigate large numbers of smaller nuclear families and compare genetic identity between sibling pairs within family units. Such analyses can be performed under the assumption of a defined genetic model (parametric linkage analysis) or by using a model-free method (nonparametric linkage analysis). Linkage analyses provide a robust and powerful method of detecting contributing genetic factors but afford a low level of resolution. Thus, although linkage studies can be completed with relatively small sample sizes, they often lead to the identification of large genetic intervals, which necessitate follow-up higher-resolution (targeted association) investigations to allow the identification of a specific candidate gene. Linkage studies are usually completed at a genome-wide level (i.e., across all chromosomes—i.e., a genome-wide linkage analysis or GWLA) but may target specific chromosome regions (targeted linkage) if the researcher has an a priori reason to do so.

Because linkage studies simply investigate the level of genetic sharing (joint inheritance), they do not allow the identification of specific contributory genetic variants. For this crucial step, an association study is required. In contrast to linkage, an association study is based upon the principle that contributory genetic variants will be more common in affected (cases) than unaffected (controls) individuals. In the simplest example, if a given genetic variant was necessary and sufficient for the onset of the disorder then we would expect this variant to be present in 100% of cases but never in controls. In complex disorders, the effect is not expected to be so stark but the rationale still holds. Association studies provide a better resolution of genetic information than linkage studies but are not as powerful and necessitate the genotyping of a high number of genetic markers in extremely large samples. These factors bring their own complications in terms of the logistics of data generation and multiple testing issues. Nonetheless, it is now possible to routinely generate genotypes for 2.5 million genetic variants (single-nucleotide polymorphisms [SNPs]) in thousands of case and control individuals enabling a so-called genome-wide association (GWA) study. The fact that association models were developed for case-control cohorts means that they often do not provide a convenient method for the fine mapping of linkage peaks in family-based samples. However, it is possible to apply such methods to genetic data collected from families by using parents or unaffected siblings as controls (Lunetta et al., 2000) or by applying quasi-association extensions (Abecasis et al., 2000). Such methods provide an important solution to fine mapping and the investigation of quantitative traits and may offer increased power to detect etiological variants.

It should be noted that although association studies are theoretically capable of identifying specific causal variants with relatively low effect sizes, in practice the genetic variants identified by association studies are not necessarily functional. Instead, they tend to be proxies that mark the approximate position of the etiologic genetic variant within a small segment of DNA. Thus, while association studies provide a strong starting point for functional studies, even high-density SNP association screens will require follow-up investigations to enable proof of causality (McCarthy and Hirschhorn, 2008).

Linkage and association investigations of speech and language disorders followed on from similar investigations of the related disorder developmental dyslexia in the 1990s (Scerri and Schulte-Körne, 2010). Over the last decade, researchers of speech-sound disorder have applied targeted linkage studies, while investigators of SLI and stuttering have performed genome-wide linkage studies and subsequent targeted association studies. In addition, a rare and specific form of verbal dyspraxia has been attributed to mutations of a specific gene known as FOXP2. A summary of loci that have been implicated in these various speech and language disorders, as well as particular genes that have been identified, is provided in.


FOXP2

The first gene to be implicated in a speech and language disorder was identified by the investigation of a large family affected by a distinctive form of speech impairment known as verbal dyspraxia. Verbal dyspraxia is characterized by difficulties in the control of orofacial muscles leading to a deficit in the production of fluent speech. In addition to their speech problems, affected members of this family also had expressive and receptive language deficits and, in some cases, written language problems and nonverbal cognitive impairment (Watkins et al., 2002). The remarkable thing about the speech and language impairments observed in this family was that the pattern of inheritance indicated that they may be caused by a mutation in a single gene (Vargha-Khadem et al., 1995). Genome-wide linkage analysis identified linkage to chromosome 7q (Fisher et al., 1998) and fine mapping of the locus indeed identified a mutation in the FOXP2 gene (OMIM 605317) that was present in all affected family members but not in unaffected individuals (Lai et al., 2001). The relevance of FOXP2 mutations to other cases of verbal dyspraxia was supported by the identification of an unrelated child with a similar form of speech impairment who was found to have a chromosome rearrangement that disrupted the FOXP2 gene (Lai et al., 2001). These data have since been confirmed by several independent FOXP2 screening studies that have identified additional individuals with disruptions of this gene, all of whom have syndromes that feature verbal dyspraxia (Feuk et al., 2006; Lai et al., 2000; Lennon et al., 2007; MacDermot et al., 2005; Pariani et al., 2009; Shriberg et al., 2006; Tomblin et al., 2009; Zeesman et al., 2006). The FOXP2 gene encodes a winged helix/forkhead DNA-binding protein from the FOX family. This protein acts as a transcriptional repressor and has four alternative isoforms (Bruce and Margolis, 2002; Lai et al., 2001; Schroeder and Myers, 2008). The FOXP2 gene shows a widespread pattern of expression across the majority of tissues and developmental time points. Nonetheless, within each tissue its expression appears to be tightly regulated in a complex pattern of expression with a high degree of conservation across species (Ferland et al., 2003; Lu et al., 2002; Schroeder and Myers, 2008; Shu et al., 2001, 2007).

The identification of FOXP2 opened up a whole field of research encompassing a wide range of disciplines including neuroimaging, animal models (primarily mouse and songbird), molecular studies of gene function and expression, and population and evolutionary studies (reviewed in Fisher, 2006; Fisher and Scharff, 2009). Although the exact role of FOXP2 in the cause of verbal dyspraxia has yet to be elucidated, it is clear that this gene is of particular importance in the development of brain regions responsible for fine motor control (motor cortex, striatum, and cerebellum) and that its disruption has exceptionally severe consequences for the development of speech. Many detailed reviews of FOXP2 have been previously published and we refer the reader to these for a more in-depth discussion of this gene (Fisher, 2006; Fisher and Scharff, 2009).

Despite its obvious importance in severe and rare forms of verbal dyspraxia, it seems increasingly unlikely that FOXP2 represents a general risk factor for genetically complex forms of language impairment (Meaburn et al., 2002; Newbury et al., 2002; O'Brien et al., 2003), nor is it expected to play a role in the related disorder autism (Gauthier et al., 2003; Laroche et al., 2008; Li et al., 2005; Marui et al., 2005; Wassink et al., 2002). However, the identification of this gene heralded a new era for the genetic study of speech and language as it allowed the identification of some of the biological pathways and mechanisms important for speech and language acquisition processes. Since FOXP2 is a transcription factor, it regulates the expression of other genes, some of which may be expected to be involved in more common forms of speech and language deficits. Gene-targeting screens indicate that the FOXP2 protein is responsible for the downregulation of between 300 and 400 neural genes, many of which functionally represent good candidate genes for speech and language disorders (Spiteri et al., 2007; Vernes et al., 2007).


CNTNAP2

The list of genes regulated by FOXP2 includes a gene on chromosome 7 known as CNTNAP2 (OMIM 604569) (Spiteri et al., 2007; Vernes et al., 2007). Recent evidence indicates that this gene may play a role in susceptibility to genetically complex forms of language impairment (Vernes et al., 2008). This study found that nine common genetic variants, involving changes at single base pairs (single-nucleotide polymorphisms) across the CNTNAP2 sequence, were significantly correlated (minP = 5.0 × 10−5) with reduced performance across a number of linguistic measures (expressive and receptive language and phonological short-term memory) in a cohort of language-impaired families (Vernes et al., 2008). The mechanism by which these SNPs might alter CNTNAP2 function has yet to be elucidated, and these findings have yet to be replicated in additional language-impaired samples. However, alternative variations across this gene (including common variation and rare disruptions or mutations) have also been implicated in a range of neurodevelopmental disorders including autism (Alarcón et al., 2008; Arking et al., 2008; Bakkaloglu et al., 2008; Jackman et al., 2009; Poot et al., 2010; Rossi et al., 2008), Gilles de Tourette syndrome (Belloso et al., 2007; Verkerk et al., 2003), schizophrenia (Friedman et al., 2008; O'Dushlaine et al., 2010), epilepsy (Friedman et al., 2008; Mefford et al., 2010; Strauss et al., 2006), ADHD (Elia et al., 2010), and learning disability (Zweier et al., 2009). Furthermore, CNTNAP2 variation has also been associated with the normal personality trait “openness to experience” (Terracciano et al., 2010).

CNTNAP2 encodes a neurexin protein that is responsible for the localization of potassium channels in developing neurons and plays an important role in the facilitation of axonal-glial interactions (Poliak et al., 2003; Zweier et al., 2009). Brain expression studies indicate that while this gene is evenly expressed across the rodent brain, it shows a specific pattern of expression in the song control nuclei of male songbirds (Panaitof et al., 2010) and is enriched in the frontal cortex of humans (Abrahams et al., 2007). Structural MRI studies of population cohorts found that individuals who carry two copies of the genetic “risk” variants previously associated with autistic disorder have significantly reduced volumes of gray and white matter across several brain regions, including the prefrontal cortex, fusiform gyri, occipital cortices, and cerebellum, which have previously been shown to be important in autistic disorder (Tan et al., 2010).

Thus current data suggest that CNTNAP2 plays a fundamental role in neuronal development and that perturbations of its function may contribute to susceptibility to a diverse range of neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders as well as normal variations in brain function (Corvin, 2010).


FOXP1

On the basis of FOXP2 data, researchers have suggested that other forkhead binding genes represent good candidates for involvement in speech and language impairments. The human FOX gene family consists of over 40 members classified into 19 subfamilies (designated FOXA to FOXS) according to specific motifs within the DNA binding domain (Hannenhalli and Kaestner, 2009). The FOXP subfamily includes four genes (FOXP1-4) with diverse functions. The proteins encoded by these genes are found to bind to each other to form active heterodimer DNA binding molecules (Li et al., 2004, 2007). In particular, it has been suggested that FOXP1 and FOXP2 may have a particularly close relationship with overlapping functions that allow them to work in a cooperative manner during tissue development (Shu et al., 2007). In 2009, Pariani et al. described a patient with a deletion of chromosome 3 that disrupted the FOXP1 gene and deleted three other transcripts (EIF4E3, GPR27, and PROK2). The primary clinical presentation was described as blepharophimosis (drooping eyelids) and arthrogryposis (contractures of hands and feet). However, the child also presented with developmental delays and speech and language deficits, which the authors hypothesized might be caused by the disruption of FOXP1 (Pariani et al., 2009). A subsequent sequencing screen of the FOXP1 coding sequence in 49 probands with a clinical diagnosis of developmental verbal dyspraxia described a nonsynonymous coding change that was observed in a single proband (Vernes et al., 2009). However, a similar change was also documented in an unaffected control individual (Vernes et al., 2009). More recently, a study described a patient with a Chiari I malformation (cerebellar tonsil abnormality) and epileptiform discharges with periods of motor arrest (Carr et al., 2010). This child was initially referred because of concerns over speech delay and was found to have a deletion involving only the FOXP1 gene (Carr et al., 2010). Although the clinical presentation of this patient differed considerably from that observed by Pariani et al., the authors suggest that the blepharophimosis and arthrogryposis in the former case may be caused by the deletion of additional transcripts. They go on to surmise that the FOXP1 disruptions are likely to account for the similarities in patient phenotype, namely deficits in motor development and speech delays. This hypothesis has recently gained support from a large-scale study for chromosome abnormalities in 1523 individuals with learning disability (Horn et al., 2010). This investigation identified deletions of the FOXP1 gene in three unrelated patients (two males, one female) with moderate learning disabilities, global developmental delays, and severe speech and language disorders. MRI and electroencephalography of the patients did not reveal any gross structural brain abnormalities, and a similar chromosome deletion was again observed in a control individual who was not reported to have learning difficulties.

The above studies illustrate the difficulties of correlating genetic variation with specific phenotypic features. Even in cases where a sequence disruption can be definitively demonstrated across a number of individuals, the proof of causality is not always straightforward. While it is true that all of the above cases had severe speech and language difficulties, these impairments often formed part of a more global developmental delay that was not necessarily consistent across individuals. In addition, control individuals with no reported developmental problems were also found to carry disruptions of the FOXP1 sequence. Furthermore, FOXP1 has also been associated with the skin disorder vitiligo (Jin et al., 2010), host-response to hepatitis vaccines (Davila et al., 2010), and the likelihood of cancer survival (Fox et al., 2004; Jais et al., 2008). The diversity of these data are typical and by no means insinuate that these particular results must be spurious. Indeed, similar results have been described by the CNTNAP2 and FOXP2 studies described above—it is important to remember that no gene product acts in isolation. The function of genes may vary across different developmental time points and in different tissues and are modulated by a large number of stochastic variables that differ between individuals. Thus, it is unlikely that any genetic investigation will ever be able to draw a simple relationship between a given gene and a specific outcome. Furthermore, it is entirely possible that a transcription factor, such as FOXP1, which has the potential to intersect many biological pathways, may play a role in many seemingly unrelated disorders. Thus, given the recent convergence of evidence, it is likely that FOXP1 is involved in biological processes that are particularly important in the development of speech and language.

The function of the FOXP1 protein in the brain remains unclear, but recent studies suggest that it may play a role in motor neuron diversification, through its interactions with Hox proteins (Dasen et al., 2008; Rousso et al., 2008); in neuronal migration, by gating Reelin signaling pathways (Palmesino et al., 2010); and in neuronal differentiation, via regulation of the Pitx3 protein (Konstantoulas et al., 2010).

Thus the accumulation of recent data suggests that, like its partner FOXP2, FOXP1 may also be involved in the determination of neural circuitry important for the development of speech and language.


Speech-Sound Disorder

Aside from FOXP2, its downstream targets, and its binding partners, researchers have reasoned that candidate genes or genetic regions implicated in dyslexia may also represent good candidates for speech and language disorders. This is particularly true for speech-sound disorder (SSD), which is characterized by the substitution or emission of speech sounds leading to intelligible speech. Speech-sound errors are a common feature of the language acquisition process but in children with SSD persist beyond the appropriate developmental time point. For example, it is estimated that while approximately 16% of 3-year-old children use inappropriate speech-sound formations, these errors only persist in 4% of children at 6 years of age (Shriberg et al., 1999). Speech-sound disorder is believed to be a specific problem with the development of phonological awareness (i.e., the conceptualization of speech-sound units) and, as such, of all the speech and language disorders is proposed to share the greatest etiological overlap with developmental dyslexia. In support of this theory, the presence of early speech problems has been shown to represent a significant risk factor for later literacy impairments, especially when the speech problems are accompanied by additional language-related deficits (Peterson et al., 2009; Raitano et al., 2004; Sices et al., 2007). These similarities have led researchers of SSD to focus entirely upon specific genetic regions that have previously been identified by linkage studies of dyslexia, namely chromosomes 1p, 3, 6p, and 15q (Scerri and Schulte-Körne, 2010), and in some cases, this approach has proved successful. Significant levels of linkage (minP = 0.00002) have been described between chromosome 3 (DYX5, OMIM 606896) and phonological memory and phonological decoding traits in SSD families (Stein et al., 2004). Suggestive levels of linkage have been reported on chromosomes 1 (DYX8, OMIM 608995) (minP = 0.0009, Miscimarra et al., 2007) 6 (DYX2, OMIM 600202) (minP = 0.0006, Smith et al., 2005), and 15 (DYX1, OMIM 127700) (minP = 0.004, Smith et al., 2005). An additional study found linkage to a binary affection status of SSD and quantitative measures of oral motor control, articulation, and phonological short-term memory in a region that flanked the DYX1 locus (Stein et al., 2006, 15 Mb distal). This region has previously been implicated in autism (AUTS4, OMIM 608636) and is commonly deleted in Prader-Willi Syndrome (Cook et al., 1998). It is possible that this result may represent variations in the precise positions of peaks of linkage, which may be caused by differences in genetic structure, or it may be that there are two loci on chromosome 15 that contribute to SSD etiology, one of which overlaps with the autism locus and a second of which coincides with DYX1.

Recent targeted association studies in dyslexic families have led to the identification of specific candidate genes within the dyslexia linkage loci mentioned above (reviewed in Scerri and Schulte-Körne, 2010). Intriguingly, many of these genes have functions in neuronal migration, a critical step in cortex development (reviewed by Gabel et al., 2010). These data complement the findings of classical postmortem neuroanatomical studies of dyslexic individuals (Galaburda et al., 1985) and suggest that this process may play a role in the etiology of reading disorders. The direct evaluation of these specific risk variants in SSD populations would categorically provide an answer to the question regarding etiological overlaps between these two disorders.


Specific Language Impairment

In contrast to SSD, investigations of SLI have applied a genome-wide linkage approach to the identification of candidate genes or regions. SLI is diagnosed as an unexpected disorder in the acquisition of language despite adequate intelligence and opportunity and in the absence of any explanatory medical conditions (e.g., autism or hearing impairment) (Law et al., 2000). By definition, SLI is a very heterogeneous disorder that includes disorders of speech that have no obvious motoric etiology and incorporates deficits in other areas of expressive language (e.g., grammar, syntax, and semantics) as well as impairments in receptive linguistic abilities.

Two whole-genome linkage screens have been performed identifying three primary sites of linkage to SLI. These are on chromosome 13 (SLI3, OMIM 607134) (Bartlett et al., 2002), 16 (SLI1, OMIM 606711) (SLIC, 2002), and 19 (SLI2, OMIM 606712) (SLIC, 2002). These studies both involved relatively small numbers of affected families and yielded borderline significant p values. Nonetheless, of all the linkage data presented in this review, these three loci probably represent the strongest and most developed results as they have all been confirmed by subsequent replication and fine-mapping studies (Bartlett et al., 2004; Falcaro et al., 2008; Monaco, 2007; SLIC, 2004). The SLI1 region on chromosome 16 has been subject to the most in-depth investigation, and a targeted association study recently enabled the identification of specific genetic variants that may cause linkage to this locus (Newbury et al., 2009). Significant association was identified to two distinct clusters of common genetic variants located within the ATP2C2 gene (OMIM 613082, minP = 2 × 10−5) and the CMIP gene (OMIM 610112, minP = 6 × 10−7). Variation in both of these genes was predominantly associated with performance on a task of phonological short-term memory, supporting the importance of memory processes in language acquisition (Newbury et al., 2009). Regression modeling indicated that ATP2C2 and CMIP exerted an independent effect upon phonological memory ability, supporting a role for both regions in language ability. Within this targeted association study, a marginally significant, similar trend of association was observed to ATP2C2 (minP = 0.006) in a sample of low-language performers selected from a population cohort. Thus, although this is perhaps the most thoroughly investigated locus described in this review, these results still require external replication, and a functional variant or mechanism has yet to be identified. Little is known regarding the functions of the CMIP and ATP2C2 proteins in the brain but both represent reasonable candidates. ATP2C2 encodes a calcium ATPase responsible for the regulation of cellular calcium and manganese levels. Calcium is an important intracellular messenger and is involved in many neuronal processes including short-term memory (Dash et al., 2007). Manganese ions are toxic to neuronal cells at high concentrations (Perl and Olanow, 2007), and manganese deficiency is linked with epilepsy (Carl et al., 1986). CMIP was identified through a screen to identify large proteins expressed in the brain (Nagase et al., 2000) and encodes an adaptor protein thought to form part of the cytoskeleton (Grimbert et al., 2003). Cytoskeletal remodeling plays a key role in synaptic formation and neuronal migration (Heng et al., 2010). The CMIP protein has been shown to interact with FilaminA (Grimbert et al., 2004), mutation of which is associated with the neuronal migration disorder X-linked periventricular heterotopia (OMIM 300017). Other studies have found that it also interacts with the RelA (a subunit of the transcription factor NF-kappaB) (Kamal et al., 2009) and PI3 kinase proteins (Kamal et al., 2010), indicating that, as described for the FOX proteins above, CMIP may function across multiple biological pathways. Neither CMIP nor ATP2C2 was identified as a FOXP2 target (Spiteri et al., 2007; Vernes et al., 2007), and no obvious relationships can be formulated between the two genes or with that of the CNTNAP2 gene, indicating that the follow up of these data may implicate new pathways and processes that are important for the development of language. Interestingly, variants within ATP2C2 have been associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD, Lesch et al., 2008) indicating that the pleiotropic effects described for other language loci may also extend to this region.

In addition to the genome-wide approaches described above, one group has specifically investigated dyslexia-linked loci and the FOXP2 region of chromosome 7 in language-impaired families (Rice et al., 2009). This study found a suggestive level of linkage to variants across all regions investigated on chromosomes 1 (DYX8), 3 (DYX5), 6 (DYX2), 7 (FOXP2), and 15 (DYX1), with various measures of linguistic ability. Association analyses of a denser panel of variants across FOXP2 and KIAA0319 revealed a marginal level of association (minP = 0.01) between KIAA0319 and measures of speech, language, and reading and between FOXP2 and reading, language, and articulation (Rice et al., 2009), indicating that the behavioral effects of these genes may extend across related phenotypes. This study further supports the etiological relationships between dyslexia and speech and language disorders, as suggested by the SSD investigations described above.


Stuttering

The potential of founder and consanguineous pedigrees has recently been demonstrated by the identification of genetic pathways that may be important in the etiology of stuttering. Stuttering is defined as a disorder of speech fluency characterized by interruptions in speech flow and involuntary repetition or elongation of syllables (Prasse and Kikano, 2008). This disorder is relatively distinct from SSD and SLI and is persistent in approximately 20% of cases, particularly males (Prasse and Kikano, 2008). The majority of molecular genetic studies of stuttering have focused upon large consanguineous pedigrees in which stuttering appears to be familial and persistent. Four genome-wide linkage and one genome-wide association study have been performed for persistent familial stuttering. These investigations have yielded suggestive linkage to chromosomes 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 12, 15, 18, and 21 and indicate a strong but complex sex effect in the relationships between risk variants (Raza et al., 2010; Riaz et al., 2005; Shugart et al., 2004; Suresh et al., 2006; Wittke-Thompson et al., 2007). Nonetheless, these studies yielded only moderate evidence of linkage or association to any one region, and the overlaps between the results were sparse. The most consistent and significant region implicated is on chromosome 12q (STUT2, OMIM 609261) (Riaz et al., 2005; Suresh et al., 2006). Sequencing of 45 genes across STUT2 revealed four coding mutations in the GNPTAB gene that were present in significantly more affected family members than unaffected individuals (Kang et al., 2010) The GNPTAB gene (OMIM 607840) encodes subunits of the N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase enzyme, which plays a role in lysosomal targeting processes. An additional subunit of this enzyme is encoded by the GNPTG gene (OMIM 607838) on chromosome 16p and a downstream enzyme, N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphodiester alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase is encoded by the NAGPA gene on chromosome 16p (OMIM 607985). Sequencing of these related transcripts revealed additional coding mutations that were not observed in control individuals (Kang et al., 2010). Across the GNPTAB, GNPTG, and NAGPA genes, mutations were observed in 3.2% of the case chromosomes and 0.5% of the control chromosome screened (Kang et al., 2010). This study therefore implicates an additional biological mechanism in speech disorders—that of the lysosomal enzyme pathway. Mutations in the GNPTAB and GNPTG genes have previously been described to cause the metabolic disorders mucolipidosis types II and III, respectively (OMIM 252500 and 252605) (Paik et al., 2005; Raas-Rothschild et al., 2000). These disorders are not characterized by stuttering but instead by skeletal abnormalities, restricted joint movement, and disorders of the heart, liver, and spleen. In some cases (particularly type II), these features are accompanied by developmental delay and speech problems but not typically stuttering. However, none of the mutations identified by Kang et al. were identical to those that had previously been implicated in mucolipidosis. Furthermore, since mucolipidosis is a recessive disorder, affected individuals must carry two copies of a mutation. In the stuttering cohort, all but two individuals carried one normal copy of the GNPTAB and GNPTG gene. This may therefore account for the less severe phenotype described in this sample. This intriguing study has yet to be replicated or extended and there are many interesting questions that can be asked regarding the mechanism of susceptibility to stuttering in these individuals.


Conclusions

In summary, the last decade has seen an explosion in our understanding of the genetic basis of speech and language disorders. The identification of FOXP2 precipitated a whole field of research that continues to advance our understanding of the foundations of speech and language. It is likely that in the future, the investigation of the pathways that involve and intersect with FOXP2 will identify many more candidate genes and mechanisms underlying speech and language disorders. The investigation of SSD has indicated that this disorder may share some genetic basis with developmental dyslexia. The study of SLI has enabled the identification of two candidate genes on chromosome 16 (ATP2C2 and CMIP), and stuttering research has identified the lysosomal enzyme pathway (GNPTAB, GNPTG, and NAGPA) as another candidate mechanism.

Although the recent progress in this field is promising, it should be noted that, in comparison to other developmental disorders with a genetic contribution, speech and language disorders are relatively understudied. Many of the studies described above involved relatively small samples and have yet to be replicated in independent cohorts. As genetic technologies develop, the generation of larger data sets becomes progressively easier, allowing the identification of genetic variants with smaller effect sizes. Nonetheless, the application of these technologies demands the existence of large sample sets with consistent ascertainment and assessment standards. Even then, as we have seen above, and as evidenced by many other GWA studies, the interpretation of findings is far from straightforward. GWA studies in other complex disorders have enabled a revolution in candidate gene identification, but it is estimated that these loci still only account for a small proportion of the observed familial clustering. The source of this so-called “missing heritability” is still a matter of debate but has been suggested to arise from the presence of common genetic variation with minimal effect sizes, rare variants, structural deviations, and genetic modifications and interactions that are not well characterized by currently available GWA technology or algorithms (Manolio et al., 2009).

Thanks to advances in technology, however, alternative methodologies are now available to complement the GWA. It is now feasible to directly sequence entire genomes for increasingly large sample sizes, and this will be important in the identification of rare mutations (Cirulli and Goldstein, 2010). It is also now recognized that successful GWAs rely upon adequate sample sizes and precise phenotyping, and to achieve this, meta-analyses may be required. Improved sample sizes and the investigation of alternative populations both afford increased power to detect variants with smaller effect sizes and enable the investigation of gene-gene interaction effects (Manolio et al., 2009). In addition, the genome-wide investigation of epigenetic effects may identify alternative sources of genetic variation that are not readily captured by the GWA approach (Maunakea et al., 2010). It is envisaged that these advances will facilitate the identification of greater numbers of risk variants, and this is reflected in the current trend away from the identification of “disease genes” toward an understanding of the biological pathways that underlie specific pathologies. Given this appetite for ever-larger data sets, it is perhaps ironic that the gene that has provided us with the most information regarding speech and language disorders was identified by the investigation of a single family with a rare and specific form of speech impairment. The FOXP2 story demonstrates the continuing validity of the genetic approach and exemplifies how such data can be used to complement and inform larger genome-wide and biological pathway investigations.

Through this review, we hope not only to have summarized the findings of genetic investigations of speech and language disorders but also to have indicated the challenges faced during the genetic investigation of such disorders. As genetic throughput expands, the true challenge is not the generation of data but the interpretation of the findings and the proof of causality. It will be interesting to see whether the recent findings pertaining to speech and language disorders can be replicated and how these avenues of investigation will eventually combine with those generated from larger high-throughput studies. Ultimately, it is hoped that the research summarized in this paper will allow a better understanding of the causes of speech and language disorders and the complex relationships between these impairments, thereby facilitating better diagnostic and treatment schedules for affected individuals.


The social brain: allowing humans to boldly go where no other species has been

Uta Frith, Chris Frith — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2010. PMC2842701, CC BY.

The biological basis of complex human social interaction and communication has been illuminated through a coming together of various methods and disciplines. Among these are comparative studies of other species, studies of disorders of social cognition and developmental psychology. The use of neuroimaging and computational models has given weight to speculations about the evolution of social behaviour and culture in human societies. We highlight some networks of the social brain relevant to two-person interactions and consider the social signals between interacting partners that activate these networks. We make a case for distinguishing between signals that automatically trigger interaction and cooperation and ostensive signals that are used deliberately. We suggest that this ostensive signalling is needed for ‘closing the loop’ in two-person interactions, where the partners each know that they have the intention to communicate. The use of deliberate social signals can serve to increase reputation and trust and facilitates teaching. This is likely to be a critical factor in the steep cultural ascent of mankind.

Keywords: theory of mind, mirror system, economic games, prediction error, mutual influence

We humans tend to think that we are the most social of all animals and our social lives the most fascinating. Surely our social nature has contributed to our success as a species. Yet, it is only recently that students of the human mind and brain have begun to explore the biological basis of our social abilities and their evolution (Adolphs 1999; Ochsner & Lieberman 2001). Of course, social psychologists have been investigating social behaviour for upwards of a century, but this work, which has contributed valuable insights on how people influence each other, occurred largely in isolation from the rest of neurobiology. Instead, the impetus for the recent marriage of social psychology with neurobiology came from comparative studies providing us with the term ‘social brain’ (Brothers 1990). This social brain, for humans at least, has a ‘theory of mind’, which enables us to predict what others are going to do on the basis of their desires and beliefs. It also has a ‘mirror system’, which enables us to understand others' goals and intentions and to empathize with their emotions by a mechanism of motor resonance. These systems are triggered by social signals, and in this paper, we will consider the nature and function of these signals in a fictitious two-way interaction with an unknown agent.

Take a typical Star Trek scenario of being stranded on an alien planet. Are there any living beings? Are they hostile or friendly? Are they like you? You need their help—and perhaps they need yours. Perhaps you can cooperate with them. Your social brain should be able to guide you to find answers to some of these questions. We start with involuntary signals and later move on to deliberate signals of communication.


Involuntary social signals


Is ‘it’ an agent?

Every time we move we send out involuntary signals about ourselves (this has been termed ‘public information’; Danchin et al. 2004). These signals inevitably tell others that we are agents. Motion dynamics seem to provide very good cues for agency. Motion cues can be isolated using point-light displays (Johansson 1973). In such displays, all information is removed except motion by showing only a few points of light located on major joints such as knees and shoulders of a person. Experiments have shown that biological motion can be picked out from other types of motion (Scholl & Tremoulet 2000). Furthermore, gender and emotion can be recognized from the movements of a point-light walker (Kozlowski & Cutting 1977; Dittrich et al. 1996). Biological motion of this type elicits activity in the superior temporal sulcus (STS), especially the posterior part (pSTS). Single cells that respond to biological motion have also been identified in this brain region in the monkey (Puce & Perrett 2003). Detecting and distinguishing different kinds of biological motion is important for recognizing prey and predators as well as conspecifics. This is likely to be a very basic and universal brain mechanism, critical to survival.


What does ‘it’ have in mind?

As soon as we have established we are facing another agent, we interpret the cause of the movement. Even infants perceive moving agents as having goals and expect them to achieve these goals in a rational way, e.g. by moving along the shortest path (Csibra et al. 1999). When two agents act contingently, then we perceive that one caused the behaviour of the other. In our scenario, it is not necessary that the agent looks like a human. It is remarkably easy to imbue even a shapeless object with intentions as long as it appears to move in response to something you do or say (Johnson 2003). Heider & Simmel (1944) showed that geometric shapes moving in a silent animation evoked attributions of intentions in ordinary viewers. This effect is highly robust and has been investigated in neuroimaging studies in terms of intuitive attribution of mental states (Castelli et al. 2000). Activation of pSTS was seen, as well as of other regions relevant to theory of mind. This suggests that perception of biological motion and the attribution of intention and other mental states share a common neural basis.


How can I know what ‘it’ will do next?

‘It’ does not look anything like us, but it moves contingently to our movements. Nevertheless, if it is like us deep down, then we can read its intentions from nothing but patterns of movements. One idea is that we do this via prediction (Kilner et al. 2007). Given that the object we are observing is animate and has a particular goal or intention, we can predict what movement it will make next. We then observe how well our prediction actually matches the next movement. On the basis of the prediction error we can update our reading of the goal or intention.

Evidence that pSTS is involved in such a process comes from two sources. First, pSTS activity is indeed modified by prior expectations. Wheatley et al. (2007) used an ingenious design in which participants were shown an object that moved in a figure-of-eight path. In one condition this object was presented as a spinning top (inanimate), while in another condition it was presented as an ice skater (animate). More activity was elicited in pSTS when this movement was perceived as representing an ice skater. Second, pSTS activity is greater when the movement does not fit with the expected intention, suggesting that this activity reflects prediction error (Pelphrey et al., Saxe et al. 2004).

Recently, Behrens et al. (2008) directly investigated learning via prediction error by using a task where the precise predictions of participants and, hence, prediction errors, could be estimated for every trial. The social component of this task consisted of a message from an informant who indicated to the participant, with varying degrees of accuracy, what their next response should be. A prediction error occurred when this indication turned out to be unexpectedly wrong (or unexpectedly right). Critically, these prediction errors elicited activity in pSTS. At the same time, prediction errors about the (non-social) value of an object elicited activity in the striatum, in line with findings from a number of previous experiments. Prediction error learning is an all-purpose mechanism and not specifically dedicated to social cognition. This is a useful reminder that even when the task in question is learning from other creatures, the critical computations need not be unique to social interactions.


What does ‘it’ know?

We can do even better in predicting what the alien creature will do next if we attribute and take into account its knowledge and beliefs. Knowing what other agents do not know is as important as knowing what they do know. There is now evidence (Samson et al. in press) that we automatically represent the knowledge of others created by their point of view. If someone else is in the room with us, and they can only see two of the four objects that we can see, the mere presence of this other person interferes with our ability to say that we can see four objects. We are slowed down when this clash of views occurs compared with when there is no such clash. This observation leads us to speculate that humans have a strong drive to fill in the gaps in other people's knowledge. There are few activities more delightful than acquiring some secret information that we can then impart to other people in confidence (Spacks 1982). In contrast, withholding information from others and deliberately deceiving them requires considerable mental effort (Vrij et al. 2006).

If we notice that the alien cannot see what we can see, then we have a certain advantage. We might hide something from its line of sight or else make sure we bring something into its line of sight. This kind of perspective taking does not need to be social. For example, we need to be able recognize that a place or an object is the same when we see it again from a different point of view. Tasks in which people have to infer what an object would look like from a different position (Aichhorn et al. 2005) elicit activity in temporo-parietal junction, a brain region closely adjacent to pSTS. This region is also activated by tasks in which it is necessary to take account of a person's out-of-date (and hence false) belief as opposed to taking account of an out-of date photograph (Saxe & Kanwisher 2003). These are both tasks that create a stark contrast of perspectives: one spatial and the other mental.


Brief excursion: the brain's theory of mind

When we interact with another person it is helpful to know something about their mental states, such as their desires, knowledge and beliefs, because this is better than anything else for predicting what they are going to do next. This vague insight was brought under experimental control by a ‘False Belief’ task developed by Wimmer & Perner (1983). For instance, we can tell where Maxi will look for his chocolate even though it has been moved to a different place when he was not there. In fact, a typical 5 year old can give you a complete explanation when given this test, and if you measure eye movements, then even infants 10–15 months old are surprised if Maxi looks in the wrong place (Onishi & Baillargeon 2005; Surian et al. 2007).

When we communicate with another person we also depend on an implicit and spontaneous understanding of mental states. For instance, we do not tell another person what we think they know already, and likewise they expect us to tell them something new (Grice 1989). If we follow the dark side, we can deceive and control others by taking advantage of their ignorance and making them believe things that are not true. In either case, it is important to know about the beliefs of others and to recognize that these beliefs may be different from our own and may not correspond with reality.

As yet it is not clear whether we are talking about a uniquely human ability. Premack & Woodruff (1978) first asked the question ‘Does the Chimpanzee have a theory of mind?’ It still remains controversial whether non-human primates (Povinelli & Vonk 2003; Tomasello et al. 2003) engage in mentalizing, as revealed, for instance, in deliberate deception. What is not controversial is that our human ability to deliberately deceive and manipulate the minds of others far outstrips that of any other creature.

However, not all humans develop this ability. Baron-Cohen et al. (1985) showed that children with autism have great difficulty with False Belief tasks while being able to perform other kinds of problem-solving tasks at a normal level. Even adults with autism cannot anticipate with their eye gaze where Maxi will reach to retrieve the chocolate (Senju et al. 2009). This in sharp contrast to normally developing children and adults.

Autism is defined by core deficits in social and communicative behaviour. If you observe a classically autistic child, then you can see in devastating clarity what it means not to have a spontaneous understanding of mental states. Mentalizing failure, or ‘mindblindness’, served as a highly successful explanation for the characteristic social impairments in autism. For example, it explained the inability to understand deception in the presence of intact understanding of sabotage (Sodian & Frith 1992), or the inability to understand irony with good understanding of metaphor (Happe 1993). The idea of a circumscribed mentalizing failure in autism suggested that there might be a dedicated brain system that is engaged when solving problems that require mentalizing, a prediction that was confirmed by a series of subsequent brain imaging studies (Frith & Frith 2003; Saxe et al. 2004). As expected, this system shows malfunction in autism as shown, for instance, in (Castelli et al. 2002; see also Zilbovicius et al. 2006; Kana et al. 2009).


Is ‘it’—deep down—like me?

You may be tempted to attribute psychological states to the alien creature, but there are other checks to see if this alien feels like us. Can we tune in to each other in a way we do automatically with other humans? We tend to covertly imitate other people and feel some kind of resonance with their emotions.


‘It’ imitates me!

When two people ‘tune in’ to each other, they tend unconsciously to imitate each other's movements and gestures and this is known as the chameleon effect (Chartrand & Bargh 1999). Furthermore, the greater the degree of imitation, the more the partners feel they have good rapport and empathy. When someone has been covertly imitated they become generally more prosocial and will give more money to charity (van Baaren et al. 2004). However, such effects do not occur if we become aware that we are being imitated (Lakin & Chartrand 2003). The feeling that we are part of a group, driven by unconscious motor and emotional resonance, appears to be intrinsically rewarding (Tabibnia & Lieberman 2007).


But not always

There are powerful factors that modulate motor resonance, acting through high-level systems that involve knowledge and beliefs. Less motor resonance is observed when our partner is a robot rather than a person (Kilner et al. 2003). This effect seems to depend more upon our belief about the nature of the agent than on the detailed behaviour of that agent (Stanley et al. 2007). Resonance is also modulated by the strength of the interaction. Thus, it tends to be stronger when we have eye contact (Bavelas et al. 1986; Kilner et al. 2006).

Obviously, motor imitation is not always appropriate for successful interactions. For successful joint action the most important requirement is a common goal. To achieve this requires that most actions should be complementary rather than identical (Sebanz et al. 2006). Further, when pairs of subjects perform complementary tasks, each covertly represents the task requirements of the other. We can see this most strongly when the concurrent representation of another person's goal interferes with our own goal. This was shown in a joint task where two people each pressed only one button in response to a potentially incompatible aspect of the same stimulus (Sebanz 2003).

Observation and imitation of the actions of others elicit activity in inferior frontal gyrus and in inferior parietal cortex. Since these are the regions where mirror neurons have been found in monkeys, they are often identified with a human mirror system for action (Rizzolatti & Craighero 2004), which we discuss further below. Remarkably, and underlining the key role of this mechanism for successful and coordinated social interaction, when subjects are trained to perform complementary actions, even greater activity was elicited in these brain regions (Newman-Norlund et al. 2007).


Brief excursion: the brain's mirror system

The discovery of ‘mirror neurons’ in macaque monkeys (Rizzolatti et al. 1996) was a milestone in the progress of social cognitive neuroscience. These neurons, so far observed in regions corresponding to inferior frontal cortex and inferior parietal cortex, fire when the animal performs a specific action (seeing a peanut being grasped) and also when the animal observes the same specific action (grasping the peanut) being performed by someone else. The implication of these findings is that the observation of an action automatically activates the brain regions concerned with execution of that same action in the observer (Rizzolatti et al. 1999). Mirror neurons point to a plausible neural mechanism not only for understanding the goals and intentions of others (Gallese et al. 2004) but also for empathy (Decety & Myer 2008).

Mirror neurons have yet to be definitively identified in humans (Dinstein et al. 2008; but see Kilner et al. 2009). However, there is plenty of evidence for resonance behaviour in humans at the behavioural and the physiological level. Just think of fans at a football match who seemingly act in unison and express the same emotions. By recording from facial muscles Dimberg et al. (2000) showed that people automatically tend to imitate the emotional expression (frowns or smiles) seen in another face. Resonance to emotional expressions seems also to occur in non-human species (de Waal 2004). However, in humans, emotional resonance can also be elicited indirectly. The mere knowledge that someone else is currently in pain is enough to elicit activity in brain regions associated with the experience of pain (Singer et al. 2004) as shown in. You would be very impressed if the alien, seeing that you are injured, tried to help you.


Deliberate social signals

By now, purely through involuntary signals given out by movement, the alien in our Star Trek scenario has been revealed as a creature very much like a human. Let us assume it has a kind of social brain, but does not speak a human language. How do you both achieve a mode of communication using deliberate signals?


How can you know ‘it’ wants to communicate with you?

Let us suppose the creature is sending out a signal. How do you know it is a signal meant for you? You need to recognize that the creature wants you to attend to it. Signals that attract your attention are called ostensive. They carry with them the promise that the receiver shall gain some benefit from attending to the message (Sperber & Wilson 1995). An ostensive gesture could be visually minimal but attentionally highly conspicuous, such as the eyebrow flash (Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1972). Once a sender has initiated communication, for instance by using the eyebrow flash, then you, the receiver, will be trying to infer what the sender intends you to understand. We have speculated that anterior rostral medial prefrontal cortex (arMPFC), in which activity is elicited by many mentalizing tasks, may have a critical role in the special kind of representation that closes the loop between minds (Amodio & Frith 2006). Ostensive gestures in different modalities (eye contact and calling your name, without a message following these signals) elicit activity in arMPFC (Kampe et al. 2003).


‘It’ wants to teach you

As everyone knows, it is possible to learn simply by observing others, but that is not the same as teaching. Deliberate teaching seems to be a special feature of human interactions that is not found in other primates (Maestripieri et al. 2002). Infants will follow the actions of adults if they are preceded by an ostensive gesture, but not otherwise (Senju & Csibra 2008). This ability is critical for learning words (Bloom 2002). First, infants can recognize when the parent is naming an object for them to learn and can distinguish this from situations in which spoken words and objects come together incidentally (Baldwin et al. 1996). Second, using their mentalizing ability, infants can pick out the person who knows something from the person who does not, and pay special attention to the signals coming from the one who knows (Sabbagh & Baldwin 2001). It is this ability to pick out the signals that are reliable and have communicative intent that enables infants to learn at the amazing rate of 10 new words a day (Bloom 2000). These observations suggest that humans have a special ability and perhaps even a basic desire to deliberately impart and receive knowledge from each other. Csibra & Gergely (2006) have proposed that pedagogy is a unique human ability that makes cultural accomplishments possible in the first place.


Closing the loop: ‘it reciprocates’

By now the alien will have revealed itself as a human in all but outside appearance. Can you be sure it is not a robot designed to mimic human behaviour? You can apply some more tests of its ability to communicate like a human. One particularly convincing sign of interaction is what we call ‘closing the loop’ (Frith 2007). Here is an example: we admit that by writing this paper we are attempting to influence you. But this is matched by your attempt to absorb our message and extract from it what you find useful. This is enough, but there might be consequences. You might be stung into criticizing and refuting some of our points. We, as authors, would then find out whether we explained some points badly so that you misunderstood them, or whether we ourselves had misunderstood some matters and hence misrepresented the facts. As a result of the exchange we would all have learned something we did not know before. This sort of exchange would be both a painful and satisfying example of ‘closing of the loop’. As the example also shows, mentalizing, the ability to attribute knowledge and beliefs, is heavily involved in this process.


Mechanisms of mutual influence

A good way to approach this question is to study the behaviour of partners in competitive games in the laboratory. Here, it is not only important to predict what a partner will do next but also what a partner expects us to do next. Hampton et al. (2008) have developed a computational model of a strategy that allows us to represent such second-order expectations. They call this the ‘influence’ learning model because it involves tracking the influence of one's own actions on one's opponent. They contrast this strategy with two less sophisticated strategies: one, predicting what the opponent will do next based on the opponent's prior actions; the other, predicting which action is most likely to win based on one's own past experience. In terms of their behaviour, the performance of people playing the competitive inspector game was best accounted for by the influence learning model. Hampton and his colleagues also identified brain regions where activity reflected the behaviour of the components of this model. They conclude that activity in arMPFC tracks the expected reward given the degree of influence one's past actions have on the opponent. In contrast, activity in pSTS reflects an update signal, capturing the difference between the expected degree of influence and the actual influence. This is consistent with the role of this region we have discussed previously in being more active when people's behaviour is not what we have predicted. This work could lead towards a methodology for elucidating the neural mechanisms underlying the complexities of social and strategic interactions (see also Yoshida et al. 2008).


You cooperate

If it looks like you are stuck for a while on your new planet, then you might do well to cooperate with the alien and join or even start a new civilization. It has been argued that the capacity for social cooperation is the lever that allowed the rapid ascent of human culture and civilization (Herrmann et al. 2007). We propose that this capacity relies on the explicit ability to communicate via ostensive signals based on the ability to mentalize. Mentalizing ability may well have been a major stimulus for the development of spoken as well as written language and their use in teaching. You might start a writing system based on social signals. If you wish to use the alphabet, then speech sounds are key. But whatever you use, a written system of communication allows knowledge to be conveyed from one agent to another without them ever meeting each other, thus separating communication from the very stimuli that normally drive it. In this way, previous generations can influence later generations far into the future.

But even immortalized communication is not enough to explain cultural evolution. We can also count on altruistic cooperation (Moll & Tomasello 2007) with the spectacular results produced by stable social structures, such as cities, markets, temples, courts of law, prisons, universities, satellite transmission and the Internet. Plentiful examples exist in science fiction to imagine this proliferation even on your new planet. Now, in human societies, we know that cooperation is not entirely free of self-interest. We suggest that one force that drives us to cooperate is the wish to build a good reputation. A good reputation is of immense value in social interactions. This is illustrated vividly by the so-called audience effect: you behave differently, more empathically, more generously, more honestly, if you are observed by others (Hoffman et al. 1996).


You build your reputation

Smith (1759) in his ‘Theory of Moral Sentiments’ suggested that underlying the drive to acquire wealth is a more fundamental desire to acquire a good reputation. ‘The rich man glories in his riches, because he feels that they naturally draw upon him the attention of the world’ while for the poor man, in contrast, ‘to feel that we are taken no notice of, necessarily damps the most agreeable hope, and disappoints the most ardent desire, of human nature’ (TMS, I,III,16). Furthermore, he suggests that ‘Men have voluntarily thrown away life to acquire after death a renown which they could no longer enjoy’ (TMS, III,I,12). The implication here is that the desire to be noticed and to have a good reputation cannot only create a drive to acquire wealth, but also a drive to behave altruistically.

We believe that ostensive signalling is crucial in building a reputation. Some anecdotal evidence from real-life trading suggests that this may be so. A new form of ostensive signalling appears to have evolved in the move from face-to-face trading pits to anonymous electronic markets. Market trading depends heavily upon trust, and trust requires that you know who you are trading with. When face-to-face trading was replaced by numbers on a computer screen such identity was no longer supplied. However, in some supposedly anonymous electronic markets, participants sometimes signal their identities by offering to buy not 10 000 000 shares, but 10 000 467, or bidding at $92 700 059. Here, the ‘467’ and ‘59’ at the end of the big numbers act like a codename (Zaloom 2006). It obviously makes no economic sense to bid $92 700 059 rather than $92 700 000. This is the sign of a deliberate signal indicating that this is ‘$59 trader’ bidding.


You show trust

Deliberate signalling in which both sender and receiver know that signals are being exchanged is a prime example of ‘closing the loop’. You need to know that the alien knows that you are signalling. Further, you want the alien to believe that you know that it trusts you. This ‘common knowledge’ is important for maintaining cooperation in interactive trust games, such as the Ultimatum game and the Prisoner's Dilemma. If mutual trust breaks down, then cooperation ceases and both parties suffer through earning less reward. A real problem for social interactions is how to get back to a state of cooperation once mutual trust has been lost. We suggest that, here too, deliberate signalling has a critical role.


You forgive

In your tentative interactions with the alien, a breakdown has occurred. But your attempts at cementing a cooperative interaction will not necessarily be stopped by this. It appears that evolution has biased humans to behave in a prosocial and cooperative manner. This seems to be our default mode of behaviour when we are not thinking very deeply about what we are doing (Frith & Frith 2008a). Many economic games can be played perfectly well at this level. A simple strategy of tit-for-tat (strict reciprocity: cooperate if your partner cooperates, defect if he defects) will usually give the best results (Axelrod & Hamilton 1981). But what happens when things go wrong?

Van Lange et al. (2002) examined what happened when noise was introduced into a trust game. In the game you are asked to invest money in your partner, but the amount you invest is randomly altered. As a result, your partner might receive a smaller than expected investment. This could easily lead to a breakdown in trust if your partner blames you rather than the system and returns with an even smaller investment. Indeed, in the experiments the simple tit-for-tat strategy no longer maintained cooperation. However, cooperation could be maintained if a partner behaved somewhat more cooperatively than the actor did in the previous interaction (i.e. tit-for-tat plus one). Forgiving behaviour was also observed by King-Casas et al. (2008) in a study where the breakdown of cooperation was caused by the abnormal behaviour of participants with borderline personality disorder, playing with healthy partners. When this breakdown occurred the healthy partners engaged in ‘coaxing’ behaviour. This was defined as giving back more than had been offered (i.e. a third or more of the tripled investment) even though the offer was low and is similar to Van Lange's tit-for-tat plus one. The participants with borderline personality disorder neither indulged in nor responded to coaxing behaviour. One of the more far-flung promises of social cognitive neuroscience is that studies of this type could have application in the resolution of social conflict.


Beyond star trek

We have tried to make a case for the central importance of social signals and have given examples of how even complex social interactions between two partners can be brought under experimental control in the laboratory. How can we use the knowledge gained so far to improve our often disastrous social relations in real life? One optimistic example is the effect of coaxing behaviour in economic games. If this is the effect of deliberate signalling, then we speculate that such paradigms can become tools to probe potential sources of misunderstanding. For example, you can sense when a prediction error has occurred by monitoring not simply what is being said, but why in this form rather than another, and you do this automatically as you engage in ostensive communication (Sperber & Wilson 1995). If my partner in trading pays me back more than I have invested in him, this is not rational. So, I need another interpretation of his behaviour. I infer that this is more than an economic exchange. Rather it is a deliberate signal asking me to trust him, as he trusts me.

How can impairments in social skills, common in many psychiatric disorders, be remedied by therapy? For instance, people with autism, who have problems with spontaneous theory of mind (Frith 1989, Senju et al. 2009), should show an absence of regard for their own reputation, in sharp contrast to their ability to judge others as being fair or unfair, mean or generous. We typically show that we have regard for reputation by the difference in our attitude when we interact with other people as compared with interacting with a computer. Thus, we might expect people with autism to make no distinction between computers and people when playing interactive games. Preliminary evidence that this is the case comes from the study by Chiu et al. (2008; see comment by Frith & Frith 2008b). If this is confirmed, we doubt that it is wise to focus on improving social skills via robot interactions, notwithstanding the fact that some therapists keenly advocate such methods. Instead, we look forward to seeing results from learning paradigms, which investigate the failure to respond to, and get rewards from social stimuli, and those that test the speculative hypothesis that people with autism learn less well from prediction errors about social stimuli. If this were the case, it might be possible to teach by eliciting very large prediction errors and decreasing them very gradually. This is quite the opposite of the current ideal, which tends to rely on the teacher behaving in a highly predictable manner.

The young field of social cognitive neuroscience faces many pressing questions. We know very little about the causes of individual differences in social abilities and their genetic basis. Can social drugs such as oxytocin be used to improve social abilities in autism (Ebstein et al. 2009)? Can they be used to enhance social ability even in otherwise healthy people? How do social cognitive abilities develop in relation to brain maturation? Social abilities are in evidence at an amazingly young age. Even newborns orient to faces and voices rather than any other stimuli. They soak up information from other human beings by following their gaze and by responding to deliberate signals of communication. However, we urgently need to know more about later social development. Fortunately, adolescence is now being studied as a phase of brain reorganization concurrent with major changes in social interests and skills (Blakemore 2008).

Readers will have noticed that we are inveterate enthusiasts and would find it difficult to be sceptical about the future of social cognitive neuroscience. Of course, we realize that methodological breakthroughs are needed to reveal the relevant physiological processes in the brain and to link them meaningfully to mind and behaviour, and we strongly believe that, to flourish, social cognitive neuroscience must remain in touch with general cognitive neuroscience. Many would agree that the most challenging frontier for the biological sciences now is to understand how the human brain produces the mind. If it can be argued that the brain has evolved to enable us to interact and communicate with each other, then finding the basis of this ability will be the key. This is why we would love to communicate with creatures on Mars.


Learning to represent visual input

Geoffrey E Hinton — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2010. PMC2842706, CC BY.

One of the central problems in computational neuroscience is to understand how the object-recognition pathway of the cortex learns a deep hierarchy of nonlinear feature detectors. Recent progress in machine learning shows that it is possible to learn deep hierarchies without requiring any labelled data. The feature detectors are learned one layer at a time and the goal of the learning procedure is to form a good generative model of images, not to predict the class of each image. The learning procedure only requires the pairwise correlations between the activations of neuron-like processing units in adjacent layers. The original version of the learning procedure is derived from a quadratic ‘energy’ function but it can be extended to allow third-order, multiplicative interactions in which neurons gate the pairwise interactions between other neurons. A technique for factoring the third-order interactions leads to a learning module that again has a simple learning rule based on pairwise correlations. This module looks remarkably like modules that have been proposed by both biologists trying to explain the responses of neurons and engineers trying to create systems that can recognize objects.

Keywords: neural networks, learning algorithms, computational neuroscience


Introduction

The obvious way to falsify a theory of how the human cortex learns to interpret the visual input is to show that its predictions disagree with experimental data. Deciding what the theory predicts, however, can be difficult. The cortex is an extremely complicated nonlinear system whose behaviour can be changed in unexpected ways by modifying the strengths of the synaptic connections. Detailed computer simulations are therefore required to understand what a synaptic learning rule predicts and the simulations usually show that the synaptic learning rule can be rejected without even considering the experimental data because it simply does not work well enough to have any chance of explaining obvious facts about people's learning abilities. Falsification by simulation has the advantage that it is possible to design better learning rules by analysing how naive learning rules fail. This paper describes a historical sequence of progressively more powerful learning rules that have emerged from computer simulations.

Consider the task of assigning a class label, such as ‘cat’ or ‘dog’, to an image that contains a single salient object. A good way to perform this computation in a network of neuron-like processing elements is to use a hierarchy of progressively more complicated feature detectors (Selfridge 1958; Fukushima 1980; LeCun et al. 1998; Serre et al. 2007). At each level in the hierarchy, a feature detector is activated by bottom-up input from a particular spatial arrangement of active feature detectors at the level below. Single cell recordings in the visual systems of mammals (Felleman & Van Essen 1991) are consistent with this model and show that the individual feature detectors become progressively more tolerant to variations in retinal position, orientation and scale as we ascend the hierarchy. This raises the question of how such a hierarchy could be learned.


Learning by back-propagating error derivatives

In the 1980s, the back-propagation algorithm (Werbos 1974; Rumelhart et al. 1986) created much excitement because it appeared to solve the problem of learning multiple layers of nonlinear features. Back propagation is a method for computing how to change the connection weights in a feed-forward neural network composed of multiple layers of artificial neurons. An input vector is presented at the bottom layer and in the ‘forward’ pass, each neuron computes a weighted sum of the inputs it receives from the layer below, puts this sum through a smooth nonlinearity and sends the result to neurons in the layer above. The output of each neuron in the final layer is compared with the desired output vector provided by a supervisor and some measure of the discrepancy is used to compute the error for that training case. Each neuron in the final layer, for example, could represent a class and the supervisor could specify which neuron should be active. Derivatives of the error are then propagated backwards through the network using the same connection weights as on the forward pass. Once the error derivatives have been computed for the ‘hidden’ neurons in the intermediate layers, it is straighforward to change their incoming weights in the direction that reduces the error, thus performing gradient descent in the error function.

Back propagation worked impressively well for some problems (LeCun et al. 1998), but for many others it did not succeed in using the multiple layers of features to significantly improve performance. In deep nets, the learning was very slow and had a tendency to get stuck in poor local optima. Also, to learn a large number of weights by back-propagating error derivatives requires a huge number of accurately labelled training examples. The idea of learning connection weights by following the gradient of some objective function is very powerful, but classification error is not a good objective function for learning a visual system.


Unsupervised learning of feature detectors

Back propagation allows the errors in the outputs of a system to drive the search for an appropriate sequence of feed-forward transformations from vectors of pixel intensities to vectors of class probabilities. A very different approach to the learning task emerges if we consider how the training data are actually created. Physical objects give rise to images via a generative process that involves the intrinsic properties of the object, deformation, viewpoint, lighting, occlusion and many other variables (Horn 1977). The generative process is complicated and highly nonlinear but it is not particularly noisy, so the particular combinations of pixel intensities contain a lot of information about their underlying causes. The class of the object is only a tiny fraction of this information and the class is typically much easier to predict from properties such as the three-dimensional shape of the object than from the raw pixel intensities.

With very limited computational resources, it may be sensible to try to perform classification by ignoring all the information in the image that is not directly relevant to the class of the object, but with the huge computational resources of the human visual system it makes much more sense to first recover the underlying causes of the image such as the surface depths, orientations, reflectances and boundaries (Marr 1982). We know that this is possible because human visual perception in a familiar, natural setting almost always returns a good approximation to the true causes of the visual input. Once the underlying causes have been recovered by modelling the complicated, high-bandwidth channel between the underlying causes and the pixel intensities, the class can be recovered by modelling the simpler, low-bandwith channel between the underlying causes and the class label.

There are several advantages to treating the task of object classification as a post-processing step in a system whose main goal is to infer all of the underlying causes that explain how a retinal image was generated. Given N equiprobable classes, each labelled image only provides log2 N bits of constraint on the mapping from images to labels, so to learn a large number of parameters by optimizing discriminative performance requires a very large number of labelled training cases. Each unlabelled image, however, provides a lot of constraint on a generative model, so generative models with a large number of parameters (e.g. 108) can be learned using relatively few training images (e.g. 106) and these training images do not require labels.

Until recently, the types of generative model that could be fitted efficiently to unlabelled i.i.d. data were very restricted. They consisted of mixture models, which treat each data point as a noisy observation of one of a limited number of prototypes, or linear models, such as factor analysis, which treat each data point as a noisy observation of linearly transformed Gaussian noise. Neither of these model classes is appropriate for highly structured images that are generated by multiple latent variables which interact in nonlinear but very regular ways to produce the observed data. Much more powerful models had been suggested (Ackley et al. 1985) but the proposed methods for fitting them to data were hopelessly inefficient.

Over the last two decades, the artificial intelligence and statistics communities have made considerable progress in the procedures for fitting complicated, stochastic, generative models to data (Lauritzen & Spiegelhalter 1988; Pearl 1988). These ‘graphical models’ are expressed as graphs in which the nodes represent stochastic variables and the lack of a connection between two nodes represents some type of statistical independence.

Belief nets are a widely used type of graphical model in which the connections are all directed and there are no directed loops (Pearl 1988). Each variable receives directed connections from its ‘parents’ and its probability distribution, when the model is generating data, is determined solely by the combination of values of its parents using a simple parameterized function or table. This makes it easy to generate samples from a belief net using an ‘ancestral pass’. First, the highest level variables are sampled from their prior distributions and then each remaining variable is sampled from the distribution created by the sampled values of its parents.

Assuming that the functions that determine how a variable depends on its parents are known for all of the variables, the inference problem is to determine the joint probability distribution for the remaining variables when the values of a subset of the variables are observed. The parameter learning problem is to discover how the probability distribution of a variable depends on the values of its parents. This is done by using a set of training cases each of which consists of the observed values of a subset of the variables. A natural way to perform parameter learning is to search for parameters that maximize the probability that the observed data would have been generated by simply running the generative model. This is called ‘maximum-likelihood’ learning.

The generative model underlying factor analysis is a belief net in which there is only one layer of hidden variables and all of the variables are linear with Gaussian noise. This makes inference and maximum likelihood learning fairly straightforward. By removing all noise from the observed variables and using heavy tailed, non-Gaussian noise to drive the hidden variables, we obtain ‘independent components analysis’ (Comon 1994). This generative model is much better than factor analysis at discovering independent causes and is still relatively easy to fit to data, but extending it to models with multiple hidden layers is difficult.

Sigmoid belief nets (Neal 1992) are generative models composed of multiple layers of binary stochastic variables. When the model is generating data, the probability that a variable, hiL, in layer L adopts the value 1 is given by the logistic sigmoid function,

where wij is the weight on the connection to unit i from unit j in the layer above and bias terms have been omitted for simplicity. The binary variables, which will be called ‘units’, can be viewed as crude approximations to cortical pyramidal cells which, over a time period of a few milliseconds, emit a single spike with a probability that depends nonlinearly on the recent input received from other neurons. The lowest level units (those with no descendants) can be used to represent the pre-processed visual input and the higher layers must learn to ‘explain’ each input vector in terms of hidden causes. A good explanation consists of a binary state vector for each layer that is both likely to cause the binary state vector in the layer below and likely to be caused by the binary state vector in the layer above.

Given the parameters of the model, the number of alternative explanations for any given data vector will be exponential in the number of hidden variables, though some explanations will be much better than others. It is infeasible to infer or even to represent the full posterior probability distribution over explanations, but fortunately it is possible to learn the parameters without ever computing the full posterior. It is sufficient to get unbiased binary samples from the posterior. An online, steepest ascent version of maximum-likelihood learning is then

where hjL+1 and hiL are the sampled binary values and piL is the top-down prediction from the sampled values in layer L + 1.

Unfortunately, it is hard to even get an unbiased sample from the posterior because of a phenomenon known as ‘explaining away’ that is illustrated in b. Markov chain Monte Carlo methods can be used to get approximate samples from the posterior, but these methods are too slow to be a plausible model of how the brain computes percepts. This leaves two alternatives: use biased samples and hope that the learning procedure still works or find a way to eliminate explaining away so that it is easy to get unbiased samples.


Learning with incorrect inference

Suppose that instead of sampling a binary explanation, h, from the true posterior distribution p(h|v, W) given the visible vector v and the weights, W, we sample from a simpler, approximating distribution q(h|v, W) which might, for example, be constrained to be a factorial distribution in which the probabilities of the hidden variables are independent given the data vector, v. If we then use the learning rule in equation, it does not perform gradient ascent in the log probability of generating v from a model with weights W. It does, however, perform gradient ascent in a closely related quantity called the (negative) variational free energy (Zemel 1994; Neal & Hinton 1998) that differs from the log probability of v by the Kullback Liebler divergence between q(h|v, W) and p(h|v, W)

If q(h|v, W) = p(h|v, W), the variational free energy is minimized, w.r.t. q(h|v, W) and performing gradient ascent in −F(v|W) w.r.t. W corresponds to maximum-likelihood learning. If q(h|v, W)≠ p(h|v, W), then −F(v|W) is a lower bound on log p(v|W) and following the gradient of −F(v|W) performs a trade-off between finding parameters that give high probability to v and finding parameters that make the approximate inference work well by making the true posterior distribution p(h|v, W) close to the approximating distribution q(h|v, W). The gradients w.r.t. the parameters of the two terms on the right of equation are infeasible to compute because they involve the true posterior, but the gradient of their difference only involves the approximating distribution and is easy to compute if the approximation has a simple form.

Variational learning is now widely used for learning complicated belief nets (Jordan et al. 1999). A modified version of variational learning has also been proposed as a model of learning in cortex (Hinton et al. 1995). The generative model resides in the top-down connections between cortical areas, and the approximate posterior q(h|v, W) is computed by separate bottom-up connections that have their own learning rule. For learning many layers of nonlinear features, however, there is a more efficient method that is based on a scheme for eliminating explaining away so that the posterior distribution really is factorial.


A stackable learning module

When a multilayer belief net generates data, the stochastic decisions made in one layer influence the probabilities of variables in the layer below, but they have no effect on the probabilities in the layer above because belief nets are ‘directed’ models in which the effects only flow in one direction during the generative process. There is a very different type of model called an ‘undirected’ model in which the effects flow in both directions during generation. An especially simple type of undirected model is a restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) which contains a layer of binary visible units connected to a layer of binary hidden units, with no connections within each layer. The connections are symmetric, having the same weight in both directions. An RBM is similar to a Hopfield net (Hopfield 1982), but instead of being directly connected the visible units are indirectly connected via the hidden units whose states are not observed. This makes the model more powerful than a Hopfield net because it can use the hidden units to represent higher than the second-order correlations between the visible units, but it also makes the model more difficult to learn.

To generate samples from an RBM, we can alternate between updating all of the hidden units in parallel given the visible states and updating all of the visible units in parallel given the hidden states

and

This alternating Markov chain converges to a stationary distribution in which the probability of a joint configuration v, h of the visible and hidden units is determined by a simple energy function

where the energy of a joint configuration is given by

The maximum-likelihood learning rule for an RBM is very simple. Each connection weight, wij, must be changed in proportion to the difference between two expectations. The first is the expectation that a visible and a hidden unit both have state 1 when the visible vector is sampled from the training data and the hidden states are computed from the visible vector using equation. The second is the same expectation when the visible and hidden vectors are sampled from the stationary distribution of the Markov chain described above

It is conceivable that the second term in equation could be estimated by letting an RBM settle to its stationary distribution during an off-line ‘sleep’ phase (Crick & Mitchison 1983) but this would mean that the estimate became progressively worse during the day as the weights changed so it would be hard to learn much in a single day. A more efficient alternative is simply to run the Markov chain for very few steps. First, the visible units are determined by the sensory input and the hidden units are stochastically activated using equation. Then the visible activities are reconstructed from the hidden states using equation and the hidden units are activated again by the reconstruction. This gives a very simple learning rule called ‘contrastive divergence’ (Hinton 2002)

This rule does not maximize the probability that the RBM would generate the training data, but it does work surprisingly well in a wide variety of applications (e.g. Lee et al. 2009).

One big advantage of using an RBM, instead of a directed model, is that the hidden units really are conditionally independent given a visible vector, so it is possible to get an unbiased sample from the posterior in one step. This makes perceptual inference accurate, simple and fast. Another big advantage is that RBMs can be stacked to form multi-layer models that are learned one layer at a time. The hidden states of one RBM, when they are being driven by training data, are treated as the ‘data’ for training the next RBM in the stack. The full justification for this recursive learning procedure is given by Hinton et al. (2006), who showed how to add extra hidden layers in a way that is guaranteed to improve a variational bound. In other words, the new multi-layer model that is created by adding another hidden layer has a better lower bound on the probability of generating the training data than the previous multi-layer model.

Surprisingly, after training several layers, the composite, multi-layer graphical model is not an undirected multi-layer Boltzmann machine as might be expected, but a ‘deep belief net’ that has an undirected RBM in its top two layers and top-down directed connections from there to lower layers as shown in c. Because of the way in which the multi-layer model is learned, it is possible to use the top-down generative weights in the reverse direction for rapid bottom-up inference, but the bottom-up weights between lower layers are not part of the generative model.

One way to understand the composite model that is created by stacking two RBMs is to write the probability that the first RBM assigns to a visible vector, v, in terms of a ‘prior’ distribution over hidden vectors p(h1|W1) and a conditional distribution of visible vectors given hidden vectors

Unlike a normal directed model, the prior uses exactly the same parameters, W1, as are used for the conditional distribution, p(v|h1, W1). Also, the prior does not assume that the hidden units are independent during the generative process. The prior p(h1|W1) contains strong correlations that exactly cancel the anti-correlations between hidden units caused by explaining away, so the hidden units are independent in the posterior.

Equation makes it clear that the generative model in b is just another way of writing the RBM model in a. But the model in b can now be improved by freezing the bottom layer of weights, W1, and changing the higher layer of weights to create a better prior distribution for the first hidden layer. A better prior is one that is a better fit to the average, over all training vectors, of the posterior distributions over the first hidden layer given the data. Hence, these posterior distributions over the first hidden layer should be treated as training data for the higher level RBM. After learning a better prior, we have the model in c and the right way to generate data from it is to run a Markov chain to get an unbiased sample of p(h1|W2) from the top-level RBM and then to do one top-down step to generate a visible vector using p(v|h1, W1).


Associating feature vectors with labels

Once a high-level representation of the visual input has been learned, there are several ways to associate class labels with that representation. The most obvious method is to treat the high-level representation as the input for a subsequent supervised learning procedure. Excellent performance can be achieved by back propagating derivatives from the supervised procedure through the layers of the deep belief net to refine all of the bottom-up weights that are used for inference. Using back propagation to fine-tune feature detectors that are initially learned as a generative model works much better than using back propagation with random initial weights (Hinton & Salakhutdinov 2006; Erhan et al. 2009).

An alternative method is to use a top-level RBM to model the joint distribution of feature vectors and labels. The RBM is trained on data obtained by concatenating the high-level representation produced by unsupervised learning with a binary label vector that contains a 1 in the location representing the correct label (see a). To improve discriminative performance, it is possible to add the gradient of the log probability that the RBM would generate the correct label if the feature vector was fixed. This gradient can be computed exactly in a time proportional to the number of possible labels (Larochelle & Bengio 2008).

shows what can be achieved by learning the network shown in a one layer at a time using 500 hidden units in the first two hidden layers and 2000 hidden units in the top layer (see Hinton et al. 2006 for details).

When many of the labels provided by the supervisor are incorrect, the RBM can use both the provided label and the features obtained from the image to infer the true label. So, if the image is a clear example of some other class, the RBM can overrule the provided label. This works remarkably well and allowed a neural net digit recognizer like the one shown in b to get almost 98 per cent of both the training and the test cases correct even when half of the training labels were wrong. Like a good student, the net ignores the supervisor when the supervisor is obviously wrong but still makes good use of the fact that the supervisor is better than random. This is possible because the unsupervised learning reveals natural classes in the data and the role of the supervisor is primarily to name these natural classes rather than to define them.


A better module for deep learning

Deep belief nets composed of RBMs are capable of modelling any distribution over binary data vectors even if the width of the hidden layers is constrained (Sutskever & Hinton 2008), but they are a clumsy way to generate some types of structure. Consider, for example, how an officer generates a neat rectangle of soldiers on a parade ground. Instead of directly telling each soldier exactly where to stand, the officer tells them roughly where to stand and also specifies lateral interactions between the soldiers that ensure regular spacing. This greatly reduces the bandwidth of communication required between the officer and the soldiers. Hierarchical systems in which the values of the variables at one level determine the interactions between variables at the level below provide a more flexible way to generate or represent complex structures. Each level creates an energy function for the level below, but leaves the details of how to minimize that energy function to the level below, thus avoiding cumbersome micro-management.

RBMs can be modified to allow the states of the hidden units to modulate pairwise interactions between the visible units. The energy function is redefined in terms of three way multiplicative interactions (Sejnowski 1986) between two visible units, i, j, and one hidden unit k

Given the states of the hidden units, the visible units form a Markov random field in which the effective pairwise interaction weight between i and j is. The hidden units remain conditionally independent given the states of the visible units and their binary states are sampled using

Given the hidden states, however, the visible units are no longer independent so a ‘mean field’ reconstruction of the data from the hidden states is performed by starting at the data vector and using a few iterations of the damped mean field equation

where 0 < ri (t) < 1 is a real-valued approximation to the stochastic binary state vi and 0 < λ < 1 must be large enough to prevent oscillations. After computing the reconstruction, the hidden states are again sampled using ri and rj in place of vi and vj in equation. The contrastive divergence learning rule for the third-order weights is then

This way of allowing hidden units to modulate interactions between visible units has far too many parameters because each hidden unit has independent control over every pairwise interaction between the visible units. For real images, however, we expect the required lateral interactions to have a lot of regular structure. A hidden unit that represents a vertical occluding edge, for example, needs to modulate the lateral interactions so as to eliminate the horizontal interpolation of intensities in the region of the edge. This regular structure can be approximated by modelling the tensor of three-way weights as a sum of ‘factors’, f, each of which is a three-way outer product

Thus equation becomes

The factors are deterministic and, unlike the stochastic visible and hidden units, they must send different messages to different sets of stochastic units. To sample a hidden unit from its posterior distribution given the states of the visible units, the input to the hidden unit must be the reduction in the energy of the whole system caused by turning the hidden unit on

If we assume that the same weights between pixels and factors are used in the first and second weighted sums in equation, the message that factor f must send to every hidden unit is

By similar reasoning, the message that factor f must send to every visible unit is

The use of factors that send different messages to different places is a form of belief propagation (Kschischang et al. 2001). It ensures that the hidden units remain conditionally independent which is crucial for fast, accurate inference. It also makes contrastive divergence learning very simple. For the factor-to-hidden weights

and for the visible-to-factor weights

The use of a third-order energy function has led to a module for deep learning containing an intermediate layer of deterministic factors that act as linear filters which send their squared outputs to the hidden units via weighted connections. This is exactly the ‘oriented energy’ model (Adelson & Bergen 1985) that is widely used in computer vision. It is also very similar to a standard model of the interaction between simple and complex cells in visual cortex which is supported by both psychophysical evidence and single cell recordings (Carandini et al. 2005), though the standard model also includes divisive normalization. By deriving this familiar model from a third-order energy function, we obtain a simple, local learning procedure for all of the parameters. shows how the receptive fields learned by the third-order factors differ from the receptive fields learned by a standard RBM when trained on the images of handwritten digits. The ‘Gaussian scale mixture’ model (Portilla et al. 2004) is a closely related, directed graphical model with multiplicative interactions, but inference and learning are more complex because of explaining away.

Third-order, factorized energy functions can also be used to stabilize the interactions between visible units during the reconstruction process. If all of the weights of a three-way factor are constrained to be negative and the states of the visible units are constrained to be positive, a factor that is only connected to visible units will act as a gain control that contributes energy which grows cubically as the activities of the units increase. The message that the three-way factor must send to the visible units is the squared output of a linear filter, as in equation, so the incoming negative weights can all be implemented by positive weights, but the outgoing weights must remain negative. This resembles an inhibitory interneuron and is one way to implement divisive normalization.

Factorized, third-order RBMs can be stacked to form composite models that have many hidden layers. This work has only just begun, but it should lead to very powerful generative models. If neurons in the first hidden layer represent local oriented energy, neurons in the second hidden layer should represent local spatial distributions of oriented energy. They should therefore resemble SIFT features (Lowe 1999) which were designed by hand but were originally motivated by neurophysiology. SIFT features are widely used in computer vision systems for recognizing objects.


Conclusion

Learning procedures that are inspired by biology but evaluated by their computational performance have become much more sophisticated over the last few decades. This is leading to a convergence between adaptive computer vision systems and models of the object recognition pathway in the cortex. As computers become more powerful, this trend is likely to continue. Eventually, our understanding of how to engineer adaptive visual systems should become good enough to allow us to hear what the experimental data are telling us about how the cortical visual system is learned.


What Is the Brain Basis of Intelligence?

Charles F. Stevens — PLoS Biology, 2011. PMC3119231, CC BY 4.0.


Darwin in Mind: New Opportunities for Evolutionary Psychology

Johan J Bolhuis, Gillian R Brown, Robert C Richardson, Kevin N Laland — PLoS Biology, 2011. PMC3139638, CC BY.

Evolutionary Psychology (EP) views the human mind as organized into many modules, each underpinned by psychological adaptations designed to solve problems faced by our Pleistocene ancestors. We argue that the key tenets of the established EP paradigm require modification in the light of recent findings from a number of disciplines, including human genetics, evolutionary biology, cognitive neuroscience, developmental psychology, and paleoecology. For instance, many human genes have been subject to recent selective sweeps; humans play an active, constructive role in co-directing their own development and evolution; and experimental evidence often favours a general process, rather than a modular account, of cognition. A redefined EP could use the theoretical insights of modern evolutionary biology as a rich source of hypotheses concerning the human mind, and could exploit novel methods from a variety of adjacent research fields.

In the century and a half since Charles Darwin's publication of the Origin of Species, evolutionary theory has become the bedrock of modern biology; yet, its application to the human mind remains steeped in controversy –. Darwin himself wrote of cognitive evolution, most notably in The Descent of Man, where he suggested that like any other trait, human “mental faculties” are the outcome of evolution by natural and sexual selection and insisted that they should be understood in light of what he called “common descent”. This evolutionary interpretation of human cognition was taken up in the 1980s by contemporary evolutionary psychology, which rapidly became dominated by a school of thought stemming from the University of California at Santa Barbara. The essence of this brand of Evolutionary Psychology (EP) is neatly summarized in the famous quote that “Our modern skulls house a Stone Age mind”.


Box 1. The Major Tenets of Evolutionary Psychology

According to the Santa Barbara school of Evolutionary Psychology (EP), human minds are organized into a large number of evolved psychological mechanisms—psychological adaptations designed to solve recurrent problems faced by our hunter-gatherer ancestors. These evolutionary psychologists attempt to provide criteria for “carving the mind at its natural joints”, generally by reverse-engineering from an observable phenomenon to its proposed function.

In the 1980s, four major tenets of EP crystallized, and these ideas became widespread. While not all evolutionary psychologists endorse the Santa Barbara perspective, these ideas have nonetheless shaped the broader field, and remain extremely prevalent.

1. The environment of evolutionary adaptedness (EEA). This concept refers to the notion that our psychological mechanisms have evolved in response to stable features of ancestral environments. While the EEA has frequently been equated with an African Pleistocene savanna, this version of the concept has been strongly critiqued, and the more recent formulation of the EEA concept presents a broader, less specific theoretical landscape of our past lives, based on an abstract statistical composite of all relevant past selective environments.

2. Gradualism. Evolutionary psychologists argue that minds are built from co-adapted gene complexes that are unable to respond quickly to selection,. When combined with the concept of the EEA, gradualism suggests that human beings experience an adaptive lag, such that evolved psychological mechanisms may not produce adaptive responses in modern human environments that have undergone dramatic recent changes.

3. Massive modularity. Given that different sets of adaptive problems will have required different computational solutions, the mind is argued to consist predominantly of domain-specific, modular programmes. Whether the mind also contains evolved general-purpose processes remains debated within EP.

4. Universal human nature. The evolved computational programmes in the human mind are assumed to be responsible for producing a universal (that is, species-typical) human nature. At the same time, different outcomes of these programmes are suggested to be triggered by different environmental or social conditions, leading to the prediction of both universal behavioural outcomes and locally specified adaptive solutions.

However, many evolutionarily minded psychologists, evolutionary biologists, and philosophers of science disagree with the theoretical proposals put forward by the Santa Barbara evolutionary psychologists, and the discipline has been the subject of intense debates,–. Here, we assess the impact of recent developments in genetics, evolutionary and developmental biology, paleoecology, and cognitive science on EP and then go on to suggest that these developments provide new avenues for research.


Reassessing the Major Tenets of Evolutionary Psychology

EP is encapsulated by four major tenets that have generated considerable discussion. Here, we argue that all of these basic assumptions need to be reassessed in the light of contemporary evidence.


The Environment of Evolutionary Adaptedness and Gradualism

EP argues that that human cognitive processes evolved in response to selection pressures acting in ancestral conditions—in an environment of evolutionary adaptedness (EEA)—and are not necessarily adaptive in a contemporary world that has changed radically in recent millennia. From this vantage point, genetic evolution simply could not keep pace fully with the extraordinary rate at which human technology transformed environments. Tied up with this notion of adaptive lag (or mismatch between our biology and our environment) is an emphasis on evolutionary gradualism: evolutionary change, particularly with respect to complex adaptations in the human mind, is deemed to have occurred slowly; too slowly to have led to significant genetic change in the few hundred generations that have elapsed since the end of the Pleistocene, or even since the spread of modern humans around the world over the last 50,000 years.

Recent developments in human genetics have challenged the concepts of adaptive lag and gradualism. EP originated in the early 1980s, when our knowledge of the human genome was limited and gradualism dominated evolutionary thinking (although biologists' attempts to estimate rates of selection in nature were in full flow in the 1970s, leaving the Santa Barbara school's gradualism assumption contentious from the outset). Since then, geneticists have not only mapped the genome, but have devised means for detecting which genes have been subject to recent selection –. There have been substantial human genetic changes in the last 50,000 years, with possibly as much as 10% of human genes affected. Events in the Holocene (the last 10,000 years), particularly the adoption of agriculture, domestication of animals, and the increases in human densities that these practices afforded, were a major source of selection on our species –, and possibly accelerated human evolution,. Evidence from the human genome strongly suggests that recent human evolution has been affected by responses to features of the environment that were constructed by humans, from culturally facilitated changes in diet, to aspects of modern living that inadvertently promoted the spread of diseases,. Genes expressed in the human brain are well-represented in this recent selection,.

Evolutionary biologists have also measured the rate of response to selection in a wide variety of animals, finding that evolutionary change typically occurs much faster than hitherto thought. A recent meta-analysis of 63 studies that measured the strength of natural selection in 62 species, including more than 2,500 estimates of selection, concluded that the median selection gradient (a measure of the rate of change of fitness with trait value) was 0.16, which would cause a quantitative trait to change by one standard deviation in just 25 generations. If humans exhibit equivalent rates, then significant genetic evolution would occur over the course of a few hundred years. While fast evolution is far from inevitable, there is nonetheless strong evidence that it has frequently occurred in humans. EP has yet to come to terms with the possibility of recent, rapid genetic changes with their potential for associated neural rewiring.

Even if we consider the selection pressures that acted on ancestral human populations during the Pleistocene epoch (approximately 1.7 million to 10,000 years ago), the abstract concept of stable selection pressures in the EEA is challenged by recent evidence from paleoecology and paleoanthropology. The Pleistocene was apparently far from stable, not only being variable, but progressively changing in the pattern of variation,. The world experienced by members of the genus Homo in the early Pleistocene was very different from that experienced in the late Pleistocene, and even early anatomical modern Homo sapiens that lived around 150,000 years ago led very different lives from Upper Paleolithic people (40,000 years ago) –.


Universalism

EP has also placed emphasis on the concept of human nature, comprising a species-specific repertoire of universal, evolved psychological mechanisms, from a childhood fear of strangers, to a cheater-detection mechanism, to a preference for specific mate characteristics. This putative universal cognition can be rendered compatible with the observed diversity in human behaviour by recourse to context-dependent strategies. From this perspective, the mind shifts between pre-specified behavioural outputs in response to differential environmental influences,.

This explanation of human behavioral variation is also contentious,–. The notion of universalism has led to the view that undergraduates at Western universities constitute a representative sample of human nature, a view that has been subject to criticism from anthropologists and psychologists –. Moreover, by EP's formulation, all epigenetic and developmental effects simply evoke alternative genetically pre-specified strategies. Recent trends in developmental psychology and neuroscience have instead stressed the malleability of the human brain, emphasizing how experience tunes and regulates synaptic connectivity, neural circuitry and gene expression in the brain, leading to remarkable plasticity in the brain's structural and functional organization. Neuroscientists have been aware since the 1980s that the human brain has too much architectural complexity for it to be plausible that genes specify its wiring in detail; therefore, developmental processes carry much of the burden of establishing neural connections.

In parallel, emerging trends in evolutionary theory, particularly the growth of developmental systems theory, epigenetic inheritance, and niche-construction theory, have placed emphasis on organisms as active constructors of their environments –. The development of an organism, including the characteristics of its brain, involves a complex interaction between genetically inherited information, epigenetic influences, and learning in response to constructed features of the physical and social environment,–. From this viewpoint, the human mind does not consist of pre-specified programmes, but is built via a constant interplay between the individual and its environment, a point made by developmental psychologist Daniel Lehrman many years ago. By constructing their worlds (for example, by building homes, planting crops, and setting up social institutions), humans co-direct their own development and evolution,.

The view that a universal genetic programme underpins human cognition is also not fully consistent with current genetic evidence. Humans are less genetically diverse than many species, including other apes, largely because human effective population sizes were small until around 70,000 years ago,. Nonetheless, there is enough genetic variation to have supported considerable adaptive change in the intervening time, and recent thinking amongst geneticists is that our species' unique reliance on learned behaviour and culture may have relaxed allowable thresholds for large-scale genomic diversity,. Human behavioral genetics has also identified genetic variation underlying an extensive list of cognitive and behavioural characteristics.

While variation within populations accounts for the bulk of human genetic variation, around 5%–7% of genetic differences can be attributed to variation between populations. Some of the significant genetic differences between human populations have arisen from recent selective events,. Gene-culture coevolution may well turn out to be the characteristic pattern of evolutionary change in humans over recent time spans,. From this perspective, cultural practices are likely to have influenced selection pressures on the human brain, raising the possibility that genetic variation could lead to biases in the human cognitive processing between, as well as within, populations. In summary, there is no uniform human genetic program.


Box 2. Gene-Culture Coevolution

Gene-culture coevolutionary theory explores how genetic and cultural processes interact over evolutionary time,. Changes in diet afforded by cultural practices, such as agriculture and the domestication of plants and animals, provide compelling examples of gene-culture coevolution, demonstrating how cultural practices have transformed the selection pressures acting on humans and given rise to some of the genetic differences between human populations. For instance, there is now little doubt that dairy farming created the selective environment that favoured the spread of alleles for adult lactose tolerance,. Another example concerns the evolution of the human amylase gene: Perry et al. found that copy number of the salivary amylase gene (AMY1) is positively correlated with salivary amylase protein level and that individuals from human populations with high-starch diets have, on average, more AMY1 copies than those with traditionally low-starch diets. Indeed, the transition to novel food sources with the advent of agriculture and the colonization of new habitats would appear to have been a major source of selection on humans, and several genes related to the metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, and phosphates show signals of recent selection –.

More generally, human dispersal and subsequent exposure to novel climates, aggregation and exposure to new pathogens, and farming and exposure to new diets are now widely thought to be the source of selection for the spread of many human alleles. Amongst the overrepresented categories in genome-wide scans of recent selection are numerous alleles expressed in the human nervous system and brain –. This raises the possibility that complex cognition on which culture is reliant (social intelligence, language, and challenges associated with constructing and adapting to new environmental conditions) have driven human brain evolution. Mathematical models exploring how genetic and cultural processes interact provide strong support for the role of gene-culture coevolution in human evolution,–. Analyses of these models has often revealed patterns and rates of change that are uncharacteristic of more traditional population genetic theory [92,114–116]. Gene-culture dynamics are typically faster and stronger and operate over a broader range of conditions than conventional evolutionary dynamics,.

EP's emphasis on a universal human nature has hindered its exploitation of new opportunities to examine human diversity utilizing evolutionary biology. Contemporary evolution theory makes predictions about behavioural variation within and between populations in traits commonly studied by evolutionary psychologists. For example, sex differences in mate preferences constitute a large proportion of EP research and are generally assumed to exhibit universal patterns; however, sexual selection theory suggests that a number of factors, such as sex-biased mortality, population density, and variation in mate quality, will affect sex roles. A modern EP would make greater use of the theoretical insights of modern evolutionary biology as a source of testable hypotheses,.


Box 3. Reconsidering the Evolution of Sex Roles

Based on the classic work of Bateman and Trivers, EP has predicted sex differences in the relative competiveness and choosiness of men and women when seeking mating partners. Men are generally assumed to have been selected to favour more sexual partners than women and to base their choices on the age, health, and physical attractiveness of prospective partners; in contrast, women are assumed to be more choosy than men and to base their judgements on the willingness of males to invest resources in their offspring. However, contemporary sexual selection theory, suggests that a number of factors, such as sex-biased mortality, population density, and variation in mate quality, will affect how competitive and choosy males and females are, with sex roles expected to vary considerably within and between societies. For example, this theory predicts that, in human beings, both sexes will be choosy when encounter rates with potential mates are high, particularly where the parental investment levels of both sexes are large and not too different, and/or where variation in mate quality of both sexes is high, and males are likely to be choosy in populations with a female-biased adult sex ratio and considerable paternal investment.

The prediction that sex roles will vary between populations is borne out in data on variance in mating and reproductive success in current and historic human populations, which does not support the notion of a single universal pattern. In addition, evolutionary psychologists have themselves begun to record cross-cultural variation in mate preferences and to examine whether variables such as adult sex ratios and local pathogen loads can explain within- and between-population variation in mating behaviour. However, the EP perspective generally assumes that context-specific strategies are pre-programmed within our evolved psychological mechanisms, such that individuals possess multiple strategies that are differentially elicited by certain external factors or that individuals develop a particular strategy as a result of environmental inputs acting on evolved developmental systems during early life (e.g.,. Arguably, the more flexible and variable the exhibited behaviour, the less explanatory power can be attributed to evolved structure in the mind.

An alternative perspective, supported by developmental systems and niche construction theorists, posits that the human mind does not consist solely of pre-specified programmes and that brain development is strongly influenced by transmitted culture. One of the key contrasts between this perspective and traditional EP is therefore the role that socially transmitted culture has to play in the development of the brain and behaviour. For illustration, consider how the relatively recent developments of agriculture (niche construction), high-density populations, and the evolution of social stratification (transmitted culture), have dramatically changed the ecological context of human mating decisions from what would have occurred in hunter-gatherer societies. According to the aforementioned theory, the increasing encounter rates that such practices likely afforded should have led to much greater choosiness in both modern men and women compared to their Pleistocene ancestors. Modern evolutionary theory has much to offer evolutionary psychologists who are willing to eschew a focus on universality.


Massive Modularity

EP has proposed that the mind consists of evolved cognitive modules, a perspective referred to as the massive modularity hypothesis,. Massive modularity is a somewhat idiosyncratic interpretation of Fodor's original concept of modularity. Essentially, Fodor suggested that what he called input systems (such as those involved in auditory and visual perception, but also in language) were modular, i.e., operating in relative isolation from each other. Information from these modular systems would be passed on to central systems (involved in problem solving or thought) that themselves were thought not to be modular. EP has extended modularity to involve the whole mind/brain.

The thesis of massive modularity is not supported by the neuroscientific evidence –. Firstly, comparative psychology presents an unassailable case for the existence of domain-general mechanisms. The processes of associative learning are widespread in animals and have general properties that allow animals to learn about the causal relationships among a wide variety of events,. For instance, a simple learning theory rule, known as the Rescorla–Wagner rule, has proved extraordinarily useful in explaining the results of hundreds of experiments in diverse animals, including foraging in honeybees, avoidance conditioning in goldfish, and inferential reasoning in humans.

Secondly, there is broad involvement of diverse neural structures in many psychological processes, and there is feedback even to the most basic perceptual processing. For instance, the hominid brain has not only witnessed a proportional expansion of the neocortex, but the neocortex has become intricately interconnected and has evolved projections into the medulla and spinal cord. This has allowed humans to learn intricate routines of movement and complex manual tasks, because the Fodorian executive part of the brain can directly monitor the fingers and the feet. The same projections allow exhibit fine control of the tongue, vocal chords, and breathing, without which humans probably could not have learned to speak. After evaluating the evidence and consistent with Fodor's original proposals, Bolhuis and Macphail suggested that there is no evidence for modularity in central systems such as those involved in learning and memory. With regard to cognitive mechanisms, more often than not, data from animal experiments is consistent with a general-process account rather than an interpretation involving adaptively specialized cognitive modules,.

A large part of EP's emphasis on massive modularity drew from artificial intelligence (AI) research. While the great lesson from AI research of the 1970s was that domain specificity was critical to intelligent behaviour, the lesson of the new millennium is that intelligent agents (such as driverless robotic cars) require integration and decision-making across domains, regularly utilize general-process tools such as Bayesian analysis, stochastic modelling, and optimization, and are responsive to a variety of environmental cues. However, while AI research has shifted away from an emphasis on domain specificity, some evolutionary psychologists continue to argue that selection would have favoured predominantly domain-specific mechanisms. In contrast, others have started to present the case for domain-general evolved psychological mechanisms, and evidence from developmental psychology suggests that domain-general learning mechanisms frequently build on knowledge acquired through domain-specific perceptual processes and core cognition. Both domain-specific and domain-general mechanisms are compatible with evolutionary theory, and their relative importance in human information processing will only be revealed through careful experimentation, leading to a greater understanding of how the brain works.


Towards a New Science of the Evolution of the Mind

We have reviewed how developments in a number of scientific fields have called into question the key tenets of EP. Fortunately, these developments do not just create problems for EP, but also suggest potential solutions. We argue that the key factor will be the methodological and conceptual integration of EP with adjacent fields.

Traditionally, EP has tested hypotheses using the conventional tools of psychology (questionnaires, computer-based experiments, etc.). Generally these hypotheses have a functional perspective—that is, EP proposes that a particular mechanism functioned to enhance reproductive success in our ancestors. However, Nobel laureate Niko Tinbergen famously proposed that understanding behavior requires comprehension not only of its function and evolution, but also of its causation and development, and he argued that a complete understanding of behavior involves addressing all four of these questions. These distinctions are relevant because accounts of the evolution of brain and cognition cannot in themselves explain the brain's underlying working mechanisms, since these are logically distinct questions. While evolutionary analyses may generate clues as to the mechanisms of human cognition, these are best regarded as hypotheses, not established explanations, that need to be tested empirically, and there are instances where such evolutionary hypotheses about mechanisms have had to be rejected. Here, we ask which of Tinbergen's questions is currently addressed in the field of EP and describe how EP could expand its focus to provide a broader and richer understanding of human behaviour.

Evolutionary psychologists commonly seek to study how the human mind works by using knowledge of evolution to formulate, and sometimes test, hypotheses concerning the function of cognitive architecture. While functional or evolutionary considerations cannot be used to test hypotheses about mechanisms, considerations in one domain can generate hypotheses concerning problems in the other domain. For instance, a theory of the evolution of a certain cognitive trait may generate hypotheses as to the mechanisms of that trait. Evolutionary psychologists have conducted hundreds of empirical studies to test the predictions generated by consideration of evolutionary arguments. However, we should be clear that such studies do not test the evolutionary hypotheses themselves, but rather test whether the predictions about the psychological mechanisms have been upheld,. For example, the numerous studies supporting the hypothesis that human beings are predisposed to detect cheaters in social situations, are consistent with several evolutionary explanations. While the original researchers reasoned that cheater detection has resulted from a selective history of reciprocal altruism, alternative evolutionary explanations, for instance that a history of cultural group selection has selected for this trait, and non-evolutionary explanations, are also plausible.

The recent trend within the behavioural sciences has been away from confirmation or rejection of a single hypothesis towards the far more powerful simultaneous evaluation of multiple competing statistical models through model selection procedures. A modern EP would, as standard practice, conduct empirical studies designed specifically to test between multiple competing adaptive and non-adaptive explanations, and would test the evolutionary historical, as well as the proximate, aspects of its hypotheses. In the following sections, we examine how EP could expand to cover all four of Tinbergen's questions.

i) A modern EP would evaluate the evolution of a character by constructing and testing population genetic models, estimating and measuring responses to selection, exploring the covariation of phenotypic traits or genetic variation with putative selective agents, making comparisons across species and seeking correlates to selected traits in the selective environment, and so forth, as do contemporary evolutionary biologists. In addition to these established tools, researchers can also exploit modern comparative statistical methods applied to cultural and behavioural variation and gene-culture coevolutionary theory, to reconstruct human evolutionary histories. The function of reliable aspects of human cognition, and of consistent behavioural patterns, can be explored utilizing the same methods. An important point here is that researchers are not restricted to considerations of the current function of evolved traits, and well-established methods are available to reconstruct the evolutionary history of human cognition.

ii) With regard to functional questions, while EP has stressed the idea that human beings are adapted to past worlds, a niche-construction perspective argues that human beings are predicted to build environments to suit their adaptations, and to construct solutions to self-imposed challenges, aided and abetted by the extraordinary level of adaptive plasticity afforded by our capacities for learning and culture. While adaptiveness is far from guaranteed, from this theoretical perspective humans are expected to experience far less adaptive lag than anticipated by EP. If correct, examining the relationship between evolved psychological mechanisms and reproductive success in modern environments will not necessarily be an unproductive task.

Consistent with this hypothesis is the observation that humans have experienced extraordinary levels of population growth, indicative of increments in absolute fitness, in the Holocene whilst exposed to modern, culturally constructed environmental conditions. However, rather than simply pronouncing that human behaviour is, or is not, likely to be adaptive, a modern EP would carry out quantitative analyses across a multitude of behavioural and cognitive traits to measure to what extent, or on what occasions, human behaviour is currently adaptive. We anticipate that the formal methods of human behavioural ecology are likely to be productive even in modern societies, in many instances. Where the use of optimality models proves unproductive, cultural evolution and gene-culture coevolutionary models could be developed to investigate whether the data conform to equilibria that are not globally optimal. Researchers could go on to explore which factors explain this variation, for instance by measuring, among diverse traits and across a broad range of populations, what percentage of the variance in behaviour is explained by local ecology and what percentage is better predicted by cultural history.

iii) In order to study the causal mechanisms underlying the character, researchers can employ methodologies that are available to modern cognitive psychologists and neuroscientists, such as fMRI and related technology, and take advantage of advances in genetics. While much EP research describes human behaviour in terms of information processing, decision rules and cognition, the psychological adaptations can also be described at the level of the nervous system. Cognitive and behavioural neuroscientists have amassed a huge amount of research on the functioning of the nervous system, including the influence of genes on brain development. However, evolutionary psychologists rarely examine whether their hypotheses regarding evolved psychological mechanisms are supported by what is known about how the brain works. Here the role of evolutionary knowledge is less direct, and again relegated to the generation of novel hypotheses that can be tested using established protocols.

Variation in experimental procedures, patterns of connectivity, differences between individuals, and comparisons across species potentially allows researchers to explore to what extent the circuitry associated with the focal mechanism is human specific, and to identify both the major genes involved and the environmental conditions that regulate their expression. There is evidence that modern neuroscience technologies are starting to be used to test hypotheses generated from evolutionary theory –, and some evolutionary psychologists are beginning to present evolutionary accounts of genetic variation underlying traits such as personality –. The aforementioned developments in cognitive neuroscience and genetics open up further opportunities for a broader EP.

iv) As discussed earlier, development is an extremely important factor in human cognition, and the human mind is built via a constant interplay between the individual and its environment. Recent work by developmental psychologists demonstrates how it is possible to detect the unlearned roots of cognition, such as deep, explicit conceptual understanding, through careful experimentation on young children. Such experiments also reveal the manner in which culturally and individually variable concepts emerge, through domain-general learning akin to bootstrapping, in response to a culturally constructed, symbolically encoded environments. In principle, all posited evolved psychological mechanisms, from fear of snakes to cheater-detection mechanisms, could be subject to the same kind of detailed developmental investigation.

Recent trends in developmental biology and cognitive neuroscience recognize that the human brain and behaviour are shaped to an important extent by individual and social learning. Hitherto, EP's theoretical stance led it to assume domain specificity in cognition, resulting in the neglect of opportunities to investigate to what extent human social and asocial learning are reliant upon processes that apply across domains, or the manner in which cross-domain general learning processes build on domain-specific inputs. For instance, while behavioural innovation is critical to the survival of animals living in changing and unpredictable environments, whether such innovation is channeled in a context specific manner is unclear. Innovation could instead be reliant on domain-general mechanisms expressed in complex cognition, intelligence and learning; for instance, innovation could involve learned behaviour patterns being adapted to a new domain. Available evidence suggests the latter scenario,.

Similarly, EP has engaged in a longstanding debate with advocates of cultural evolution over whether human social learning is governed by evolved content biases (e.g., choose the sugar-rich food) or by domain-general context biases (e.g., conform to the local norm). There is sufficient empirical evidence for the deployment of context biases, such as conformity or prestige bias, to render the casual dismissal of transmitted culture counterproductive,. A broader EP could actively pursue these questions, by testing experimentally whether human social learning is dominated by content or context biases, and by investigating the factors that affect reliance on each. The finding that innovation, social learning, and other aspects of development are capable of introducing novelty into phenotype design space, thereby establishing new selective scenarios, opens up new opportunities for investigating evolutionary novelty to which social scientists can actively participate.


Conclusions

None of the aforementioned scientific developments render evolutionary psychology unfeasible; they merely require that EP should change its daily practice. The key concepts of EP have led to a series of widely held assumptions (e.g., that human behaviour is unlikely to be adaptive in modern environments, that cognition is domain-specific, that there is a universal human nature), which with the benefit of hindsight we now know to be questionable. A modern EP would embrace a broader, more open, and multi-disciplinary theoretical framework, drawing on, rather than being isolated from, the full repertoire of knowledge and tools available in adjacent disciplines. Such a field would embrace the challenge of exploring empirically, for instance, to what extent human cognition is domain-general or domain specific, under what circumstances human behaviour is adaptive, how best to explain variation in human behaviour and cognition. The evidence from adjacent disciplines suggests that, if EP can reconsider its basic tenets, it will flourish as a scientific discipline.


From Structure Prediction to Genomic Screens for Novel Non-Coding RNAs

Jan Gorodkin, Ivo L Hofacker, Michael Levitt — PLoS Computational Biology, 2011. PMC3150283, CC BY.

Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are receiving more and more attention not only as an abundant class of genes, but also as regulatory structural elements (some located in mRNAs). A key feature of RNA function is its structure. Computational methods were developed early for folding and prediction of RNA structure with the aim of assisting in functional analysis. With the discovery of more and more ncRNAs, it has become clear that a large fraction of these are highly structured. Interestingly, a large part of the structure is comprised of regular Watson-Crick and GU wobble base pairs. This and the increased amount of available genomes have made it possible to employ structure-based methods for genomic screens. The field has moved from folding prediction of single sequences to computational screens for ncRNAs in genomic sequence using the RNA structure as the main characteristic feature. Whereas early methods focused on energy-directed folding of single sequences, comparative analysis based on structure preserving changes of base pairs has been efficient in improving accuracy, and today this constitutes a key component in genomic screens. Here, we cover the basic principles of RNA folding and touch upon some of the concepts in current methods that have been applied in genomic screens for de novo RNA structures in searches for novel ncRNA genes and regulatory RNA structure on mRNAs. We discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the different strategies and how they can complement each other.


Introduction

Non-coding RNA genes (ncRNAs) have emerged as major players in the cell and are involved in both housekeeping functions as well as regulation. They are characterized as functional transcripts that do not code for proteins and can be processed in numerous ways, see e.g.,. An abundant class of ncRNA genes are the micro RNAs (miRNAs), which have received considerable attention e.g., –. This can be observed through the rapid growth in the literature, not only for miRNAs, but also for ncRNAs in general. Furthermore, regulatory RNA structure in UTR regions of protein-coding genes is also an exciting, emerging field.

The roles of ncRNAs are diverse and not only include regulation of protein coding genes, but also inactivation of other gene classes (e.g., imprinting), alternative splicing, and modifying other ncRNAs, to mention just a few examples. Thus the miRNAs are but one among several other classes of ncRNAs. Novel classes of small ncRNA genes such as piRNAs, and hpRNAs have also been reported. Recently, long intervening ncRNAs (lincRNAs) have been found. These are mRNA-like transcripts that lack protein-coding potential, contain exon intron structure, and are apparently largely unstructured. The repertoire of ncRNAs is rapidly expanding and RNA-seq sequencing techniques, in combination with computer methods, are expected to give rise to a general expansion of the RNA universe. These RNA families are collected in the Rfam database in the form of structural alignments and consensus structures. In a number of cases, such as SRP RNAs and tmRNAs, Rfam is based on pre-existing curated RNA structural alignments from specialized databases. This important resource is also often used to construct and test RNA structure prediction tools.

The size variation of ncRNAs is extreme, ranging from nucleotides (nt) for small interfering RNAs and miRNAs to nt for the air RNA. ncRNAs are not only located in intergenic regions, that is outside of protein coding genic regions, but they are also found in introns. In the latter case they are either processed out during splicing, or they represent independent transcripts that come with their own promoters, as e.g., in Caenorhabditis elegans. There are also examples of ncRNAs overlapping coding regions. In addition, mRNAs may contain functional cis-acting RNA structures, such as the iron-responsive element in vertebrates or riboswitches in bacteria.

As can be seen by inspection of Rfam, a solid volume of ncRNAs and regulatory RNAs come with a characteristic and functional RNA structure, which often is more conserved in evolution than its primary sequence. In order to find ncRNA genes, it therefore makes sense to search for RNA (secondary) structure rather than primary sequence. Computationally, this is a much more challenging and demanding problem than searching protein coding space, as there are no regular signals in RNA structured sequence such as open reading frames.

However, searching for RNA secondary structure is likely not to provide us with all functional non-protein-coding transcripts, since the emerging compilation of long ncRNAs seems to indicate that these in general are not densely structured, even though they might contain structural regions. This is exemplified by a mouse transcriptomic analysis that revealed thousands of such transcripts based upon full-length cDNA sequencing. It remains to be systematically investigated whether these RNAs harbor characteristic structures that carry out specific functions, and thus if searching for RNA structure in general is a sufficient starting point to search for ncRNAs. It is worth noting that the only functionally well-characterized lncRNA, hotair, does have functional RNA structures –.

Here, we focus on describing the principles of searching for de novo RNA structures in genomic sequences, being aware that the gene (and functional transcript) itself can be (much) larger than the (predicted) structure and that overlapping predicted structures can be in the same functional transcript.


Parameters of the Search Space

Searching for novel RNA secondary structures requires that functional structures can be distinguished (e.g., by their folding energy) from those generated on shuffled sequences of the same composition, that is, the background. In general, programs like mfold and RNAfold will fold any RNA sequence you feed into them. Whether the structure (or parts thereof) is actually trustworthy is of course determined by the user.

It turns out that for most known ncRNAs (with miRNAs as a notable exception), it is generally not sufficient to screen individual genomes using minimum free energy folding (of a sequence in some fixed size window), since neither folding energies nor the resulting structures provide a reliable signal. Although ncRNAs tend to have somewhat more stable structures than expected by chance, the difference in folding energies between random sequences created by shuffling and native ncRNAs is in general too small to distinguish real ncRNAs from decoys,. However, the often stronger conservation of the (secondary) structure compared to the primary sequence can be used to enhance the discrepancy to the background. For example, for a human RNA sequence CCCCCCCAGUUGGGGGG that forms a simple hairpin, the mouse version could be CACCCCCAGUUGGGGUG such that a GC base pair in human corresponds to an AU base pair in mouse. Not only do such features destroy conservation of primary sequence, but the base pairs can also be separated essentially by the full length of the sequence. Hence, meaningful in silico screens can be carried out on comparative genomic data, but using complex algorithms that take long-range base pairs into account.

The ideal search scenario is illustrated by a toy example in, where we have randomized some sequences (shuffling the order of the nucleotides) and implanted a small hairpin conserved only in structure. These can be considered as a set of corresponding (but poorly conserved) sequences that do not necessarily have much in common except for common RNA structure. This sequence set can be searched (sequences on the left side) and a joint structure extracted (on the right side) where base pairs are represented by matching parentheses. In real examples, the “background part” of sequences is never so strongly divergent and neither are the sequences of the contained motifs (while the structure is convergent). This, of course, creates challenges for the prediction scheme.

Overall, in silico searches for ncRNAs can in essence be carried out in the following three ways: (i) by sequence/structure similarity to already known ncRNAs, (ii) by searching for specific ncRNA classes, e.g., miRNAs and snoRNAs, and (iii) de novo searches. Here, we focus on de novo searches, but briefly touch upon the others below.


Sequence Similarity Search for ncRNAs

The basic form of similarity search is purely sequence based using BLAST, and this approach has apparently not been reported in the literature for anything other than finding near identical sequences, e.g., genome and EST annotation projects,. The more advanced approach is to include the RNA secondary structure as done for covariance models such as INFERNAL and RaveNnA –. These constitute a probabilistic model of the RNA structure together with the corresponding sequence variation (e.g., compensating base pairs). More specifically, they employ stochastic context-free grammars (SCFGs), an extension of hidden Markov models (HMMs), that can cope with the long-range base pair interactions. An alternative (which is faster) is to extract patterns for RNA motif search, e.g., RNAmotif.

To obtain good models, well-curated data (structural RNA alignments) are needed, which can be obtained either from specialized databases, as in the case of RNAseP RNA and SRP RNAs, or from the meta database Rfam. Curating these and conducting homology-based searches comes with its own set of issues, which is described elsewhere.

Class-specific searches use distinctive features of an RNA class to search for novel, but not necessarily homologous, members of that class. miRNAs are such an example that can be identified on the basis of the characteristic stem-loop shape of the precursor either encoded as explicit rules or combined with machine learning techniques. Another example is the well-known tRNA-scanSE program to search for tRNAs. Similar types of searches have also been employed for other families, and incorporating this information is generally expected to help span greater distances in the evolutionary tree than what can be done solely from (present) covariance models. The principal reason is RNA structure itself changes, so that models made for one family cannot readily be applied to another. Well-known examples are RNAse P RNA and telomerase RNA. A recent advance in the INFERNAL package is that it can search for local structural matches.

As previously mentioned, in silico screens currently involve searching for de novo RNA structure, but there have also been a few cases employing GC content as an indicator of RNA sequence structure in certain organisms (extremophiles with biased AU content) –. Here, we focus on describing the principles and the concepts of de novo searches. When there is overlap with similarity search methods, this will be mentioned. We will concentrate, however, on the concepts and not on reporting what one actually can expect to find and what to do with these sequences. The latter aspects are reviewed e.g., in.

To summarize, in there are two basic flow charts of current similarity searches to provide mapping of homologous ncRNAs and regions of synteny for related genomes. The latter can be used as an extra layer of confirmation for the raw similarity search, but also to investigate if genomic rearrangements have taken place. Clearly, synteny can yield further support for the outcome of an in silico screen.


RNA Structure and Folding

As mentioned above, folding of single sequences is in general not sufficient to reliably detect RNA structure. Still, the principle of folding single sequences is fundamental in basically all computational approaches constructed to search for RNA structure in genomic sequence. The structured RNA molecules by nature take a characteristic three-dimensional (3D) structure. As depicted in, even though it is still difficult to predict 3D from 2D structure, most contacts between bases are already part of the secondary structure. Moreover, the canonical base pairs making up the secondary structure can be reasonably well predicted without any knowledge of tertiary structure. This makes the minimum free energy secondary structure a useful abstraction of the full 3D structure. Current methods do generally focus on the RNA secondary structure, even though the awareness and feasibility of taking the 3D structure into account is improving. It is beyond the scope of this text to go deeper into this. Unless mentioned otherwise, we will from now on write RNA structure as a shorthand for RNA secondary structure. The RNA secondary structure can be represented in numerous ways, as depicted in.


Concepts of Folding RNA Sequences

The basic folding algorithm goes back to the early work of Ruth Nussinov, who proposed a simple dynamic programming algorithm to find the maximum number of base pairs for an RNA sequence. The idea is to keep track of the number of base pairs of any sub-sequence starting at some position, say, and ending at position. Given that the sequence is nucleotides long, the recursion requires that. Additionally, pseudoknots are ignored as a first approximation. Pseudoknots can be considered as higher-order base pairing interactions and would correspond to having lines crossing in the outer left part of diagram shown in. Including pseudoknots results in much more complex algorithms with higher time and memory consumption.

Thus, starting with (unpaired) sub-sequences of length one and extending (and meeting the first base pair at some point), one can consider a structure on the sub-sequence. Such structure can be formed in only two distinct ways from shorter structures: Either the starting nucleotide is unpaired, in which case it is followed by an arbitrary structure on the shorter sequence, or the first nucleotide is paired with some partner base, say. In the latter case the rule that base pairs must not cross implies that we have independent secondary structures on the sub-intervals and. Graphically, we can write this decomposition of the set of structures as shown in.

Denoting as the maximum number of base pairs (or optimal energy) for a secondary structure on corresponding to the left side of the equation, we see that is the optimal choice among each of the alternatives. In this context, independence of two substructures in the paired cases implies that we have to optimize these substructures independently. Using as if and base pair and zero otherwise, we arrive at the recursion:

where the maximum runs over. Rather than having the parameter one or zero and rather than counting the maximum number of base pairs, we can let take negative values depending on the type of base pair, that is, by replacing with to take the individual base pairs into account, and then replace the in the recursion by. An example of filling out the dynamical programming matrix is shown in. The recursion in Equation 1 is a simplification (and less ambiguous) of a more general form of the Nussinov algorithm. A good introduction is given in.


Towards a Full Folding Algorithm

This simple model is still too inaccurate, since it does not capture energetically important structure motifs, such as stacked pairs, bulges, and various types of loops (hairpin, multi, interior, and exterior). The more realistic “nearest-neighbor” energy model is therefore based on loops, rather than base pairs. A complete set of loop energies is available from the group of Doug Turner. Stacked pairs, for example, consist of two consecutive base pairs and are the major source of stabilizing energy. Each possible stacking comes with its own free energy as listed in. It can be observed that GCs have lower binding values and therefore form more stable stacks and thereby structures. This relates to the issue of searching for RNA structures in GC-rich regions in the genomes. In general, loop energies depend on the loop type and its size, and sequence dependence is conferred only through the base pairs closing the loop and the unpaired bases directly adjacent to the pair (the terminal mismatches). The general form of loop energy is therefore

where the last term is used for special cases, e.g., to assign bonus energies to unusually stable tetra loops. While the model allows only Watson-Crick (AU, UA, CG, and GC) and wobble pairs (GU, UG), non-standard base pairs in helices are treated as special types of interior loops. Therefore, an extended dynamic programming algorithm is needed and replaces the one shown above.

Using the loop-based energy model is essential in order to achieve reasonable prediction accuracies. On average, current energy models achieve accuracies of in terms of the percentage of correct base pairs. Prediction accuracy tends to fall somewhat with sequence length. This effect could be simply due to combinatorics (long RNAs have more wrong structures), or because long sequences are kinetically trapped in structures other than the ground state. Recent approaches combine structure-probing experiments and use the following information for single/double-stranded positions as constraints to the folding algorithms to obtain higher accuracy,.

The more standard energy model results in somewhat more complicated recursions and requires additional tables. However, memory and CPU requirements remain and as in the Nussinov algorithm. The factor comes from the time it takes to fill out the upper half of the matrix of size and then check for adding sub-structures (the index in Equation 1). The crucial quantity in the loop-based version is the optimal free energy for a sub-sequence enclosed by a base pair. In order to compute that, we now have to distinguish between the different types of loops that can be closed by and. For a complete set of corresponding recursions see e.g.,.


Folding of Randomized Sequences

While it seems natural to detect ncRNA genes on the basis of structure prediction, the task is far from straightforward. The problem is that almost any RNA sequence will form some kind of secondary structure. The real challenge is therefore to distinguish whether a structure is spurious or may constitute a functional structure. Unfortunately, structures formed by functional ncRNAs do not look significantly different from structures formed by random sequences, as illustrated in. By random sequences we denote sequences for which the order of the nucleotides has been shuffled. Often this is done by preserving the di-nucleotide order, as that has an impact on the stacking of base pairs.

In fact, when Rivas and Eddy set out to build a general RNA gene finder based on this principle, they had to conclude that secondary structure alone is generally not significant enough for the detection of ncRNAs. Subsequent studies focused on folding energies and showed that (i) functional RNAs tend to be slightly more stable than randomized RNAs, (ii) the difference is statistically significant, but too small to be of much use without additional criteria, and (iii) that for a fair comparison randomized sequences should be generated such that the di-nucleotide content (not just nucleotide composition) is conserved.

A notable exception are microRNAs which form unusually stable structures.


Extracting Structure from Multiple RNA Sequences

As single sequences are not sufficient to extract a clear signature of RNA structure, and since RNA structure can be more conserved than sequence, multiple (orthologous/syntenic) sequences can be searched to find a common structure. It is particularly of interest to detect or exploit compensating base changes, as these indicate conserved structure in spite of varying sequence as exemplified in the toy example in. Below, we conceptually describe approaches to predicting consensus RNA structure from either aligned or unaligned sequences, an essential step towards searching for RNA structure in genomic sequence.


Mutual Information

Given a multiple sequence alignment (typically made without knowledge of the structure), the most common way to quantify covariation for the purpose of RNA secondary determination is by measuring the mutual information content,:

where and are two columns of a multiple sequence alignment, denotes the frequency of nucleotide in column, and denotes the frequency of co-occurrence of the nucleotides and.

Mutual information makes no use of pairing rules and can therefore be used to detect tertiary interactions as well. However, the number of sequences needed to reliably deduce secondary structures from mutual information alone is prohibitive for most classes of RNA. Nonetheless, alternative versions of the mutual information content have been shown to drastically lower the required number of sequences –. In any case, however, it makes good sense to combine co-variance analysis with structure prediction techniques. A manual approach to optimize the alignment is to revise the alignment based upon computation of the mutual information content, a process which recently has been automated in several projects, e.g., –. In a prediction screen, the consensus structure predictions are often based on a fixed pre-computed sequence alignment.


Folding Multiple Alignments of RNA Sequences

Consider a multiple alignment for which the mutual information content has been computed, then one simple way to extract the information about base pairs would be to employ a Nussinov-style algorithm to maximize the amount of mutual information between paired columns. In general, such an approach is insufficient, as a number of structural features cannot be taken into account, for example base pair stacking. An alternative is to combine the information from covarying base changes with a standard dynamic programming folding algorithm. In the RNAalifold program this is done simply by averaging the folding energy over all sequences, thus, e.g., the energy contribution of a stacked pair in the consensus structure is taken as the average of the stacking energy over all sequences in the alignment. To make best use of the covariation information, this average folding energy is augmented by a covariance term that is added as a pseduo-energy. Instead of mutual information, the following covariation term is employed:

where the matrix is chosen such that compensatory mutations receive a bonus of kcal/mol, consistent mutations (such as G-C C-U) receive kcal/mol, conserved pairs get a score of 0, and non-canonical pairs incur a penalty of 1 kcal/mol. In contrast to mutual information, this covariance term explicitly favors consistent mutation and tends to be less noisy for alignments with few sequences.

A widely used alternative, but similar approach, is to compute probabilities for alignment columns (based on substitution rates) to be single stranded (unpaired) and probabilities for columns to be base paired (based on substitution rates) and search for the structure that leads to the highest alignment probability. This approach is taken in the SCFG program Pfold, which aims to maximize the joint probability of consensus structure and alignment. More precisely, it computes the probability of an alignment given a consensus structure, a phylogenetic tree, and a model of substitution rates. This uses a Felsenstein model, as is usual in maximum likelihood tree estimation, for single-stranded and base-paired columns, respectively. In addition, it uses an SCFG to compute the prior probability of a structure, and thereby the joint probability. Recently, the concepts of Pfold were extended to a maximum expected accuracy framework, PETfold, to simultaneously optimize phylogenetic and energetic information.

Under ideal conditions, i.e., well-conserved structure, many compensatory mutations, and error-free alignments, all these algorithms produce near-perfect predictions. For realistic datasets, the challenges lie in dealing with (small) structural variations between the sequences, while being not too sensitive to alignment errors, and dealing gracefully with the lack of covariation.


Simultaneously Folding and Aligning RNA Sequences

Consensus structure prediction exploits the co-variation signal in an alignment, and this signal should increase as sequences become more diverged. A potential problem in applying sequence-based alignments for RNA structure prediction is, however, that with lower sequence similarity, alignments become more inaccurate, eventually leading to a breakdown of structure prediction. Empirically, this limit has been found to lie at about 60% pairwise sequence identity, both for RNAalifoldZ and in a study by Gardner et al., who showed for tRNAs that around this similarity sequence-based alignment methods drastically lose the ability to reproduce the alignment, whereas structure-based methods are still providing fairly good results. A toy example in illustrates how sequence similarity can be insufficient for comparing structured RNA sequences.

In 1985, Sankoff published the first method for simultaneously folding and aligning sequences of length, a method that has time and memory complexities of and, respectively. This basically makes the algorithm intractable for more than two sequences as well as for long sequences. Intuitively, for two sequences all folds in the one sequence are to be compared with all folds in the other, leading to twice as high an exponent, e.g., instead of. This intractable high complexity has prompted several creative attempts at simplified versions of the Sankoff algorithm, as well as completely different types of approaches, e.g.,. Complementary to folding alignments, approaches folding the individual sequences and aligning the structures have been proposed, e.g.,.

Some of the first implementations for RNA structure alignments are based on SCFGs, and avoid the high cost of the Sankoff algorithm by using an iterative approach that alternates between aligning sequences to a covariance model and deducing a refined covariance model from the alignment.

The first simplified implementation of the Sankoff algorithm was the first version of FOLDALIGN, which was restricted to stem-loop structures only. Later, more complete versions were published and the first full-scale implementation for two sequences was dynalign,. A nice SCFG framework was also introduced in stemloc and later consan methods –. Later, PMcomp and LocARNA introduced the use of pre-computed base pair probability matrices to reduce computational cost (PMcomp) and memory (LocARNA). Common for these methods is that when structurally aligning two sequences, the recursion involves a four dimensional dynamical programming matrix. Essentially, Equation 1 can be extended to a where the sub-sequences and are simultaneously folded and aligned. The scoring scheme (energy model) thus has to be able to score (mis)matches between unpaired nucleotides as well as between base pairs. For the latter, one often uses the so-called ribosum matrices, derived from substitution frequencies in ribosomal RNAs, but also pair probabilities or even the energies of base pair stacking.

Recently, basic conceptual improvements to the Sankoff-style approach as introduced in FOLDALIGN have been implemented. The first improvement was introduction of sparsification, in which not all computations of what correspond to the index in the Equation 1 need to be carried out, as a number of configurations are the same, but obtained in different ways from composition of various sub-structures. The other improvement was a heuristic approach that basically prunes away cells in the dynamical programming matrix that never exceed a length-dependent threshold. This could be accomplished by filling out the dynamical programming matrix “ahead of time” (see for details).

Additional methods (not explicitly employed for ncRNA gene finding) have been published since and we refer to for further details.

Whereas most methods perform global alignments, a few do local structural alignments. These include FOLDALIGN and LocaRNA, which conduct pairwise local structural alignments, as well as CMfinder.


RNA Structure-Based ncRNA In Silico Screens

Here, we describe the basic principles applied for the search of structured RNAs in genomic sequence and we refer to for a detailed overview and discussion of the outcome. There are two main directions that have been applied for the de novo search for RNA structure, which is, as indicated above, a trade off between computational resources and the ability to explore the size of the search space. The two directions are, one that employs sequence-based alignments and one that also exploits synteny/orthology, but allows for structural (re-)alignment of the sequences. This is also sketched in.


Screens on Sequence-Based Alignments

These screens are typically carried out by using a sliding window, that is, a pre-defined window of some size is moved along a set of multiple aligned genomes (typically MAF [Multiple Alignment Format] blocks from the UCSC browser). The alignment is based on sequence similarity and the window slides a number of nucleotides (e.g., half or quarter of the window size) in each step. In each window a consensus structure prediction is performed. By the end of the screen, various types of post processing are carried out, such as ranking the findings, estimating a false positive rate, determining strand specificity, and finding overlapping regions.

A potential drawback of the procedure is that results depend not only on the quality of the input alignments, but also on the windowing procedure. Windows should be large enough to fully cover ncRNAs (or at least a complete substructure), but should not be much larger than the smallest ncRNAs one wants to detect. A window size of, e.g., 120 nt, as has been used in RNAz screens (see below), is large enough to ensure that almost all miRNAs precursors will be detected. However, for maximum sensitivity, it can make sense to repeat screens using different window sizes.

An early reasonably successful attempt to predict structured RNAs from sequence alignments was qrna, which employed three different models of sequence evolution: a pair of HMMs describes the null model of sequences evolving without position dependent constraints, a second HMM that produces pairs of codons and models the evolution of protein coding sequences, and finally a pair of SCFGs is responsible for determining the evolution of sequence pairs with a common secondary structure. qrna computes the likelihood of the input alignment for each model, and identifies the model that yields the highest likelihood for the input alignment. qrna was successfully used to predict ncRNAs candidates in E. coli and S. cerevisiae, some of which were verified experimentally. A limitation of qrna is that it only works on pairwise alignments. With the more recent method, Evofold tries to extend the qrna approach of model comparison to multiple alignments. It adopts the pfold approach of modelling the joint probability of consensus structure and alignment by combining a phylogenetic model (substitution process along the branches of a tree) with a simple SCFG to compute the a priori probability of a structure.

In contrast to the SCFG-based approaches, the AlifoldZ and RNAz programs are based on energy-directed folding. In it was shown that (in contrast to single-sequence folding) the joint folding energy of real ncRNAs can be distinguished from the folding energies of randomized alignments. A natural measure to assess whether an RNA is unusually stable is to compute a z-score over folding energies where and are the mean and standard deviation of randomized sequences obtained by shuffling. The idea in AlifoldZ is simply to compute the z-score using the energies of consensus structures as returned by RNAalifold. This is straightforward except that it requires a method to randomize alignments. Simply shuffling columns would result in alignments with unusual gap and conservation patterns (e.g., many short gaps instead of a few longer gaps). AlifoldZ therefore uses a conservative shuffling where only columns that display the same gap pattern and similar conservation can be swapped.

The shuffling procedure, however, results in a somewhat slow procedure. RNAz therefore aims to avoid shuffling altogether. It uses energy z-scores for single sequences only and combines it with a separate measure of structure conservation. Importantly, the z-scores for single sequences can be estimated, as it turns out that the mean energy and standard deviation are simply functions of the sequence length and composition. RNAz therefore uses a support vector machine (SVM) (for a tutorial, see e.g.) to train regression models for and, which allows computation of z-scores with only a single call to the folding algorithm. The latest version of RNAz improves detection accuracy by using a regression model based on di-nucleotide content rather than nucleotide frequencies. To quantify structural conservation, RNAz uses a structure conservation index (SCI), defined as the ratio of the energy returned from consensus structure prediction divided by the average folding energy of the individual sequences, see. Finally, a SVM takes the z-score and SCI as input and classifies the alignment (of the given window) as containing a significant RNA structure or not.

The Sankoff-based method Dynalign was applied in a screening approach using a fixed size window, but allowing for realignment (by Dynalign) and training of an SVM on such alignments. For low sequence similarity candidates (with identity less than 50%), it (not surprisingly) performs better than RNAz. Subsequently, Dynalign has been optimized to lower its computational resources by employing an HMM for pre-processing the input and applying the HHM-based alignment as a constraint.


Local Searches

A local search for RNA structure deviates from that of sequence-based alignments in two main ways. Firstly, even though the alignment is used to indicate orthology or synteny, the alignment itself is ignored and the combined sequence structure approach is applied to the sequences. Secondly, the approach is not bound by any window, so does not suffer from limitations such as adding too much flanking region and/or partial overlap to a real RNA structure, both of which can result in erroneous detection of RNA structures. In contrast, the local search approaches do not suffer from these limitations, but come with a set of their own to lower the computational overhead and make the methods practical. These limitations include a limited motif size, typically nt, though this might change in the future.

In the Sankoff-based approach FOLDALIGN, constraints other than those mentioned above made genome-wide screens possible. Two corresponding genomic sequences of lengths and were screened, but since the motif size was limited to size, it was only necessary to store a 4D matrix constrained by (typically 200 nt) rather than the full (large) sequence lengths. Essentially, the dynamical programming matrix slides along the two genomes and for each position throws away elements corresponding to positions no longer included by the motif range while adding new ones. To screen (genomic) sequences, one of the sequences is chopped into pieces of size, where a default value is and where two consecutive pieces overlap nucleotides. Without employing pruning, this doubles the running speed as compared to storing the entire 4D programming matrix in memory. This approach was applied to screen corresponding but unaligned sequences between human and mouse.

While the current local alignment version of FOLDALIGN is limited to two sequences, it is also of interest to conduct a screen involving multiple sequences. The program CMfinder searches a set of unaligned sequences using seed structures found from energy folding. It aims exactly to do what is outlined in. The principle is summarized in and holds significant overlap to the early SCFGs. The candidates are used to construct an initial alignment from which a covariance model is constructed and used to make further searches. Additional findings are incorporated into the model and a new search is made until convergence is reached. As in the work of Eddy and Durbin, an expectation maximization (EM) algorithm was employed to find the optimal local structure. CMfinder was also recently applied to screen for ncRNAs in prokaryotes, and has been a main tool in riboswitch discovery, e.g.,. An additional strength is that if some of the sequences do not contain the RNA structure, they will simply be ignored, whereas the sequence alignment–based methods discussed above try to predict an RNA structure in all sequences.

An overview of the methods applied in in silico screens along with a short description of what they have been applied on can be found in.


False Discovery Rates

A main issue that comes with all the methods for de novo RNA structure searches is they have high false positive rates, around 50%. Furthermore, a comparison of the ENCODE regions that comprise one percent of the human genome show little overlap between RNAz, Evofold, and CMfinder. Even though the methods work in quite different ways, they all aim to fulfill the same task. This clearly shows that the area still needs to mature. A future direction is to improve the background model for the screens, e.g., by using di-nucleotide shuffling. A major challenge lies in providing good background models for shuffling multiple alignments. Recent advances in that area include methods like SISSIz and Multiperm.

The Multiperm program shuffles the multiple alignments, while preserving gap and local patterns of conservation, while also preserving the approximate di-nucleotide frequencies, which is a main concern. The SISSIz program simulates (using a phylogenetic substitution model) a multiple alignment with a given dinucleotide content and does preserve, on average, local conservation patterns and gap structure. To our knowledge, the two programs have not been systematically benchmarked, but in our experience they are of approximately the same quality (unpublished observations).


Performance Evaluation

Evaluating the performance of both RNA structure prediction and RNA gene finding is a subtle task. In both cases, a comparison to known (blinded to the experiment) data is required. RNA structure prediction is typically evaluated by comparison to curated structure data, e.g.,. From the number ofcorrectly predicted base pairs one computes accuracy measures, such as the positive predictive value (PPV) and specificity, or Matthews correlation coefficient. The latter is for RNA structure prediction well approximated by the geometric mean of the sensitivity (SEN) and PPV. Note that the SCI measure is not suitable for performance evaluation, since it does not compare predictions to a blind dataset. SCI is a measure of divergence of the structures in the multiple alignment, and a high SCI does not necessarily imply correct performance, but merely states that the consensus structure is in good agreement with the structure of the individual sequences. Still, the entire structure prediction can be wrong.

For RNA gene finding, the genomic locations of predicted structures are compared to the locations of known RNAs (in blind dataset). Overlap of prediction and known gene (by some threshold) are used to state that a known RNA gene has been correctly predicted, see e.g.,. A major problem, however, is to measure the false positives, because a prediction in a given genomic location might indicate a so far unannotated ncRNA gene. What can be measured, however, is how many of the known ncRNA genes are missed in some benchmark dataset.


Discussion

Approaches for de novo and in silico searching for structured RNAs is a highly difficult task that exceeds “regular” finding of protein coding genes in complexity due to the lack of regular patterns (such as codon bias). Algorithms have to take long-range interactions (secondary structure) into account, and typically work in a comparative manner requiring several homologous sequences.

The current algorithmic approaches using sequence-based alignments are much faster than using structural alignments; however, structural alignments can take regions with weak sequence conservation into account more accurately. An observation from the CMfinder screen on the ENCODE regions was that the CMfinder alignment was similar to the original alignment for MAF blocks with high sequence similarity, but showed significant rearrangement for low similarity blocks.

A major challenge is the quality of currently available genomic MAF alignments. Especially if the number of species is large, alignment blocks are quite short such that an ncRNA may be broken up into multiple blocks. In this case one can try to extend or merge MAF blocks without losing too many species. Often, MAF blocks appear to be broken by gaps in one organism (unpublished observations).

When screening for RNA structures in genomic sequence, the respective methods optimizes a scoring function and within that function seeks an optimal structure. However, the structure predicted might well be suboptimal for a number of reasons. These include inaccuracies of the energy model, kinetic folding effects, as well as neglecting tertiary structure. Adding covariance information can dramatically improve the quality of structure prediction, but is dependent on the quality of the alignment. This is an issue in particular due to the limited quality of genome-wide alignments.

As the number of species grows, alignment blocks tend to become smaller. This imposes length constraints on the length of ncRNAs that can be detected, and may in the future require more sophisticated pre-processing of input alignments. In addition, the different search strategies have their own constraints on the length of their motifs (due to fixed window size, computational complexity, etc.) and thus have the same issues as for limited size MAF blocks. Currently, genomic screens typically result in a number of overlapping predictions, and the entire region is then merged into a candidate region for which there sometimes is not an entire structure prediction, e.g.,. In fact, an open challenge is to make a good strand discriminator, as a prediction on one strand can imply an almost equally good prediction on the other strand. Some work has been initiated in this area.

Compensating base pairs are clearly important, even though systematic analyses to study the impact have not been carried out. As discussed in, the overlap between RNAz, EVOfold, and CMfinder on the ENCODE regions was poor, and a main difference was that a substantial amount of CMfinder candidates had more and more of the MAF blocks re-aligned as sequence similarity dropped, suggesting that compensating base changes are important in lesser regions. In a study of known RNAs from Rfam, it was concluded the that MULTIz alignments were relatively accurate, but with room for better alignments in a number of regions. Thus, a factor contributing to the lack of detection of novel RNAs could be the ability to include compensating changes into the alignments.

Suboptimal structures have not yet been taken systematically into account in ncRNA gene finding methods. However, at least in some cases, they might be essential for the detection of functional RNAs. Riboswitches, for example, are known to change conformation, and it is therefore expected that such types of information can add value to a genomic screen in general. To our knowledge, there have not been any systematic studies to compare predicted RNA structures from in silico screens with experimental data.

Simultaneously with the potential for RNA structure in the genome, a number of recent studies have shown the existence of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), which are long transcripts. Presumably, these lncRNAs are largely unstructured. However, recently, one of these lncRNAs was shown to have an enhancer-like function that was coupled to the presence of short RNA structures in the lincRNA. These lncRNAs have been revealed to cover a variety functions, including epigenetic gene silencing, antisense regulation, and possibly chromatin organization, to promote long-range gene activation, to mention just a couple of examples. Over time there have been some attempts to distinguish coding from non-coding sequence on transcript. For a recent approach (post the lncRNA awareness), see.

Whether all lincRNAs contain local structured domains remains an open question. In a functional RNA structure (67 nt) was predicted within a 2.8-kb ncRNA expressed in the brain, and subsequent studies revealed that this ncRNA also has overlap to RNAz predictions. Scenarios like this add to the challenge of arriving at full-length and/or functional transcripts from the RNA structure predictions, and it appears that RNA structure predictions cannot stand alone and will need to be accompanied by other types of data and possibly follow-up experiments to assign functional information.

Recently, exciting experimental developments have opened the arena for high-throughput structure probing on a transcriptome scale,. These methods promise to provide useful data that can complement the computational screens, but are still in their early phase, each with their own challenges. For example, none yet work in vivo. Other sources for probing data are also promising to provide information applicable to a transcriptome-wide scale. Incorporating such data in folding algorithms, including those used for genomic screens, will therefore be highly relevant. Emerging work in that area has recently been initiated.


Visual adaptation and face perception

Michael A. Webster, Donald I. A. MacLeod — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2011. PMC3130378, CC BY 2.0.

The appearance of faces can be strongly affected by the characteristics of faces viewed previously. These perceptual after-effects reflect processes of sensory adaptation that are found throughout the visual system, but which have been considered only relatively recently in the context of higher level perceptual judgements. In this review, we explore the consequences of adaptation for human face perception, and the implications of adaptation for understanding the neural-coding schemes underlying the visual representation of faces. The properties of face after-effects suggest that they, in part, reflect response changes at high and possibly face-specific levels of visual processing. Yet, the form of the after-effects and the norm-based codes that they point to show many parallels with the adaptations and functional organization that are thought to underlie the encoding of perceptual attributes like colour. The nature and basis for human colour vision have been studied extensively, and we draw on ideas and principles that have been developed to account for norms and normalization in colour vision to consider potential similarities and differences in the representation and adaptation of faces.


Visual adaptation and the perception of faces

Stare carefully at the cross in the image in for a minute or so, and then close your eyes. A clear image of a face will appear after a few seconds. (A popular version of this illusion uses an image of Christ, so we have tried it with a devil.) The phantom image is a negative afterimage of the original picture, and arises because each part of the retina adjusts its sensitivity to the local light level in the original picture. Thus, when a uniform field of dim light is transmitted by the closed eyelids, cells that were previously exposed to dark (or light) regions will respond more (or less). Note that the afterimage is also much more recognizable as a face compared with the original, in part because it has the correct brightness polarity (e.g. dark eyes). This polarity-specific difference is one of many examples that have been used to argue that face perception may depend on specialized processes that are distinct from the mechanisms mediating object recognition. However, while the visual coding of faces may depend on face-specific pathways, the principles underlying how these processes are organized and calibrated may be very general. In particular, the principles of sensitivity regulation that give rise to light adaptation in the retina are likely to be manifest at all stages of visual coding, and may be fundamentally important to all perceptual analyses. Thus, just as adapting to different light levels can affect the perception of brightness, adaptation to different faces can affect the appearance of facial attributes, and in both cases these sensitivity changes may shape the nature of visual coding in functionally similar ways.

In this review, we consider the properties and implications of adaptation effects in face perception. Although it may not be obvious, the appearance of faces does depend strongly on the viewing context, and thus the same face can look dramatically different depending on which faces an observer is previously exposed to. These face after-effects offer a window into the processes and dynamics of face perception and have now been studied extensively. Here, we consider what these studies have revealed about human face perception. But before examining this, it is worth emphasizing that it is important to understand how face perception and recognition are affected by perceptual adaptation for a number of reasons. First, faces are arguably the most important social stimuli for humans and the primary means by which we perceive the identity and state of conspecifics. Any process that modulates that perception thus has profound implications for understanding human perception and behaviour, and these consequences are important regardless of the basis of the adaptation. That is, how our judgements of such fundamental attributes as identity, expression, fitness or beauty are affected by the diet of faces we encounter is essential to understanding the psychology of face perception, whether those context effects result from changes in sensitivity or criterion and whether they reflect high-level and face-specific representations or low-level and thus generic response changes in the visual system. Second, a central focus of research in face perception has been to understand how information about faces is encoded by the visual system, and to what extent this code might be specific for faces. Adaptation provides a potential tool for dissecting this neural code and a means to test whether the neural strategies that have been identified at early levels of the visual pathway can also predict the characteristics of high-level vision. To this end, we compare the after-effects for faces and consider their implications for the format of the neural code by which faces are represented, noting similarities and differences between face adaptation and analogous adaptation effects in human colour vision, where the format of the neural representation is relatively well defined. Finally, face after-effects also provide an important context for studying the processes of adaptation itself; whether the plasticity that is so readily demonstrated for simple sensory attributes is again a general feature of visual coding; and how this plasticity is manifest for the kinds of natural and ecologically important stimuli that the visual system is ultimately trying to digest.


Adaptation and visual coding

The perceived size and shape of objects can be strongly biased by adaptation. For example, after viewing a tilted line, a vertical line appears tilted in the opposite direction, while adapting to a vertically oriented ellipse causes a circle to appear elongated along its horizontal axis. Like light or colour adaptation, these are negative after-effects because the neutral test stimulus appears less like the adapting image and thus biased in the complementary direction. And like colour adaptation, these shape or figural after-effects have been widely studied, because they provide clues about how spatial information is encoded by the visual system. In particular, adaptation is one of the primary tools for investigating the ‘channels’ used to represent visual information. At early stages of the visual system, stimuli are encoded by the relative activity in mechanisms that respond to restricted ranges along the stimulus continuum (e.g. tuned for a particular range in orientation, spatial scale or wavelength). If the channels have joint tuning on multiple parameters, then they are selective to restricted regions in stimulus parameter space. In its simplest conception, adaptation reduces the responses in the mechanisms that respond to the adapting stimulus, and thus biases the distribution of responses to the test stimulus, leading to changes in the detectability and appearance of the test image. Studies of how these adaptation effects transfer from one stimulus to another can therefore reveal properties of the channels such as their number and selectivity, and thus how information is organized at the sites in the visual system that are affected by the adaptation.

Increasingly, this approach is being extended to analyse more high-level processing as well as more ecologically relevant tasks in perception, including the perception of faces. Specifically, adaptation is being used to dissect the channels mediating face coding, and to reveal the principles underlying this code. One fundamental issue is how the channels span the space of possible faces. Do they tile the space so that an individual face is represented by a local peak in the distribution of neural responses (an exemplar code similar to how early spatial coding might represent the scale and orientation of local edges)? Do they instead use a relative code to represent how each individual face differs from a prototype (a norm-based code similar to the way hue and saturation might be represented according to how they deviate from white)? Are the channels tuned to the raw physical properties of the image or to the semantic and phenomenally accessible dimensions of a face (e.g. for particular identities or types of individuals)? And do they represent these properties independently or jointly encode the different constellation of characteristics that uniquely define a face (e.g. its age, expression or identity)? Let us see.


Figural after-effects in face perception

Early signs that adaptation could affect face perception included reports that judgements of facial expression were biased by prior exposure to faces with a different expression, and that the aspect ratio of a face appeared altered after seeing face images that were stretched by viewing the faces through cylindrical lenses. Webster & MacLin explored figural after-effects in faces by asking how the appearance of a face changed after adapting to faces that were configurally distorted by locally distending or constricting the image relative to a point on the nose. shows an example of these images formed by different combinations of vertical or horizontal distortions. Exposure to one of the distorted faces (e.g. horizontally constricted) made the original face appear distorted in the opposite way (e.g. horizontally distended). Thus after adapting, the image that appeared most like the original face had to be physically biased towards the adapting distortion in order to compensate for the opposite distortion induced by adaptation. (That is, the negative perceptual after-effect must be cancelled—or nulled—by a positive physical shift towards the adapting image, just as a green after-effect in a previously white light can be cancelled by a physical change towards red.) These after-effects are highly salient in faces and can shift the perceived distortion in the image by 30 per cent or more of the inducing level. They can also strongly bias the set of images that appear normal. For example, after adapting to a distorted image, the range of physical distortions that observers accept as a possible photograph of a face is strongly biased towards the adapting face, again in the direction opposite to the perceptual after-effect. In addition to judging the distortion or normality of the image, the after-effects can also be assessed by judging properties such as the perceived attractiveness of the image and can impact ratings of the personality characteristics of the face. The after-effects have also been assessed with a variety of other measures in addition to nulling. These include recognition thresholds, in which stimulus strength is varied until the individual face can be reliably identified; normality judgements, where the images are classified as depicting a real versus impossibly distorted face; magnitude estimation, where observers use a rating scale to report attributes such as how distorted or attractive a face appears; and contrast detection, in which the after-effects are measured as changes in the luminance contrast required to recognize the face.

Leopold et al. used a model of real facial variations and observed comparable after-effects when observers were adapted to the configurations corresponding to an individual's face. In their experiments, the stimuli could be varied along ‘identity trajectories’ that passed through the multi-dimensional coordinates defining the individual face and the average face. Increasing distances away from the average towards the individual increased their ‘identity strength’ while stimulus variations in the opposite direction corresponded to an antiface with complementary characteristics. Adaptation to the antiface biased the appearance of the average face so that it appeared more like the target face, and consequently lowered the threshold identity strength required for recognizing the target face.

Adaptations to real facial configurations are sometimes referred to as ‘face identity after-effects’ to distinguish them from the ‘face distortion after-effects’, which are measured by arbitrarily distorting the images. However, it is likely that the underlying processes are intimately linked if not the same, for real configural variations are a form of distortion in the average face, and conversely simple geometric distortions appear as plausible images of real faces. (Indeed, suggests that no matter how you distort a normal face, it starts to appear more British.) Moreover, comparable adaptation effects are observed with synthetic faces based on rendering key facial features or face silhouettes. The after-effects also vary somewhat seamlessly between distortions that are within the range of normal variability or are too large to depict a possible human face.

A key implication of the Leopold et al. study was that real faces vary in their configural properties enough to and in ways that can induce different states of adaptation. This has been found not only for individual identity but also for the natural variations defining facial categories such as gender and ethnicity, as well as natural variations within an individual face such as changes in expression. For instance, after adapting to a male face, an androgynous face (formed by morphing between a male and female face) appears more feminine. The adaptation can also influence face perception by changing the appearance of the textural characteristics of the faces rather than their shape. As one example, ageing produces more prominent changes in facial texture than in facial shape, and adaptation to these textural changes can lead to large after-effects in perceived age. Collectively, these results suggest that adaptation is influencing the visual representation of stimulus dimensions that are directly involved in face perception. Perhaps, more importantly, they also suggest that adaptation is probably routinely shaping these representations in normal viewing in ways that are selective for the specific population of faces to which an individual is exposed.


Dynamics of face adaptation

Do the figural after-effects for faces reflect a common and general process of visual adaptation or are they more akin to other forms of neural plasticity such as perceptual learning or priming? One way this question has been addressed is to examine the time course of the adaptation. Adaptation to simple visual features, in part, reflects transient changes in the visual response which shows a lawful pattern of build-up with increasing adapt time and decay when the adapting stimulus is removed. The build-up and duration of face after-effects follow a very similar time course and functional form to conventional spatial contrast adaptation, suggesting that they involve similar mechanisms. However, the dynamics of all visual after-effects are complex and may occur over multiple timescales. Surprisingly, strong face after-effects can be generated following exposures of only a few seconds (a disheartening revelation for those of us who instead spent hours adapting). Extremely brief adapting and test durations have also been found to produce potent after-effects in shape perception and have been used to distinguish global shape after-effects from simpler after-effects produced by features such as local tilt that require longer durations. Similarly, face adaptation may exhibit different properties and potentially different levels of processing at different adapting durations. Like simple after-effects, adaptation to faces can also result in long-term changes, which may be more likely to occur for more familiar faces. Distortions in highly familiar faces can lead to particularly noticeable after-effects. In part, this may be because observers are more sensitive to them. However, there is evidence that familiarity also changes the actual strength of the adaptation and how it generalizes across stimulus dimensions such as changes in viewpoint, and thus the properties of the adaptation may also mirror other dynamics of how the visual representation of faces might change with experience.


Sites of sensitivity change

is an example of an after-effect that arises very early in the visual system—in the response changes of the photoreceptors—but propagates to levels where the pattern of activity is interpreted as a face. This highlights the point that adaptation can occur throughout the visual pathway, and thus high-level processes can inherit the response changes from earlier levels. There is little doubt that adaptation to a face image induces response changes in visual mechanisms that are sensitive to simple features in the image. A central question is whether, in addition to these low-level response changes, there are also aspects of the adaptation that arise at high and possibly face-specific levels of visual processing.


Image versus object

One approach to this question has been to ask whether the adaptation is more closely tied to retinocentric or object-centric representations. Compared with low-level after-effects, adaptation to faces shows substantial transfer across changes in size and location. In fact, these size changes are often included as a control to reduce the contribution of early retinotopic response changes. However, the strongest after-effects persist when the adapt and test faces give rise to the same proximal stimulus (i.e. the same retinal image). The broad but incomplete transfer of the adaptation across spatial transformations is consistent with the larger receptive fields and spatial tolerances characterizing extrastriate areas implicated in face perception like the fusiform face area (FFA). The after-effects also show partial transfer across changes in orientation. In a clever test of this transfer, Watson & Clifford used faces that were distorted along one axis of the face (e.g. vertically). Adapting and test faces were then shown tilted, with an orientation difference of 90° (e.g. adapt tilted 45° clockwise and test tilted 45° counterclockwise). This predicted after-effects that were in different directions depending on whether the response changes are tied to the spatial axis of the adaptation (always 45° clockwise) or to the axis of the object (a vertical distortion within the face regardless of the spatial orientation of the head). The observed after-effects rotated with the object, again implicating a high-level process in the adaptation.


Inversion effects

The effects of orientation on face adaptation have received considerable attention. Compared with other objects, faces are more difficult to recognize when they are upside down, and this is thought to occur because the configural or holistic processing required for sensitive face recognition is lost when the image is inverted. This inversion effect is therefore considered a hallmark of face perception. A number of studies have explored whether the adaptation also shows an inversion effect. Initial tests suggested that it does not. After-effects of comparable strength can occur for upright or inverted faces, or for faces that have the correct or inverted contrast polarity. However, there is little transfer of the after-effect between original and inverted images, and in fact opposite after-effects can be induced simultaneously between them. Notably, these inversion-contingent after-effects cannot entirely reflect processing differences between upright and inverted images, because they also occur for pairs of faces tilted 90° to either side of vertical.

The finding that adaptation still occurs with inverted images does not rule out a face-specific site for the adaptation (for inverted faces do strongly activate the FFA). Moreover, recent studies have pointed to more subtle orientation-dependent asymmetries in the adaptation effects. For example, after-effects for perceived identity may be stronger in upright faces, and adaptation to upright faces may show stronger transfer to upside-down faces or contrast-negated faces than vice versa. Moreover, after-effects from inverted faces (e.g. with varying eye height) may show greater transfer to non-face shapes (e.g. to an inverted ‘T’), suggesting that the after-effects for upright images may be more selective for faces.


Same versus different objects

A further approach to testing the level of processing revealed by the adaptation has involved testing how adaptation transfers across different classes of objects. For example, after-effects for distortion, gender or expression are strongest when the adapt and test images are drawn from the same individual, but both effects also show substantial transfer across different identities. Thus, adaptation can adjust to whatever the abstracted configural properties are that define facial attributes (though this in itself does not require a sensitivity change at the level at which these attributes are explicitly represented).

The extent to which the adaptation to a face is specifically selective for faces, and how it depends on the visual versus conceptual attributes of the stimuli, remains unclear, for the results thus far present a complex picture. Examples of the types of questions aimed at identifying the levels of processing underlying face adaptation including the following. (i) Does the adaptation depend on local features or global configuration? Adapting to isolated features (e.g. curved lines) can induce changes in the perceived expression of a face. However, hybrid faces formed by combining features from opposing expressions do not produce adaptation. Moreover, consistent features but in scrambled configurations, or non-face features shown in consistent configurations, both produce expression after-effects, suggesting that the adaptation was directly to the expression information whether this was carried by the local or global features. (ii) Is the adaptation adjusting to a visual image or an abstract concept? Expression after-effects transfer across different images of the same person, but are not induced by non-facial images of emotion (e.g. an aggressive dog) or emotional words. Adaptation to gender also does not transfer between images of faces or hands, though each category shows an after-effect, and in fact attractiveness after-effects can be induced for either faces or bodies. However, a recent study found that adapting to male or female faceless bodies did induce a gender after-effect measured in faces. Moreover, identity after-effects have also been reported following exposure to an individual's name, or after imagining an individual, and thus could potentially be mediated by visualization. Yet, a recent report found that real and imagined faces induced after-effects of opposite sign. (iii) Does the adaptation depend on physical similarity or perceived similarity? The stimulus variations defining face images can be varied to produce equivalent physical changes that are categorically perceived to belong to either the same or different identities. Behavioural after-effects depend on whether the adapt and test images fall within or between these perceptual categories (while functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) responses to faces have found evidence for coding dependent on both physical similarity or perceived similarity). The importance of perceived similarity is consistent with the finding that varying the low-level properties of the images (e.g. colour or spatial frequency content) leads to stronger contingent after-effects when these variations alter perceived identity. (iv) Does the adaptation require awareness? Tilt or colour-contingent after-effects, or orientation-selective losses in contrast sensitivity, can be induced even when the adapting stimuli are too rapidly modulated in time or space to be perceptually resolved, and hence fail to be consciously detected. After-effects for face identity are instead strongly suppressed by binocular rivalry, pointing to a later site for the adaptation. Notably, the perception of threat-related expressions is less dependent on awareness; yet, adaptation to expressions may also require attention.


Neural correlates

Neural measures of face adaptation have also been used to examine the nature and potential sites of response changes. For example, prior adaptation reduces the magnitude of the N170 component of the event related potential and the corresponding M170 response in magnetoencephalography (MEG) signals associated with an initial stage of detection of a stimulus as a face. The adaptation is category specific but can show strong transfer across different renditions of faces or even from isolated face parts. Adaptation of the MEG response has also been used to implicate a role in expression adaptation of the superior temporal sulcus, an area associated with changeable characteristics of faces.

The blood oxygen level dependent response in fMRI also shows rapid adaptation to a repeated stimulus and has been used in several studies to probe the properties of face adaptation. Notably, the adaptation effects are widespread in the cortex, including regions beyond areas like the FFA that are identified through standard face localizer scans; if these areas exhibit strong selectivity for individual facial characteristics they would not be strongly activated by face versus non-face comparisons. Intriguingly, two recent studies have also reported that individuals with developmental prosopagnosia who thus have impaired face recognition, nevertheless exhibit largely normal face after-effects.

The diversity of these results concerning the nature of face adaptation is not surprising given that face stimuli will engage and potentially adapt many levels of visual processing, and that face perception itself may depend on a number of distinct processes with different characteristics for representing attributes such as identity and expression. However, together they strongly suggest that adaptation to faces depends, in part, on response changes at high and abstract levels of visual coding.


Selectivity of face adaptation for facial attributes

In the preceding section, we reviewed results implying that at least some part of the adaptation to faces taps directly into the visual representation of faces. If one grants this possibility (and even if one does not), then it becomes of considerable interest to ask how adaptations to different facial characteristics interact. Many of the studies addressing this question have asked whether adaptation to one facial attribute (e.g. gender) is contingent on the value of a different attribute (e.g. ethnicity), in order to assess whether different attributes are represented independently (in which case adaptation should transfer) or conjointly (in which case it should not). A number of dimensions exhibit partially selective and thus dissociable after-effects, including gender, age, ethnicity and species. For example, opposing distortion or gender after-effects can be simultaneously induced in Asian versus Caucasian faces by adapting to a sequence of, say, Asian male and Caucasian female faces. However, in other cases there is almost complete transfer. An intriguing example is that identity after-effects show little dependence on the expression of the adapting face, even though as noted above differences in identity reduce adaptation to expressions. One possible explanation for this asymmetry is that different expressions may be encoded as variations on the same ‘object’ and thus may behave equivalently in identity adaptation, whereas a change in identity may cause the adapt and test to appear to be drawn from different ‘objects’ and thus lead to less transfer of the adaptation.

Several studies have also examined how face adaptation depends on differences in viewpoint (e.g. frontal versus three-quarter view images). These have found that after-effects show substantial transfer but are nevertheless strongest when the adapt and test images share the same perspective. One implication of this result is that facial identity may be encoded by multiple mechanisms selective for different viewpoints rather than abstracted out so that it is independent of the observer's perspective. Consistent with this, adapting to a face seen from a particular angle biases the perceived viewing angle of faces seen subsequently. Like the after-effects for facial configuration, these viewpoint after-effects may also involve adaptation at high levels of visual coding. For example, the after-effects for different head orientations can be strongly biased by the physically minor but visually salient changes in the direction of gaze.

These results show that many of the dimensions along which faces appear to vary are not represented completely independently—at least at the levels affected by the adaptation. This is perhaps surprising given that we can usually readily judge one attribute (e.g. age or gender) regardless of others. However, there are clear parallels to these effects in the visual coding of simpler properties like colour and form. For example, adaptation to colour can be strongly selective for form, and thus reflects mechanisms that are selective for conjunctions of these features, even though these attributes behave as separable dimensions that can be accessed independently in tasks such as visual search. A further important parallel is that this joint selectivity means that how adaptation modifies visual coding for one dimension can depend on the levels of other dimensions. This could suggest that norms may be established independently for different face categories, e.g. for male or female faces and different ethnicities, so that an Asian male/Caucasian female adapting sequence would shift the Asian norm male-ward and the Caucasian norm female-ward. We consider models for these effects further below, but here note that while separate norms may exist as prototypes of different types of face, the contingent after-effects do not show that those individual category norms have a role to play in the process of adaptation. Instead, these effects can be accommodated by mechanisms that all represent trajectories from a common prototype or general face norm.


Adaptation as renormalization

One of the most important principles to emerge from studies of face adaptation is that the after-effects are consistent with a norm-based code, in which individual faces are represented by how they deviate from an average or prototype face. That is, by this account the average face is special, because all other faces are judged relative to it. Norm-based accounts are central to many models of face space. Among the most compelling evidence for prototype-referenced coding are facial caricatures, which are created by exaggerating the specific ways that an individual face differs from the average. This suggests that faces might be represented by their polar coordinates in a multi-dimensional space where the angle defines their individual character and the vector length the strength of that individual character. Consistent with this account, single cell and fMRI responses of face-selective neurons suggest that the cells are tuned to encode the distinctiveness of individual faces from the average face. This coding scheme contrasts with exemplar or central tendency models where each face is instead encoded by matching to a set of candidates—for example, according to the most active channel, among a highly selective set, for a given face. In this case, there might be multiple channels spanning a given face dimension, with multiple cross points, and thus there may be no level or neutral point that is special. Multiple-channel codes of this type are found for some low-level stimulus dimensions such as spatial frequency and may also underlie some aspects of face perception including the direction of gaze. However, many perceptual dimensions appear to be represented relative to a norm, which itself appears neutral and which thus reflects a qualitatively unique state. For example, many simple shape attributes like aspect ratio or orientation show evidence for a special norm (e.g. circular or vertical), and the phenomenology of colours is organized analogously to the norm-based account of face space, by describing the direction (hue) and degree (saturation) that the colour differs from a norm (grey). Thus, in vision norms may be the norm.

Three properties of face after-effects have been used to implicate the presence of a special norm. All are based on the evidence that adapting to a new face renormalizes the face space so that the perceptually neutral norm, which by analogy with colour we may regard as a ‘neutral point’ in face space, is shifted towards the adapting face.

The first piece of supporting evidence is the asymmetry of the after-effects for neutral versus non-neutral faces. Webster & MacLin found that adaptation to distorted faces strongly biased the appearance of a neutral (undistorted) face. Conversely, adapting to the neutral face did not alter the appearance of a distorted face. This is consistent with renormalization because the neutral face simply reinforces the current norm or neutral point in face space and hence changes nothing, whereas the distorted adapting face induces a shift in the neutral point so that the previously neutral faces are no longer seen as such. Analogously, in colour vision, the spectral sensitivity is changed by introducing a long- or short-wavelength adapting light, but not by a light for which the relevant cone inputs are in the typical balanced state.

The second property is that adaptation changes the appearance of the adapting face itself so that it looks less distorted or distinctive, and produces appearance shifts in the same direction for faces that are either more or less distinctive than the adaptor. (For example, adapting to a distended face causes all faces including the adapting face to appear narrower.) This suggests that the adaptation is to a first approximation simply recentring the perceptual space nearer to the current adapting stimulus (e.g. so that the physically distended adapting face now appears more neutral, or closer to the norm). Importantly, as discussed below, both of these properties contrast with the predictions of a template or exemplar-based model, where the visual system instead becomes less sensitive to the adapting face and to its near-neighbours in face space. In this case, no shift is predicted in the appearance of the adapting face, and all other faces are predicted to appear less like the adapting face. Thus in this case, after adapting to a moderately distorted face, an extremely distorted face should appear even more distorted. Models of face adaptation that appeal only to low-level desensitization to the local contrast make the same false prediction, for similar reasons.

A third test for a norm in the adaptation process has involved comparing the after-effects for face dimensions that vary through the neutral point (face and antiface pairs) or along other directions in the space. At the neutral point on this distortion continuum, the character perceptually attributed to the face switches from anti-face to face. As noted above, adapting to an antiface shifts this transition point so that the quality of the original face now appears in faces that would ordinarily have been perceived as belonging to the anti-face class. But when the same procedure is applied using a continuum of adapt and test distortions that does not pass near the norm, the after-effects appear substantially weaker. This again suggests that adaptation is specifically renormalizing the perception relative to a special neutral point. However, note that this does not mean that the adaptation interactions are specific to a particular face and its antiface. The average global shifts implied by simple renormalization instead predict that adapting to any face will shift the appearance of all faces along the identity axis in the direction that separates the norm from the adapting face. Faces that are separated from the norm in different directions may undergo the same shift (e.g. after-effects to horizontal distortions are roughly the same regardless of the vertical distortions in the faces); but if the after-effect is measured as the change in response along the adapt–test axis, then it will vary as the cosine of the angle formed by the identity axis and adapt–test axis. Thus in the limit, no after-effect would be measured if the adapt to test axis was perpendicular to the identity axis. (By analogy, adapting to red will cause all colours to appear greener, but this after-effect would be less evident if the adapt and test colours are varied only along a red–blue axis.) A similar issue—that the axis of the after-effect may differ from the axis used to measure it—applies to interpreting measurements of the selectivity of the adaptation for different face attributes. It thus remains an important and unresolved question to ask in what ways adaptation to a given vector in face space alters the appearance of other directions, and the extent to which any changes reflect a global or more localized renormalization of the space.


Norms and the mechanisms of face coding

Models of visual coding typically assume that perceptual norms reflect a norm or neutral point in the underlying neural code. That is, the norm looks special because the neural response is special. How could this norm be manifest in visual coding?


Norms along one dimension

shows four different examples of how stimuli along a single dimension might be represented by a set of channels. As illustrated, the dimension might correspond to wavelength or hue (e.g. green to red), or to a facial characteristic (e.g. male to female). The response normalization suggested by adaptation has been explained by a model in which facial dimensions are encoded by a pair of mechanisms tuned to opposite poles of the dimension (a). Similar ‘two-channel’ models have been used to account for opposing after-effects for orientation or shape. In this case, the dimension is represented by the relative responses across the two channels, while the norm occurs at the unique point where the two responses are balanced. Adaptation is assumed to reduce each channel's response roughly in proportion to the channel's sensitivity to the adapting stimulus, and thus shifts the norm—and the appearance of all other faces—towards the adapting stimulus. This model is similar to colour vision at the level of the photoreceptors—where spectra are represented by the responses in a small number (three) of broadly tuned channels. At this level, the norm for colour vision can be thought to correspond to equal levels of excitation across the three cone classes. This coding scheme can be contrasted with a multiple channel model in which the dimension is instead encoded by the distribution of responses across many channels that are each tuned to a narrow range of stimuli (b). In this case, adaptation depresses responses most in the channels tuned to the adapting level. This would not alter the perceived level of the adapting face (as the mode of the distribution does not change) while all other faces will appear shifted away from the adapting level. As noted, this repulsion is inconsistent with the observed characteristics of face adaptation.

However, there are alternative models that could also generate the same pattern of normalization. In the two cases above, we considered that the stimulus was narrowband in relation to the stimulus continuum of interest, while the channels were broad or narrow. d illustrates the case where the channels are narrow but the stimulus is broad. Here, variations in the stimulus may correspond to changes in the slope rather than the peak of the activation profile across the channels, and a unique norm again occurs when the responses are equal across the bank of channels. Adapting to a biased slope will once more reduce responses most in the channels that are most stimulated, rebalancing the responses and thus shifting the norm in ways that will be functionally similar to the effects of narrowband stimuli in the two-channel model. Broadband stimuli may be more typical of natural stimuli. For example, most colours we see reflect subtle biases throughout the visible spectrum rather than a single wavelength, and the norm of white typically corresponds to a flat or equal energy spectrum. A similar example is the perception of image blur. Multiple channel models were developed, in part, to account for spatial frequency adaptation, which suggested that the visual system has multiple mechanisms tuned to different spatial scales. Adapting to a single frequency produces repulsive after-effects and there is no ‘neutral’ frequency that is special—characteristics of the model in b. However, natural images contain a broad frequency spectrum, and for these there is a unique balance to the spectrum that appears perceptually of normal sharpness as if properly focused (though this is not always tied to a single simple property of the amplitude spectrum like its global slope). Biasing the slope of the spectrum by blurring or sharpening the image disrupts this balance, and leads to a renormalization of perceptual focus. Thus, whether or not there is a unique norm and how that norm is biased by adaptation depend on the properties of both the channels (narrow or broad) and the stimulus (narrow or broad). As a result, it remains possible that there are dimensions of facial variation for which the underlying channels might instead appear narrowly tuned, but for which the ‘spectrum’ defining the individual face is broad.

c shows at lower left yet another way that norms might be represented, this time in terms of what MacLeod & von der Twer call a ‘split range’ code, where the input continuum is divided at a physiological null point (the face norm), with separate rectifying neurons responding to inputs on opposite sides of that null point. This channel could be formed by taking the difference of the two individual sensitivity regulated responses in a, followed by rectification, or the portrayed behaviour could be approximated if mutual inhibition between the opposite signals drives the response of both towards zero near the null point. This winner-take-all organization represents the norm explicitly as a null or weak response within the channel, rather than implicitly by the balance of responses across channels. This opponent organization is a hallmark of colour coding, and may be a functional requirement for any perceptual domain defined by norms. It also offers a substantial gain in efficiency over the single-sigmoid encoding at upper left, as each channel can devote its full response range to only half the stimulus range, resulting in a square root of two improvement in signal to noise over two independently noisy channels that both span the entire range. We discuss the functional consequences of these encoding schemes in §9.

Face adaptation is often suggested to imply some form of an opponent code, but the effects thus far have not revealed an explicit opponent mechanism of the kind found for colour. In particular, it should be noted that negative after-effects do not require an opponent mechanism, and thus are not evidence for one. For example, a common mistake in the discussions of colour vision is to attribute complementary colour afterimages to opponent processing. The sensitivity changes underlying simple chromatic adaptation are instead largely receptoral—at the non-opponent stage of colour coding, and as Helmholtz understood, the roughly complementary colour of negative afterimages is easily explained on that basis. The opposite after-effect that is induced results primarily from the rebalancing of responses across receptors that are adapting independently, and while the afterimage may appear phenomenally opponent, this does not necessitate an actual opponent mechanism (in the same way that the negative after-effect in does not require an opponent mechanism for faces with positive and negative contrast). Psychophysical evidence for opponency instead required demonstrating that the signals from different cone types interact antagonistically to affect sensitivity. Comparable parallels to this ‘second-site’ adaptation in face perception remain largely unexplored. One form of adaptation that directly demonstrates opponency is contrast adaptation. Viewing a light that alternates between red and green or bright and dark reduces the perceived contrast of test lights, without changing the appearance of the mean (zero contrast). Opponency is demonstrated by the fact that the changes in sensitivity can be selective for colour or luminance contrast, whereas a single receptor would be modulated by both types of variation. Tests of ‘contrast’ adaptation for faces—by exposing observers to a distribution of faces that vary around the average face—have found only weak hints of changes. (Specifically, after adapting to faces that vary from markedly expanded to markedly contracted there is little if any reduction in the perceived extent of the distortions.) However, contingent after-effects, of the kind we discuss next, are consistent with a form of contrast adaptation in face space.


Norms along two or more dimensions

The models we considered so far are for encoding a single dimension, but can be extended to represent multiple dimensions. a illustrates a representation of faces in terms of two dimensions—gender and ethnicity. We have overlaid this face space onto colour space to again emphasize the close parallels between this representation and models of colour coding. Again in colour vision, hue (identity) corresponds to the vector direction while saturation (identity strength) corresponds to the vector length relative to grey (the norm). Similarly, antifaces are analogous to complementary colours while ‘caricatured’ colours are hues that are over-saturated.

Only two axes are required to represent all the stimulus levels in the plane. However, suppose the two dimensions are instead spanned by multiple mechanisms, each activated by a different weighted combination of signals along the axes and therefore responding preferentially to stimuli that deviate from the norm in a particular direction in the plane (b). Now an individual hue or identity trajectory might be represented by the most responsive mechanism of this set. (Analogously, orientation is represented by many neural channels each tuned to a different preferred orientation.) Notably, this multiple-channel model behaves like a hybrid between a norm-based code (for saturation or identity strength) and an exemplar code (for hue or identity trajectory). In particular, with a uniform distribution of preferred directions, no direction in the plane is special, and each direction might be represented by the centroid of the distribution of activity across the channels.

How could this model be tested with adaptation? Webster & Mollon examined changes in colour appearance after adapting to fields that varied along different axes and thus between complementary pairs of colours. If these stimuli were represented in terms of the independent signals along the two principal axes, then adaptation should always lead to independent response changes along either axis. This could reduce responses along each axis but should always lead to a selective compression of colour space along one of the primary axes (whichever is adapted more) or to a non-selective loss (if axes are adapted equally; a). Instead, they found that the adaptation was always selective for the adapting axis, an after-effect consistent with multiple selective channels each tuned to a different direction in the plane (b). The selectivity was revealed both in a greater loss of perceived contrast along the adapting axis, and in biases in apparent hue away from the adapting axis. For example, after adapting to the blue–yellow axis (along the negative diagonal), blues and yellows appeared less saturated, and all other hues appeared biased or rotated away from the adapting axis. No shifts were observed in the hue of the adapting axis. One interpretation of these results is that while simple chromatic adaptation (to a single colour) produces an adaptive shift in colour space, chromatic contrast adaptation (to a single colour axis) renormalizes the contrast selectively along the adapting axis and others near it. On this view, colour contrast adaptation and simple chromatic adaptation have quite different mechanisms and different perceptual consequences. Simple chromatic adaptation induces a relatively uniform shift in colour space, while colour contrast adaptation gives rise to a perceptual repulsion from the adapting hue axis.

Analogous tests could be applied to face space, and in fact have been. Instead of adapting to an alternation of complementary colours, the observer adapts to opposed pairings of facial characteristics, in a sequence balanced around the norm along a diagonal axis (e.g. Asian female face versus Caucasian male face). Contingent after-effects typically result (e.g. a male-ward shift in the perception of Asian faces, together with a female shift for Caucasian ones). This shows that the two dimensions (gender and ethnicity) are not represented independently, and that the after-effect is not just a simple translation of phenomenal face space relative to physical face space. One way to amend that scheme is to suppose that adaptation induces not only the previously discussed perceptual shift towards the general face norm (which will ideally cancel out under adaptation to symmetrically paired faces), but in addition, a perceptual repulsion from the adapting face axis, analogous to the hue repulsion of Webster & Mollon. For test stimuli on opposite sides of the origin, the repulsion shifts are opposite in direction. This view can explain the contingent after-effects without abandoning the assumption that adaptation always involves a shift relative to the general face norm; whatever more specific norms might be postulated, they need have no role in face adaptation. As Webster & Mollon noted, the hue shifts following adaptation to different axes may be a form of ‘tilt after-effect’ in colour space. Similarly, the contingent after-effects that have been observed for different facial dimensions may be a tilt after-effect within face space.

An alternative to this account of contingent adaptation is that separable pools of mechanisms encode how faces within different categories differ from each category-specific prototype (so that face space is actually a collection of many category-specific spaces that each respond and adapt relative to their local norm). This leads to qualitatively similar predictions for adaptation to conjunctions (e.g. to a female Asian face), but it is less clear how such models can accommodate the lack of an after-effect induced by the global norm (as that face is distinctive relative to each local norm and thus should induce a change in the local norms). A further consideration is that many of the contingent effects can be explained by assuming that adaptation does not produce a uniform shift in face space but rather a shift that decreases with increasing distance between the adapt and test stimuli. By that account, a female Asian face will produce a larger gender after-effect in Asian than in Caucasian faces simply because the Asian faces are more similar to each other. Finally, the presence of a contingent after-effect does not require that the mechanisms are intrinsically tuned to the dimensions defining the faces, as this tuning could potentially arise on the fly if the underlying dimensions are not adapting independently.


Contrast in face space

The parallels we have drawn between face coding and colour coding associate facial identity trajectories with hue, and identity strength with saturation or contrast. However, unlike colour, the ‘contrast’ of a face stimulus can be varied in two ways: as the magnitude of the facial dimension (e.g. how female or male the face appears) or as the physical contrast of the image (e.g. how faded or distinct the image is). Both are potentially relevant for understanding the adaptation effects because both can modulate the neural response, and moreover both may be important for encoding some facial dimensions including gender. Higher visual areas that encode objects and faces are less affected by variations in luminance contrast than cells in primary visual cortex, suggesting that identity strength is functionally the more important dimension of contrast. Conversely, an individual's face does not normally vary in its identity strength, raising the puzzle of why face identity is not encoded more discretely. One possibility is that categorical coding would greatly reduce the number of distinct identities that could be represented by the distribution of responses across the coding dimensions. A second puzzle is why, as we noted above, there is not a clear effect of adaptation to variations in identity strength comparable to the losses in perceived contrast that result from variations in colour saturation.

How the luminance contrast of a face affects, and is affected by, adaptation remains to be established. High-level shape after-effects show strong transfer across luminance contrast, consistent with the adaptation in higher visual areas. Yet, the limited results for face adaptation suggest that the distortion after-effect is much stronger for high contrast images. Recent work has also shown that adaptation to faces selectively alters the contrast threshold required to recognize the face, suggesting that luminance contrast sensitivity may provide an additional metric for probing face after-effects. At short durations, the adapting face actually facilitates luminance contrast detection of the same face and thus sensitivity losses are stronger for test faces that differ from the adapt face, suggesting that these effects may reflect a combination of both adaptation and priming.


The relationship between adaptation and norms in visual coding

As we noted at the outset of this section, this discussion hinges on the assumption that norms appear neutral because they lead to a neutral response in the actual neural code. An alternative is that norms are instead the learned characteristics of our environment and thus might be related to neural responses in arbitrary ways. For example, there are large individual differences in the stimulus that observers perceive as achromatic (or, presumably, as an average face). This could be because observers are each normalized in a different way (perhaps because they are adapted to different colour environments), but could also be because they adopt different criteria for labelling a stimulus as white. In fact this distinction is central to the debate over cultural versus biological determinants of norms for colour attributes like basic colour terms or for facial attributes like attractiveness. Adaptation provides a means to test these alternatives. If the norm corresponds to a balanced response across the channels, then adaptation to the norm should not alter the response, or in other words should not induce an after-effect. That is, the face stimulus that looks neutral should be the stimulus that does not change the state of adaptation, just as the spectral light that appears achromatic also leaves spectral sensitivity unaffected. Two observers with different norms should thus each show no after-effect when adapted to their own norm, but a bias when adapted to the neutral stimulus chosen by the other. Conversely, if the observers differ in their criteria but not the visual code, then the neutral adapting stimulus will be the same for both, and need not correspond to the subjective neutral point for either. Finally, if individual differences in subjective norms result from differences in how neural responses are normalized, then adapting all observers to a common stimulus should reduce the inter-observer variation in subjective norms. Applications of these tests to both colour and faces suggest that individual differences in norms are tied to individual differences in sensitivity, and thus that the stimuli that appear neutral are in fact tied to a neutral response state at the level(s) of the visual system affected by the adaptation. Moreover, exposing individuals to a common grey, or to an average face, results in much greater agreement in their chosen norm. Thus, the perception of a special norm for colour or faces may have an actual neural basis that is intimately linked to the observer's state of adaptation.


Visual coding, adaptation and natural image statistics

Another approach to understanding the properties of neural coding is to ask how information about the stimulus is adapted—over even evolutionary timescales—to be represented optimally. This theoretical approach has led to important insights into early visual coding and may similarly reveal the principles involved in high-level representations. An example of how these analyses have been applied to the specific case of face processing can be found in Bartlett. Here, we consider how optimal coding schemes derived from the analyses of colour vision can be used to predict how faces might be processed.


How is neural coding shaped by the statistics of the environment: colour as a test case

To be useful, neural representations should distinguish well among the kinds of stimuli that are usually encountered. When natural stimuli are represented by stimulus coordinates such as a distortion parameter for faces in a face space, or redness in a colour space, an efficient neural code requires a good match between the limited stimulus range over which the neural responding is strongly graded on the one hand, and the distribution of natural stimuli on the other. It is inefficient to waste discriminative ability on extremes of the stimulus continuum that are seldom encountered; but it is also less than optimal to neglect unusual cases totally, by devoting all discriminative capacity to just the most typical stimuli (near-whites, or nearly average faces). These extreme design choices imply an optimum code intermediate between them: steep gradients of neural response should be in the region where natural stimuli are concentrated.

But how can discriminative capacity be allocated at will to different parts of the stimulus space? Some latitude is generally available, by choosing suitable nonlinear functions for the dependence of neural responses on the stimulus dimensions. If discrimination is limited by random fluctuations or quantization errors introduced at the output of the nonlinear transformation—an important proviso—then discrimination in any region of the stimulus space can be improved by increasing the gradient of the stimulus-response function there. This happens because the uncertainty in the output corresponds to a smaller difference at the input: the equivalent random variation in the input will be inversely proportional to the gradient of the stimulus-response function. But since the limited range of neural responses precludes a steep gradient everywhere, an increased gradient and improved discrimination at one point entails a sacrifice in discriminative ability at another point where the gradient has been reduced.


Advantages of opponency: crispening and range matching

In both colour space and face space, the natural stimulus distribution is centrally peaked. Near-greys are relatively common, and the margins of cone excitation space are only very sparsely populated. In the case of face space, the defining coordinates are not well specified, but most measure on face images are likely to show the generally expected centrally peaked distribution, even in cases where discrete variation, notably in gender, makes the distributions closer to a mixture of Gaussians than to a single one. This means that fine discrimination is less important in the margins of colour space than in the centre, near white, where natural colour stimuli are most densely packed. Much psychophysical evidence on colour discrimination has indeed indicated best discrimination near white (or more precisely, near the stimulus to which the visual system is adapted, see below) with a progressive deterioration as the saturation of the reference stimulus increases. This superiority of discrimination for the naturally abundant near-neutral colours originates from a compressive nonlinearity in the neural code at the colour-opponent level, where it is the differences between cone excitations that are represented. With opponent neurons that respond in a nonlinearly compressed way to the imbalance of photoreceptor inputs, the steep gradients of the neural responses for nearly neutral colours—where the inputs are nearly balanced and the opponent neurons are not strongly activated—provide good discrimination for these naturally frequent stimuli, at the expense of reduced discrimination at the margins of colour space where it is seldom needed. The requirement for finer discrimination near white thus yields one important rationale for colour opponent encoding: paradoxically, colour-opponent neurons are best equipped to register deviations from the neutral norm to which they are relatively unresponsive.

Similar considerations favour a norm-based code for faces, as an efficient response to the statistics of the natural stimuli. The parallel may indeed be more than metaphorical, as any measure derived from a face image can potentially be encoded as a deviation from an established norm (with the norm as a null stimulus), and any such representation may ultimately require an opponent code. All frontally viewed faces, considered in purely physical terms, have considerable similarity to a face representing the perceptual norm. Opponent processing—a balancing of opposites mediated by mutual inhibition—is therefore a natural way to generate neural signals that are minimal or zero for the norm face. Even so basic an achievement as evaluation of shape independently of size could involve an opponent interaction between orientation-selective neural indicators of size or spatial frequency. Aspect ratio—a key parameter in face perception, especially under reduced conditions such as great viewing distance—can indeed be encoded more precisely than would be expected from independent assessments of horizontal and vertical extent, just as the red/green dimension of colour can be judged with far more precision than expected on the basis of independent assessments of the photoreceptor excitations. The verbal description ‘long-faced’ assesses aspect ratio relative to the face norm. The same may well be true of its neural representation, just as in colour vision the balance between redness and greenness places the transition point near the peak density of natural colours.

The advantages of the opponent code are exploited to good effect in colour discrimination. Yet, as we discuss below, studies of face discrimination show at best a fairly modest optimum in discrimination in the neighbourhood of the average face, with some dimensions (e.g. eye height or mouth height) consistent with an essentially linear response. One possible reason for this discrepancy is that nonlinear encodings have no influence on discrimination if the limiting noise is introduced prior to the nonlinearity. In the representation of colour, significant nonlinearity is present already at the retinal output, where fluctuations of impulse counts at the retinal ganglion cells are an important source of added noise. But a norm-based representation of faces must originate centrally, at a stage where nearly all sources of noise may have already come into play. We discuss face discrimination further in §12 on functional advantages of adaptation.


Range matching

The natural variation along the intensity axis in colour space is much greater than along the red/green chromatic axis. Intensity varies with a standard deviation of about a factor of 2 or 3 under fixed illumination, but the red/green variations in the natural environment originate from surprisingly subtle variations in the balance of red- and green-sensitive cone photoreceptor excitations—a standard deviation of only a few per cent. The contrast gain for colour must be set higher if the world is to appear perceptually balanced in colour and lightness. This is not possible by nonlinear compression of the photoreceptor inputs themselves, but an opponent neural signal for red/green balance can represent the subtle input imbalances that support colour, while achromatic intensity is represented by a parallel system with a correspondingly higher threshold and wider operating range. Comparable considerations arise in face space, although here the coordinates of the stimuli are not as well defined. Physically subtle deviations from the average along some continua, for instance the upturn or downturn of the mouth, or deviations from symmetry may be as significant as grosser differences in other dimensions, and this could provide an incentive for representing them by relatively independent nonlinear signals. Adaptation may be helpful in this process of multi-dimensional range matching: independent, roughly reciprocal sensitivity-regulating processes for different directions in face space would provide a relatively simple way to match the operating ranges of such signals to the dispersion of the input, much as suggested by Webster & Mollon for colour contrast adaptation. But as noted in §8, contrast adaptation in face perception so far appears weak at best. Perhaps, the computational expense of direction-selective adaptation in the high-dimensional face space is prohibitive.


Adaptively roving null points and contrast coding

Along each dimension, only a limited range of colours can be differentiated with precision, a necessary consequence of the limited dynamic range of neural signals. But the region of fine discrimination in colour space is not centred on white or any other fixed colour. Rather, it shifts to remain centred on the adapting colour, if a non-white condition of adaptation is defined by (for instance) a common background within which the colours are separately displayed. The enhanced discrimination for colours close to the adapting background, sometimes termed ‘crispening’, occurs over a quite restricted range, with pronounced loss of discriminative ability at or beyond about 10 times the threshold colour contrast in each direction, a range roughly appropriate to the dispersion of environmental stimuli. Face analogues of this effect have been more difficult to demonstrate, but they include the ‘other race’ effect discussed below.


Optimal nonlinearity

Definite prescriptions can be derived for neural input–output functions to optimize discrimination. Mutual information between input and output is maximized by making the slope of the response function inversely proportional to the environmental probability density function (histogram equalization). Squared error of estimation is minimized with a milder nonlinearity that allows better discrimination in the margins of the space, but even this optimizing principle predicts a marked superiority of discrimination for nearly average faces, contrary to the findings that we discuss in §12. Important category distinctions may call for special treatment. In colour vision, interest in distinguishing fruit from leaves may have dictated a redward shift of the perceptual norm, making the mode of the distribution of natural colours perceptually yellowish and greenish; in face space, gender discrimination may be a comparable case. The high-dimensional case of face space can be handled similarly in principle, by range matching followed by (for example) multi-dimensional histogram equalization, if a coordinate system (not necessarily linear) can be found in which the stimulus probability distribution satisfies independence.


Adaptation and the tuning functions of face coding

We have seen that face after-effects can help to reveal the types of channel coding that the visual system might use to represent faces. Can it be further used to decipher the specific properties of faces to which these channels are tuned? Adaptation has played a central role in characterizing the stimulus selectivities of the mechanisms of visual processing. For example, studies of chromatic and chromatic contrast adaptation helped to reveal the spectral sensitivities of channels at different stages of colour vision, while as noted above, multiple channel models of spatial vision were in part founded on measurements of the selectivity of the adaptation for properties like the orientation and spatial frequency of patterns. The rough correspondence between the bandwidths for frequency, orientation or colour measured psychophysically and in single cortical cells gives some credence to the notion of adaptation as the psychologist's electrode. Can the same techniques be applied to tease apart the mechanisms of face coding?

Several problems hamper this. First, it is again not certain to what extent the adaptation is directly altering sensitivity at face-specific levels of processing. An adaptation effect at earlier levels is unlikely to reveal the stimulus dimensions to which face channels are tuned. Second, the selectivity of the adaptation for different natural facial categories does not require that the mechanisms of face coding are directly tuned to these specific categories, for as long as the mechanisms can be differentially adapted by different categories they will result in selective after-effects. Finally, the interpretation of any adaptation effects is muddied even further by the possibility that adaptation can itself change the tuning of the mechanisms. For example, natural variations in face configuration are such that simply derived neural signals will not be statistically independent, and one proposed function of adaptation is to improve the economy and precision of the neural representation by revising the channels' tuning so that their responses become independent. Such models can in theory account for contingent adaptation between two dimensions even if these are represented independently before adaptation, and they predict contingent after-effects for any face dimensions that are associated in the stimulus.

Because of these problems, it remains unclear whether there are special axes in the representation of faces—perhaps corresponding to prominent natural categories—or if the selectivity of the after-effects simply reflects the distances between the stimuli in face space. Colour vision again provides a telling example that the stimulus dimensions that appear phenomenally special are not necessarily the dimensions to which the neural mechanisms are tuned. Hering's opponent process theory was founded on the observations that certain colours appeared unique and mutually exclusive (red or green, blue or yellow, and light or dark). However, opponent neurons in the retina and geniculate are tuned for a pair of directions in colour space distinctly different from the Hering directions. Moreover, at cortical levels both adaptation and single-unit recording reveal multiple mechanisms tuned to different colour-luminance directions, so that the neural basis for special hues becomes less certain. One possibility is that at later stages, the visual system builds cells with tuning functions that match colour appearance—so that there are mechanisms that directly signal the sensations such as pure blue and yellow. Yet another alternative is that blue and yellow only appear special because they are special properties of the environment (phases of daylight) and not because they reflect special states of neural activity. This question remains actively debated in colour science. The point is that we cannot be confident that facial attributes that appear salient or ecologically relevant are the stimulus attributes that face processing is directly encoding.


Adaptation and facial expressions

One case where it might currently be possible to apply selective adaptation to dissect the tuning functions of face-coding mechanisms is facial expressions. Expressions represent highly stereotyped variations in facial configurations that correspond to well-defined action patterns. These action patterns are to a large extent universal and innate, and thus it is possible that visual mechanisms could be specifically tuned to these stimulus dimensions. Moreover, just as there are primary colours, there are only a small set of six basic expressions (joy, anger, sadness, surprise, fear and disgust). Thus, compared with facial identity, the ‘space’ of expressions may more nearly approach the space of colour in having only a small number of dimensions that can be clearly defined and that have stronger a priori connection to the space of possible visual channels. Adaptation could thus be used as a test for these channels. In particular, tests of the selectivity of after-effects could be used to ask whether each expression can be adapted (and thus might be represented) independently, or whether expressions might instead be coded by their directions within a space defined by a different set of cardinal axes corresponding to dimensions such as positive or negative valence or arousal. Such norm-based spaces are prevalent for representing expressions and emotion, and imply that different expressions should be complementary. Tests for complementary after-effects could therefore provide evidence for or against this organization.

Strong facial after-effects can be induced by exposure to facial expressions. For example, Webster et al. found that adaptation biased the perceived boundary between two morphed expressions, paralleling the after-effects they found for gender or ethnicity. Hsu & Young instead morphed between a neutral and expressive face, and found that sensitivity to the expression decreased following adaptation. These after-effects appear to be driven primarily by the visual characteristics of the stimulus. For example, adaptation to emotion conveyed by non-facial images or auditory stimuli produces little after-effect in faces, while stimuli with appropriate configural or featural information for an expression can induce a change. Thus, these studies suggest that the adaptation is altering the responses of visual mechanisms and not processes related to an amodal concept of different expressions or emotions.

These after-effects are clearly strongest when the adapting and test faces have the same expression, yet it is less clear to what extent the different expressions adapt independently. For example, Hsu & Young found that adapting to a sad face facilitated perceiving a face as happy and vice versa. Similarly, Rutherford et al. observed that happy and sad faces produced complementary after-effects in a neutral face. In contrast, Juricevic & Webster found little consistent change in sensitivity to each of the basic expressions after adapting to a different expression. (It should be noted that none of these studies measured changes in actual sensitivity, but rather measured which expression was reported for the face.) Complementary after-effects might be expected to occur for pairs of expressions that represent opposite spatial configurations. However, actual expressions may involve largely uncorrelated variations in facial structure. That is, an ‘antihappy’ configuration does not clearly convey anger or sadness. illustrates this point by showing each of the six basic expressions and their anti-expressions formed by morphing through an average neutral face. The original expressions are largely identifiable, yet their visual opposites are surprisingly ambiguous.

Rather than an opponent organization, the most appropriate geometrical idealization of the phenomenal space for visually expressed emotions may instead consist of six monopolar and mutually roughly orthogonal dimensions radiating from the neutral norm. In a progression of morphs displaying decreasing intensities of a basic emotion, the appropriate way to continue the series past the neutral face may be obvious on physical analysis (the upturned or downturned mouth, for example), but there is generally no clearly corresponding phenomenal continuity in the anti-expressions. This echoes the phenomenology of identity, where antifaces tend to be viewed as unrelated individuals rather than specifically opposite, even though they are indeed opposite at the stimulus level. And in this respect, hue is once again a parallel case, as we have argued above. In all three cases (expression, identity, hue), it is plausible that the monopolar nature of the phenomenal attributes is traceable to the rectifying behaviour of spiking neurons in the respective neural representations. But it may also have justification on functional grounds. The expression of each emotion is a distinct action, just as each hue results from a distinct mode of filtering of a broadband source. The case of emotional expression is unique, however, in that there is often no natural basis for the anti-stimulus to arise. For example, for expressions that include opening the mouth from the neutral face, there is no corresponding natural configuration for further closing the mouth.

This lack of symmetry in the frequency of occurrence between expressions and their opposite configurations raises the question of how the visual coding of facial expressions is normalized. If happy and angry faces were configural opposites, then adaptation could readily adjust the neutral point to the average between them. But if the anti-expressions instead correspond to expressions we are unlikely to experience, then it is no longer apparent what the counterweight is that holds the neutral face in place—if the adaptation depends on mechanisms that are directly representing the expressions. Perhaps instead, the normalization is set at a level of basic configural coding, shared with mechanisms involved in recognizing individuals. This possibility is also consistent with evidence that adaptation to expressions is weaker when the identity of the test and adapt faces differ as expected, if the adaptation occurs at sites before separate expression and identity representations are extracted. Surprisingly however, as we noted above, the converse selectivity is not found—identity after-effects are unaffected by a change in expression. Another possible account of expression normalization is that once a general face norm is created, the deviations from that norm that express the six basic emotions are encoded by six monopolar signals, and the role of adaptation is just to adjust appropriately their sensitivity and operating range, always using the general face norm as the zero of their operating ranges.


Functional consequences of adaptation

What role do short-term adaptations of the kinds measured in face after-effects play in aiding perception? Most studies directed at this question have examined whether adaptation improves discrimination among faces. Some hint that this should occur is suggested by the ‘other race’ effect. It is generally easier to recognize or distinguish between individuals of one's own race (or rather, of the race one is exposed to). This is broadly analogous to the crispening effect in colour discrimination noted above, where it is easier to discriminate between colours that are both close to the white point or to an adapting background, than between colours that each contrast strongly with the adapting stimulus. Discrimination is impaired for high-contrast stimuli because the retinal signals, which encode contrast, are saturated. Similarly, in face perception it may be that we are better at discriminating among near-average faces, because the gradients of the neural signals are steepest around the average. Adaptation would then be important for centring the response and thus sensitivity around the current average, so that under experimentally contrived adaptation, the stimulus region where discrimination is best shifts along with the perceptual norm.

Tests of these ideas have met with mixed results. In Wilson et al., discrimination thresholds for synthetic faces were lower around the average face than around atypical faces. Tanaka et al. found that morphs physically half-way between a typical and an atypical face appeared subjectively more similar to the atypical face as expected if the centre of the face space is perceptually enlarged relative to the margins. Tanaka & Corneille further found that near-average face morphs are discriminated with slightly greater precision than atypical ones. Dakin & Omigie found a slight reduction in discrimination threshold for faces close to the average, but differing slightly from it. Rhodes et al. found that differences among near-average faces are perceptually compressed rather than enhanced, but in some experiments found evidence of perceptual expansion near the middle of the range of experimentally presented faces. Finally, Susilo et al. observed that discriminability of eye or mouth height was the same whether the feature positions were near or far from the norm. Some experimental studies of adaptation have found improvements in discrimination as adaptation progresses. Rhodes et al. found that adapting to faces from a new ethnicity improves discrimination performance (identity thresholds) for faces drawn from that ethnicity. In other cases, the adaptation does not seem to help or hinder discrimination.

There are two potential reasons for the failure of adaptation to clearly impact distinguishing faces. First, the weak effect is not unique to faces but is found for most stimulus dimensions. For example, adaptation to different contrast levels (as opposed to different mean light levels) has been extensively studied but has only rarely been found to improve contrast discrimination; and while pattern discriminations show more promise, the improvements with adaptation are again not clearly robust. For nonlinearity to influence discrimination strongly, the discrimination-limiting noise must be introduced after the nonlinearity (‘Birdsall's theorem’). This reduces the scope for characterizing central nonlinearities on the basis of discrimination data. Second, in a discrimination task, observers will use the best cues available, and thus it is difficult to ensure that their performance is limited by processes directly related to face perception. For example, the faces could in principle be distinguished by judging a simple ‘non-face’ feature like eye separation, in a representation designed for spatial distance judgements generally; if so, the statistics of faces will be irrelevant. But as there is no alternative ‘non-colour’ basis for colour discrimination, performance in this case should depend entirely on the design of the neural code for colour, thereby revealing fully the influence of the natural distribution of environmental colours.

While adaptation thus seems to produce only weak changes in discrimination, it produces striking changes in appearance. Are there functional benefits to these appearance changes? One should not necessarily expect this, as face adaptation could be, in part, a side effect of luminance and contrast-adaptation processes that have been installed in the visual system for other purposes than face processing specifically. In colour vision, adaptation plays an important role by contributing to colour constancy. The light spectrum reaching the eye from an object depends on both the reflectance function of the object and the spectrum of the illumination. In order for colour to reliably signal the object's reflectance, variations in illumination must therefore be discounted. Renormalizing the cone sensitivities so that the response to the average ambient spectrum is balanced tends to factor out changes in the general illumination and thus promotes constancy. It is conceivable that adaptation could play an analogous role in face perception. In particular, constancy requires removing the response to irrelevant information from the stimulus. In faces, this could include the average characteristics of the population (e.g. their ethnic features). Normalizing to this average might thus remove uninformative features of the face (group characteristics) and allow informative cues to identity and expression (individual characteristics) to be perceived more directly. (While we cannot know the inner experience of another, an intriguing prediction of this adaptation is that different observers may experience the average face—just as the average colour—in phenomenally similar ways, yet for each, this average is tied to their specific population. That is, it is possible that the perceptual experience you have, looking at the average face to which you have been exposed, is fundamentally similar to the experience I have looking at mine.)

The processes of perceptual constancy are also important for removing uninformative variations in the observer. For example, spectral sensitivity can vary dramatically over time because of changes in the density of the lens pigment or across retinal location because of variations in macular pigment. A critical aspect of colour constancy is thus to compensate for the intrinsic sensitivity limitations of the observer. Renormalizing colour appearance for the average spectrum reaching the receptors can again partially factor out these sensitivity differences, and additional processes may contribute to even stronger constancy. Such compensatory processes are likely to be important for calibrating or ‘error-correcting’ most perceptual dimensions so that the perception of patterns remains stable across factors such as changes in retinal location or viewpoint. Similarly, for face perception, an important function of adaptation may be to calibrate face-coding so that the population of mechanisms is normalized to consistent levels. Even though the adaptation to faces is very rapid, such adjustments may be particularly important for maintaining face coding over longer timescales involving large physiological changes, for example, during development or ageing. Indeed, it is possible that most of the functional consequences of adaptation involve initially calibrating the visual system, and that the after-effects that are observed experimentally are merely fine-tuning.

Finally, in the same way that constancy is important for calibrating different neural processes within the observer (so that they signal the same information despite different physiological limits), adaptation is also arguably important for equating perceptual responses across observers. That is, adaptation may allow individuals with very different visual systems to perceive some aspects of the world in similar ways—by normalizing the idiosyncrasies of their coding to a common environment. A social consensus for facial characteristics (e.g. that average faces are more attractive) may depend on a perceptual consensus shaped by adaptation to a common visual world. An intriguing case where this socially shared norm may fail is in autism. Autistic individuals can show severe social impairments and deficits in face perception, and they have also been found to show weaker adaptation to faces, which could be a cause or effect of their problems in responding to faces.


Adaptation in the real world

As we have noted, the effects of adaptation are important not only for dissecting how faces are represented by the visual system, but also for understanding how our perception of faces is shaped by the facial characteristics with which we come in contact in our daily lives. We are all exposed to a different diet of faces, and if we are adapted to this diet then we might each encode and perceive faces in uniquely individual ways. For example, how old someone looks—in the literal sense of looking—may be very different for someone surrounded by a younger or older cohort. However, this presupposes that the adaptation measured in the laboratory is also manifest on the street. Is there evidence for this?

Thus far, the signs are mostly anecdotal (in that they cannot be tied with certainty to sensory adaptation), yet are nevertheless compelling. One example is that face adaptation effects are found when observers are engaged in natural visual tasks. An interesting case is portraiture. Asymmetries are difficult to detect while drawing a face but can become obvious when viewing the mirror-reversed image, a trick employed by artists. This effect could arise because the artist is adapting to and thus normalizing their sensitivity to the image they are drawing. Further hints come from comparing facial judgements in observers who are known to have different exposure histories. For example, the effects of gender strength on ratings of facial attractiveness differ for students at same-sex versus mixed-sex schools in ways that are predictable from the average gender to which they are exposed. Similarly, preferences for average faces differ cross-culturally in ways that are likely to reflect the relative exposure to different ethnic groups.

As noted above, a primary anecdotal source of evidence for face adaptation in natural viewing is the other-race effect, which could arise because we are best at distinguishing among faces that are near to the average face to which we are adapted. Another consequence is that we should become more sensitive to when a face differs from our own ethnicity. Japanese and Caucasian observers do show different average category boundaries in morphs between the two ethnicities, suggesting that for each group the characteristics defining the other group appear more salient. If an observer moved to a new environment with a different ethnic mix, then we might expect their norm to shift accordingly. Webster et al. tested this for Japanese students who were residents in the US. The ethnicity boundaries for long-term residents were significantly closer than new arrivals to the average category boundary for indigenous Caucasians, and the degree of the shift was correlated both with the length of time in the US and the degree of daily exposure to Caucasian faces. Judgements of attractiveness may also change as individuals join and thus adapt to a new population—an observation noted by the anthropologist Malinowski.

Such results support the assumption that adaptation plays a significant role in calibrating face perception in natural viewing. And the effects of adaptation in the laboratory are so pronounced that it is difficult to imagine that it is not centrally involved in regulating our everyday experiences with faces.


Face coding and colour

We have drawn heavily on the domain of colour vision to illustrate how both long- and short-term adaptation processes modulate visual coding, in order to explore whether similar principles may play a role in face perception. The parallels between the norm-based coding schemes characterizing both colour and face processing suggest that the visual system may often reinvent common strategies to represent diverse characteristics of the visual world. Moreover, for both representations, adaptation may play analogous and central roles, suggesting that there are principles and properties of adaptation that are common throughout the visual stream.

Yet the functional role of face adaptation, and of the face space in which adaptation is modelled, remain tantalizingly obscure. The representation of faces in a metric space by associating neural signals with the various coordinates is a natural one and a useful tool for analysis, but it is not independently validated by introspection, or well-suited to subserve face recognition except indirectly. A metric representation of colour makes some functional sense, as in colour, continuous variations are significant: colour coordinates can map onto behaviourally significant distinctions, as with ripeness of fruits for instance, and achieving colour constancy under varying illumination calls for metric computations. With faces, there is a more limited role for continuous variation. Face recognition instead depends on a discrete yet holistic organization, somewhat like that of spoken words in a speaker's lexicon, and seems to proceed without any introspectively accessible reference to the face norm or to the coordinates of face space. Indeed, colour space as well as face space are seriously incomplete as models of face and colour perception. If opponent signals were the basis of our recognition of colours, it would be easier to make discriminations on the individual signals that jointly represent colours than on their conjunctions. Yet, in fact, one cannot easily say which of a green surface and a red one is the more blue; and the same/different judgement for colour is so much easier than the dimensional comparison that it cannot be based on introspective access to the opponent codes. With faces, this problem is exacerbated because so many more dimensions are needed to identify an individual uniquely, whereas in colour, three suffice.

In closing, we illustrate how adaptation can be used to ask whether there are even closer connections between colour and face perception. Faces naturally vary not only in their shape and texture but also in their basic chromatic properties. For example, male faces are on average slightly redder than female faces and this difference is sufficient to aid gender classification when shape cues are highly impoverished. Moreover, an individual's face can vary considerably in colour with changes in health or emotional state, and natural colour variations modulate judgements of facial attractiveness. In fact, one posited role for primate trichromacy is to support judgements of skin tones to assess the mood and fitness of conspecifics. Given that colour can provide a reliable cue to differences both between and within observers, we might expect the mechanisms mediating face recognition to use both shape and colour information. Yamashita et al. explored this by testing whether face adaptation can be selective for specific combinations of colour and shape. These experiments used a variant of the McCollough effect, in which observers are adapted to complementary colours paired with gratings at different orientations. In achromatic test bars, this leads to strong negative after-effects for colour that are contingent on orientation. However, when red and green are instead paired with oppositely distorted faces, there were neither visible colour after-effects, nor were shape after-effects contingent on the colour. Similar null effects were found when different colours were paired with different facial expressions, even when these colours were varied along chromatic axes consistent with different expressions. One implication of this result is that there are in fact limits to visual plasticity—shapes and colours that are clearly distinguishable cannot be arbitrarily associated through adaptation. This is important because it suggests that the contingent adaptation effects that have been reported for faces are actually revealing something about the tuning properties of face mechanisms, and that it is by design that the visual system combines these dimensions in a joint representation. A second implication is that while both colour and shape may be useful for evaluating faces, they may be encoded largely independently. The neural machinery deciphering the spatial configurations of faces may share many tricks with colour vision, yet may be colour blind.


Personality influences the neural responses to viewing facial expressions of emotion

Andrew J. Calder, Michael Ewbank, Luca Passamonti — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2011. PMC3130379, CC BY 2.0.

Cognitive research has long been aware of the relationship between individual differences in personality and performance on behavioural tasks. However, within the field of cognitive neuroscience, the way in which such differences manifest at a neural level has received relatively little attention. We review recent research addressing the relationship between personality traits and the neural response to viewing facial signals of emotion. In one section, we discuss work demonstrating the relationship between anxiety and the amygdala response to facial signals of threat. A second section considers research showing that individual differences in reward drive (behavioural activation system), a trait linked to aggression, influence the neural responsivity and connectivity between brain regions implicated in aggression when viewing facial signals of anger. Finally, we address recent criticisms of the correlational approach to fMRI analyses and conclude that when used appropriately, analyses examining the relationship between personality and brain activity provide a useful tool for understanding the neural basis of facial expression processing and emotion processing in general.


Introduction

Over the past 15 years, there has been an explosion of interest in the neuropsychological basis of human emotion. A large body of this research has addressed the neural mechanisms underlying the recognition of human signals of emotion, of which the face is the primary source. Research from patients with brain lesions and neuroimaging studies have vastly improved our understanding of the relevant functional and neural mechanisms. The main findings are summarized in Haxby et al.'s model of face perception, which is divided into ‘core’ and ‘extended’ systems. The core face system supports the perception of different facial characteristics and is located in occipitotemporal cortex. It comprises separate regions or routes contributing to the perception of ‘changeable’ facial properties, such as facial expressions and eye gaze, and ‘invariant’ facial properties, such as facial identity; although see Calder & Young and Calder for a different perspective. Components of the core system project to an extended face system that contains separate regions for the interpretation and analysis of the different facial properties. The extended face regions have a wider role in processing stimuli other than faces. For example, the extended brain areas involved in facial expression recognition are also involved in processing other emotional stimuli from multiple sensory modalities. Research focusing on the extended face regions underlying facial expression recognition has identified a disproportionate, although not exclusive, role of certain brain regions in processing particular facial and vocal emotions, such as the amygdala's role in processing signals of fear and insula's role in coding disgust. By contrast, other brain areas, such as regions of prefrontal and somatosensory cortices seem to play a more general role in recognition of multiple facial expressions; for reviews see. The current paper explores how the function of components in the extended face system is affected by individual differences in personality traits that influence the manner in which we interact with facial signals of emotion and other emotional cues. In addition, we discuss that analyses that take account of individual differences in relevant personality dimensions reveal aspects of neural function that are not apparent when using the standard subtraction contrast method alone.

Neuroimaging techniques, such functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), have been key in outlining the neural basis of facial expression processing. The vast majority of these studies have taken a group-based approach, in which the neural response to selected or multiple facial expressions is studied in a group of healthy individuals that are not pre-selected according to any specific criteria, other than generally being right-handed and having no history of neurological or psychiatric disorders. However, a wealth of cognitive and behavioural research has demonstrated that individual differences in people's personality can affect the manner in which they process emotional stimuli. For example, although anxiety is a normal emotional and physiological response to being threatened, individuals differ in the amount of anxiety they experience. The processing of threat-related stimuli has been investigated extensively in behavioural studies of individuals diagnosed with anxiety disorders and in non-clinical groups of participants with high and low levels of self-reported anxiety. The results show that in both clinical and non-clinical populations, anxiety influences the behavioural response to stimuli conveying threat. In the case of facial expressions, high-anxious individuals show an increased propensity to orient their attention towards facial displays of fear and anger; an effect that is also found when the stimuli are presented outside of conscious awareness. Similarly, additional research has shown that heightened levels of non-clinical anxiety can affect recognition of facial signals of fear; for example, high-anxious individuals show increased sensitivity to low intensity exemplars of fearful faces in morphed facial continua; see also Surcinelli et al..

Functional neuroimaging techniques, such as fMRI, are potentially equally as sensitive as the behavioural or cognitive paradigms used to study the effects of personality. Yet, the effect of individual variation in personality dimensions on brain function is frequently ignored or dismissed as noise in studies of healthy individuals. Recent research, however, shows that certain personality dimensions can account for a significant proportion of variance in the neural response to emotional stimuli; for example, the amygdala's response to facial signals of fear is significantly correlated with individual differences in anxiety. This variation could also help explain why meta-analyses show that approximately 40 per cent of functional imaging studies addressing the neural response to facial expressions of fear fail to find a significant amygdalar response. In other words, the presence or absence of an amygdalar response to facial signals of threat may depend on whether the participants' mean level of anxiety lies towards the upper or lower end of the anxiety range in the healthy population.

As we go on to discuss, other personality dimensions are also important. However, this initial example serves to illustrate that the role of specific brain regions in processing facial expressions (or other stimuli) could be underestimated or missed without taking into account the influence of personality traits or other variables that have been shown to have a consistent impact on the processing of these stimuli. The graphic illustration in underlines the utility of a correlational approach. In addition, it clarifies how it differs from the standard univariate approach in which the neural activation in response to one condition is subtracted from the activation associated with another. We apologise if the distinction is readily apparent to some readers, but having encountered three reviewers of previous experimental studies who asked how it was possible for a particular brain region to show a correlation with a personality variable in the absence of a group effect, we felt that others may also appreciate a short discussion of these two types of effects.

In brief, correlations and group (or main) effects are statistically distinct. For any given brain region, each can be observed in isolation or both can occur. illustrates two hypothetical datasets. In a, a correlation between a personality trait and the brain response to a particular contrast of interest (condition X − condition Y) occurs together with a significant main effect of this contrast. b shows a second situation in which an equally robust correlation with a personality trait is found in the absence of a group main effect. The latter occurs because lower and higher scores on the personality dimension are associated with relative reductions and increases, respectively, in the neural response to the contrast of interest, producing an overall effect that does not statistically differ from zero. Similarly, it is possible for a brain region to show a significant overall reduction in the group analysis (owing to an increased response to Y relative to X); again, this can occur with or without a significant correlation with a personality trait or other variable. In summary, group effects and correlations provide different information on the response of a brain region to a particular stimulus. The former relates to the overall mean group effect, while the latter indicates whether a significant proportion of inter-subject variation in the neural response of that region can be accounted for by an independent variable. From b, it should be clear that a particular stimulus or experimental task might have a significant effect on the function of a given brain region, but that in some situations this could be missed by a standard subtraction contrast approach alone.

In the following sections, we discuss recent neuroimaging studies that demonstrate the influence of personality on the neural response to viewing emotional facial expressions. Reviews of the effects of personality traits on cognitive and behavioural indices of emotional processing can be found in other recent publications and are not reviewed here. Our review is not intended to be exhaustive, but rather illustrative of the importance of considering individual variation in relevant personality dimensions. We acknowledge that individual differences in other factors, such as the participants' gender, handedness, age, race or genotype, have also been shown to affect the neural response to emotional stimuli. However, this work is beyond the scope of the current paper and interested readers should consult reviews by Cahill, Canli & Amin, Hamann & Canli, Wager et al. and Hariri for a discussion of these effects.

The paper is divided into three main sections. A first section describes the first work showing effects of personality on brain function before providing a more detailed account of how the neural response to certain facial expressions is related to individual differences in anxiety. A second section describes how individual differences in reward drive, a trait linked to aggression, affect the neural response to angry facial expressions. In a final section we consider limitations and criticisms of the correlation-based approach to functional neuroimaging and responses to these criticisms. We conclude that when used appropriately, neuroimaging analyses that factor in the relationship between relevant personality variables and neural activity provide a fruitful approach to understanding the neural basis of facial expression processing and social cognition in general.


Anxiety and the processing of facial signals of threat

As far as we are aware, the first study to show the influence of variation in personality on the neural response to emotional facial expressions in a non-clinical population was reported by Canli et al.. The study showed that individual differences in participants' scores on a measure of extroversion were correlated with the left amygdala response to facial expressions of happiness relative to a neutral expression baseline. Since the left hemisphere has been implicated more in approach-related behaviour, the relationship with extroversion was interpreted as contributing to behaviour consistent with the social interactive style of extroverts. By contrast, the amygdala response to facial expressions of fear, anger and sadness showed no significant relationship with extroversion, nor with any of the other, so-called, ‘big-5’ major personality traits (neuroticism, openness, agreeableness and conscientiousness). However, the amygdala did show a significant overall increase in its response to fearful (versus neutral) expressions irrespective of personality (i.e. group effect), consistent with previous research.

Canli et al. concluded that the group effect for fearful expressions (in the absence of any significant correlation) and amygdala correlation with extroversion for happy expressions (in the absence of a significant group effect) reflect two distinct processes in the amygdala. First, the consistent amygdala response to fearful faces is due to the universal importance of detecting cues to potentially dangerous events. Second, the variable response to happy expressions as function of extroversion reflects the more sociable nature of individuals scoring high on this scale. The first of these conclusions has not been consistently supported by subsequent research, however, which has demonstrated that the amygdala response to fearful faces is related to individual differences in participants' levels of anxiety.

Such a relationship with anxiety accords with neuroimaging investigations of clinical samples indicate that ‘hyper-responsivity’ of the amygdala may underlie many anxiety-related disorders including social anxiety disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and specific phobia. This has been linked to the central role of the amygdala in processing threat-related stimuli, including fearful faces. However, functional neuroimaging studies of fear processing in the typical, non-clinical population have largely ignored the influence of anxiety, despite clear evidence of its influence on behavioural tasks in both clinical and non-clinical populations. As already discussed, variation in the amygdala response to threatening stimuli as a function of individual differences in the non-clinical anxiety range could help explain why a significant proportion of neuroimaging studies fail to find a significant increase in amygdala activation to fearful faces. Moreover, a relationship between amygdala activity and anxiety would demonstrate that a substantial degree of the variability in the amygdala response to facial signals of threat has a meaningful psychological basis. Consideration of relevant personality factors, such as anxiety, could therefore reveal insights into the function of the amygdala, and other components of the extended face system, that are not apparent when examining effects at a group-level that pool across a wide range of inter-subject variability. In other words, exploiting the amygdala–anxiety relationship offers the opportunity to gain a better understanding of the amygdala's role in processing different types of facial threat.

To date, a number of studies have demonstrated that levels of anxiety in the non-clinical population are positively correlated with the amygdala response to fearful faces. However, this relationship appears more evident when the fearful faces are unattended or presented outside of conscious awareness. For example, Bishop et al. used a face/house paradigm, borrowed from previous work, in which participants were instructed to attend to pairs of faces or houses presented in the horizontal or vertical axes. This enabled a comparison of the neural response to fearful and neutral faces when presented in an attended (‘attend faces’) or unattended (‘attend houses’) location. A group-level analysis revealed that the right amygdala showed an increased response to fearful relative to neutral faces across both attended and unattended conditions. Although this did not reach significance in the left amygdala, a further analysis showed that left amygdala response to this contrast was positively related to state anxiety (a). Moreover, although attention showed no significant interaction with emotional expression (fearful versus neutral) at a group level, the left amygdala response to this interaction was correlated with state anxiety. This reflected less attentional modulation of the amygdala response to fearful versus neutral faces in participants with higher anxiety levels (b). By contrast, both high- and low-anxious participants showed an increased amygdala response to fearful faces when attended.

A more recent study investigated the relationship between anxiety and attended/unattended fearful faces using a different paradigm. Here, participants were shown a superimposed image of a house and face. When instructed to attend to the houses, high-anxious individuals showed an increased amygdala response to fearful faces. However, this effect was only found for female participants, suggesting a possible interaction with the participants' sex. The authors are careful to point out, however, that this sex difference may be owing to other moderating factors that might have differed between their male and female groups. For example, they note that depression can attenuate the attentional bias to threatening stimuli and may, therefore, affect the relationship between the amygdala response and anxiety as well. In addition, as we go on to discuss, our own research has shown that the effects of anxiety on the amygdala response to threatening facial expressions survive factoring out any contribution of sex. Hence, the idea that the relationship between anxiety and the amygdala response to threatening faces is specific to female participants seems unlikely, although it is important to consider this possibility in future research.

A third study by Etkin et al. presented fearful faces inside and outside of the participants' conscious awareness by displaying backward masked faces at 33 ms and non-masked faces at 200 ms, respectively. Etkin et al. found an increased amygdala response to consciously presented (200 ms) images of fearful faces that was independent of anxiety. However, amygdala activation to the unconscious presentations was only apparent when considering the influence of anxiety, with trait anxiety predicting an increased response in the basolateral amygdala.

Together, these studies suggest that the relationship between anxiety and the amygdala response is greater when fearful faces are unattended or presented outside of conscious awareness. This accords with behavioural evidence indicating that attentional capture in high-anxious participants is most effective when the stimuli are presented outside of awareness. Increased amygdala activation to unattended fearful faces might suggest a role for the amygdala in evaluation or detection of pre-attentive threat. However, an alternative explanation is that the paradigms in these studies allowed limited residual perceptual resources to be allocated to unattended locations. The latter account is bolstered by the finding that high-anxious individuals show reduced recruitment of prefrontal control mechanisms in response to threat-related distractors relative to low-anxious participants. Note also that Pessoa & Ungerleider have demonstrated that a significant proportion of subjects can reliably detect masked presentations of fearful faces at a duration of 33 ms, which was used in the unconscious condition in Etkin et al.'s study. Hence, this study may tap degraded perception, rather than unconscious perception in at least some subjects. To address this further, Bishop et al. conducted a further experiment that used a letter search task of high or low perceptual load superimposed on fearful or neutral face distractors. They found that high-anxious individuals showed an increased amygdala response to fearful distractors only for the low perceptual load condition. This result is difficult to reconcile with the proposal that the amygdala response to facial signals of fear is not gated by attention, or indeed that the amygdala response to facial signals of fear in high-anxious participants is not gated by attention.

Like fearful facial expressions, angry faces also represent highly potent signals of threat, often rated as equally arousing and as unpleasant as fearful faces. However, the influence of anxiety on the amygdala response to facial expressions other than fear has been somewhat neglected. This is a significant oversight given that facial signals of anger have been characterized as the prototypical stimulus for eliciting anxiety in low-ranking or socially submissive animals. Using a similar face/house paradigm to that used by Bishop et al., Ewbank et al. investigated the effect of anxiety and attention on the neural response to both fearful and angry faces. Importantly, the exemplars of these two expressions were matched on ratings of arousal and valence; thus any effects could not be attributed to differences on these dimensions. While group-based contrasts revealed no difference in amygdala activation to anger and fear, regression analyses examining the influence of individual differences in anxiety revealed a differential effect of attention on the amygdala response to these two expressions. Relative to neutral faces, the amygdala response to unattended fearful faces was positively correlated with trait anxiety. Consistent with previous work, the relationship between anxiety and attended fearful faces was marginally less marked but achieved borderline significance with trait anxiety. By contrast, trait and state anxiety were positively related to the amygdala response to angry relative to neutral expressions, but only when attended (a,b); unattended angry faces showed no corresponding relationship with anxiety. Moreover, the different patterns for attended and unattended angry expressions were underlined by an additional analysis demonstrating that the right amygdala showed an increased response to attended versus unattended angry faces as a function of trait and state anxiety. These effects of anxiety persisted after factoring out any influence of the participants' sex and individual variation in social anxiety (i.e. fear of negative evaluation (FNE)). Hence, these other factors do not seem to contribute to the effect.

One possible explanation for Ewbank et al.'s findings is that angry and fearful faces represent two qualitatively different signals of threat. While fearful faces signal the presence of threat or danger for which the source is undetermined, angry facial expressions signal a more direct and immediate threat and are used primarily in face-to-face encounters to control or manipulate others' behaviour. Moreover, to fully evaluate the threat signalled by an angry face it is important to take the aggressor's identity, rank, sex, etc., into account, which requires focused attention. In contrast to anger, a fearful face may act as a potent cue to danger regardless of whether it is attended or not. However, fearful faces may be more effective when unattended—that is, prior to attentional capture and prior to knowledge of the possible source of the threat, or whether the signal may constitute a false alarm that should be ignored.

The aforementioned studies demonstrate that the observer's focus of attention has a clear influence on the neural response to facial signals of threat. However, additional research has shown that the expresser's direction of attention is an equally important factor that can affect the processing of facial signals of anger and fear. Behavioural studies report a consistent influence of gaze on the processing of angry faces, with angry faces being perceived as more threatening when their gaze is directed at, compared with away from, the observer. Similarly, there is evidence that facial expression has a reciprocal influence on perception of gaze direction, with angry expressions causing gaze or gaze/head combinations to be more readily perceived as directed at the observer. Across studies, the effect of gaze on the processing of fearful faces is less consistent than has been found for angry expressions. Some studies indicate that the processing of fearful faces is enhanced by averted relative to direct gaze, while other work reports enhanced processing for direct gaze fearful faces, or has found no significant influence of gaze on processing fearful faces; see Bindemann et al. for a detailed investigation of these effects.

Group-based fMRI studies investigating the influence of gaze on the neural response to facial signals of threat have reported mixed results. An initial study by Adams et al. found an increased amygdala response to averted gaze angry faces and direct gaze fearful faces, relative to the direct gaze angry and averted gaze fearful counterparts. By contrast, Sato et al. reported an increased amygdala response to angry faces directed towards the observer, while Hadjikhani et al. found an increased amygdala response to averted gaze fearful faces relative to direct gaze fearful faces. More recently, Straube et al. showed a greater amygdala response to averted relative to direct gaze facial expressions that did not interact with the emotion displayed (anger, happy and neutral), and therefore appeared to reflect an effect of gaze direction, rather than an interaction between facial expression and gaze.

Given the important role of anxiety in evaluating facial signals of threat, it is reasonable to expect that anxiety might also play an important role in the interactive relationship between gaze and angry expressions. This is supported by recent behavioural evidence indicating that high-anxious participants show greater avoidance behaviour when faced with direct compared with averted gaze angry faces. Similarly, Hess et al. showed that angry faces gazing at, relative to away from, the observer produced increased self-reported anxiety in observers. By contrast, direct and averted fearful faces were rated as being equally anxiety-provoking. Thus, it is reasonable to predict that the relationship between the amygdala response and anxiety should be more evident for direct than averted gaze angry faces, whereas the relationship for fearful faces would be less dependent on gaze.

Consistent with this hypothesis, Ewbank et al. found that state anxiety showed a positive linear relationship with the amygdala response to direct gaze angry faces relative to direct gaze neutral or averted gaze angry faces (c), but no corresponding effect for averted gaze angry faces. By contrast, for fearful faces, state anxiety predicted an increased amygdala response to both direct and averted gaze faces relative to their neutral face comparison conditions, although stronger evidence was found for the averted gaze condition (d). State anxiety was also correlated with the right amygdala/extended amygdala response to the interaction between emotion (anger and fear) and gaze (direct and averted), reflecting the fact that anxiety was associated with a gaze-dependent response to angry faces, but not fearful faces. The relationship between anxiety, expression and gaze direction was mirrored by behavioural ratings, which showed that increased anxiety was associated with increased ratings of anger for direct but not averted gaze angry faces, and with increased ratings of fear for both direct and averted gaze fearful faces.

These findings accord with other behavioural work showing that high-anxious participants find it harder to disengage from direct gaze angry faces and show enhanced attentional-orienting from averted gaze fearful faces. In addition, they fit with the observation that direct gaze angry faces are rated as more angry, whereas the effect of gaze on the perception of fearful faces is less consistent. Ewbank et al.'s findings also correspond extremely well with the results of our earlier neuroimaging study examining the interactive effects of facial expression (anger and fear) and the participants' focus of attention and levels of anxiety. Recall that this showed that anxiety was positively related to the amygdala response to attended, but not unattended, angry faces. By contrast, anxiety showed a positive relationship with the amygdala response to both attended and unattended fearful faces, with a marginally larger effect for unattended fear; see also. Thus, the amygdala response to angry faces shows a positive monotonic relationship with anxiety when the faces are attended by, or their gaze is directed towards, the participants. By contrast, the positive relationship between anxiety and the amygdala response to fearful faces may be less dependent on gaze direction, but there is a bias towards more marked effects for unattended faces in the studies to date.

The observation that the relationship between anxiety and the amygdala response to threat is differentially influenced by the attention and gaze for facial signals of anger and fear accords with the different nature of threat signalled by these expressions. Angry expressions afford a maximal state of vigilance when the threat is directed at and attended by the observer, owing to their maximal potential danger in this form. By contrast, the threat signalled by facial expressions of fear appears less dependent on gaze direction. In addition, as already discussed, the greater relationship between anxiety and unattended facial expressions may reflect the fact that these signals are perceived as more aversive prior to establishing the source of the threat, or prior to determining whether the signal constitutes a potential false alarm.

The results of these experiments also suggest that the amygdala response is not selective for a particular expression, nor related to the arousal value of the face, but instead reflects the degree of threat, or more specifically, the relevance of the signal to the observer. These findings, therefore, support the proposal that the amygdala constitutes an evolved system for appraisal of self-relevance, primarily involved in responding to stimuli or events that are of high personal relevance; see also Adolphs and Ewbank et al.. As such, the relationship between anxiety and the amygdala response to threat-related facial expressions is difficult to reconcile with the proposal that the amygdala is involved in coding signals of ambiguity and responds more to ambiguous threat. In other words, increasing anxiety is not associated with an increased amygdala response to signals of ambiguous threat (e.g. averted gaze angry faces), but instead shows an increased response to unambiguous threat (e.g. direct gaze angry faces).

Overall, the work reviewed above demonstrates that individual variation in anxiety within a non-clinical population shows a consistent positive relationship with the neural response to facial signals of threat. To determine the reliability of these anxiety-related brain activations, we have summarized the results of the aforementioned studies using activation likelihood estimations (ALEs). Here, we included all fMRI studies reporting a correlation between state or trait anxiety and the neural response to fearful or angry faces in non-clinical populations. According to the ALE procedure, the most statistically reliable activations were identified in bilateral amygdalae, further supporting the relationship between anxiety and this region. A full list of regions showing significant relationships with both state or trait anxiety can be seen in.

It is notable that correlations with state anxiety are located in slightly more dorsal and medial regions of the amygdala in comparison to correlations with trait anxiety, which are associated with slightly more lateral regions. The central nucleus of the amygdala is located in the dorsal section of the primate brain and projects to cortical and brainstem regions involved in autonomic arousal. By contrast, the basolateral amygdala (lateral section of the amygdala) projects to the central nucleus, and is thought to be critical for the acquisition of learned-fear responses. It is also of note that the state-related activation extends beyond the dorsal amygdala into the extended amygdala. This includes the substantia innominata, which is sensitive to ‘arousing’ stimuli. Thus, one possible interpretation is that responses correlating with state anxiety reflect increases in arousal, while responses correlating with trait anxiety correspond to enhanced processing (or encoding) of facial signals of threat. However, considering the relatively small number of studies that have examined the relationship between anxiety and the amygdala response, and the strong correlation between state and trait anxiety, further studies will be necessary to establish whether there are any reliable differences between the amygdala responses to these two measures of anxiety. Any neuroanatomical distinction is further tempered by the fact that all but one of the studies summarized in used a relatively standard acquisition sequence. High-resolution imaging, however, will be necessary to draw conclusions concerning the relative contribution of different sections of the amygdaloid complex to state and trait anxiety. Note also, that since similar numbers of studies have found correlations between state and trait anxiety and the amygdala response to facial signals of threat, we find little support for the suggestion that amygdala activity to these stimuli is primarily related to state anxiety.

In summary, a number of studies have reported a correlation between neural activity and individual variation in self-reported anxiety (both state and trait) when viewing facial signals of threat, particularly in the amygdala. A common theme across these studies is that a particular effect or interaction is not apparent, or less apparent, when using a standard univariate approach in which mean activity to two or more conditions is compared in the group as a whole. Rather, differential effects of attention, facial expression and eye gaze were more evident when factoring in the contribution of individual differences in anxiety. Thus, taking account of individual variation in anxiety has helped untangle the neural mechanisms underlying the processing of different forms of facial threat in the healthy population, both in terms of understanding the influence of the observer's focus of attention and the faces' gaze direction. Next, we consider research showing that the neural response to angry expressions is also affected by participants' sensitivity to reward.


The behavioural activation system and the processing of facial signals of aggression

Facial expressions of anger are manifest signals of threat for the individual at whom they are directed. However, the manner in which people react to such stimuli is significantly influenced by differences in personality traits and therefore differs from one individual to the next. For example, as discussed in §2, high-anxious participants may be more intimidated when facing social threats and consequently withdraw. In contrast, certain other individuals may feel provoked by displays of aggression and respond in a hostile manner. Behavioural research has indicated that these latter individuals often score high on a personality measure that assesses sensitivity to reward, such as the behavioural approach system (BAS) scale.

Although the relationship between reward and aggression is not immediately apparent, comparative research has demonstrated the adaptive function of aggression in obtaining or maintaining valued resources such as food, reproductive partners, territory and social status. Furthermore, omission or termination of a reward is a powerful instigator of aggressive behaviour in both human and non-human species. Similarly, it is of note that the aggression seen in psychopathy—a condition associated with high BAS activity—is frequently goal directed and linked to the gain of monetary and sexual rewards or social status.

A number of studies have demonstrated a relationship between BAS and aggression. Harmon-Jones reported positive associations between BAS and trait anger, and between BAS and a self-report measure of physical aggression. Similarly, Smits & Kuppens found an association between BAS and trait anger, and between BAS and reports of both physical and verbal aggressions. In a frustrative non-reward study, Carver induced anger by using a task manipulation that caused participants to lose a reward and found a positive relationship between BAS and experienced frustration. Wingrove & Bond also used an active behavioural task in which participants played a computer game that required cooperation with a partner. Unbeknown to participants, most trials were rigged to cause them to fail, resulting in anger and frustration. Measures of situational quarrelsomeness, resentfulness, discontent and hostility in this study were correlated with two scales of the BAS measure. For a more detailed review of these studies, see Carver & Harmon-Jones.

The relationship between BAS and anger also extends to processing facial expressions of anger. Putman et al. showed a positive correlation between BAS and participants' response times to identify the colour of a transparent wash placed over masked presentations of facial signals of anger in a colour Stroop task. This was attributed to high BAS participants' increased attention to angry faces, perhaps resulting from their tendency to interpret these facial displays as signals of provocation or social challenge. A similar effect has been observed in high trait anger participants.

In view of these behavioural findings, we have examined how neurophysiological responses to viewing facial signals of aggression are related to inter-subject variability in BAS. In a first fMRI experiment, we found that the BAS-drive component of this personality trait, measuring participants' drive or motivation to gain a reward or goal, was correlated with increased amygdala activation and a decreased ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC, ventral anterior cingulate cortex (vACC)) response when participants viewed pictures of angry (relative to neutral or sad) faces. Interestingly, the same inverse relationship between the amygdala and vmPFC has been observed when evoking subjective experience of anger. These findings also accord with animal research that emphasizes the role of the amygdala in triggering the negative effect associated with anger and the role of vmPFC in control or regulation of emotion, with anger associated with increased negative effect and decreased emotional control.

The vmPFC and amygdala are tightly interconnected regions, so we reasoned that a measure of the dynamic interplay between them would represent a better index of the brain mechanisms underlying the processing of facial signals of aggression and their relationship with BAS-drive. Thus, in a second fMRI study, we specifically addressed the change in effective connectivity or coupling between the vmPFC and amygdala while participants viewed angry relative to neutral faces. Effective connectivity was measured using two techniques—psycho-physiological interactions (PPIs) and dynamic causal modelling (DCM). PPI investigates how a change in a psychological context (e.g. viewing angry versus neutral faces) affects the connectivity (i.e. the correlation) between a ‘source’ region (here the amygdala) and the rest of the brain. DCM is an alternative approach to effective connectivity analysis that enables inferences about the directionality of causal connections between regions (e.g. a change in connectivity from region A to B or vice versa) within a hypothesis-driven anatomical model.

The results of the PPI analysis were remarkably specific. Across the group as a whole (i.e. irrespective of individual differences in BAS-drive), the amygdala showed a borderline negative connectivity with the left vmPFC (vACC). However, our hypothesis was that the magnitude of this effect might reflect systematic individual differences in BAS-drive personality. Consistent with this, BAS-drive was highly correlated with the change in connectivity between the amygdala and vmPFC (vACC), with high-BAS participants presenting reduced negative connectivity in response to viewing angry relative to neutral faces relative to low-BAS participants. Using DCM, we explored the directionality of the effect, and found significant changes in connectivity between the amygdala and vACC, and vice versa, as a function of viewing angry versus neutral faces across the group as a whole. However, the effect of BAS-drive on this connectivity was restricted to projections from the vACC to the amygdala; connectivity in the opposite direction was unrelated to BAS-drive.

With respect to the research discussed previously showing that anxiety can also affect the amygdalar response to facial signals of aggression, a separate connectivity analysis of the same data examined the influence of individual differences in state anxiety with PPI. This identified a change in connectivity between the amygdala and dorsal anterior cingulate, and between the amygdala and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC). In addition to the amygdala, both frontal regions have also been associated with individual differences in anxiety in selected previous studies. Although we did not investigate this network further using DCM, it is of interest that neither state nor trait anxiety (or the behavioural inhibition scale (BIS), which is also related to anxiety) was correlated with the change in connectivity between the vACC and amygdala identified by the DCM analysis investigating the relationship with BAS-drive. Hence, investigating the influence of individual differences in BAS-drive and anxiety in the context of a connectivity analysis allowed us to identify two distinct networks: one potentially underlying the increased antagonistic response to angry expressions associated with anger-prone individuals, and the other, the increased withdrawal response to these signals associated with anxiety-prone individuals.

An additional interesting observation from the DCM analysis was that the optimal neuroanatomical model for processing angry and neutral expressions included simultaneous inputs of facial information into both the amygdala and vACC (‘parallel model’), rather than an input to either of the two regions alone (‘serial models’). This ‘parallel’ model of processing facial expressions accords with electrophysiological recordings in non-human primates and humans showing that the amygdala and vmPFC/vACC respond quickly and within approximately the same time-scale window (approx. 120–220 ms) to faces. Similarly, electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings show that frontal and frontocentral regions show a more positive (or less negative) response to emotional relative to neutral faces between 120 and 300 ms.

fMRI is known to have poor temporal resolution and so inferences about the timing of effects are limited from our fMRI experiments examining the influence of BAS. To address the temporal properties of the effect of BAS-drive on the frontal response to facial expressions, we conducted a further experiment using EEG recordings in separate groups of high-BAS-drive and low-BAS-drive participants. On the basis of previous findings showing a reduced vmPFC response to angry compared with sad or neutral expressions in participants with increased BAS-drive, we hypothesized that high-BAS-drive individuals would also show a selective reduction in the frontal event-related potentials (ERPs) to angry faces relative to sad and neutral faces. Following earlier research, we focused on the frontal response within two time windows (130–200 ms and 200–300 ms post-stimulus onset). Consistent with this previous research, the first time window (130–200 ms) showed enhanced positive ERPs for emotional (angry or sad) relative to neutral faces, but these ERPs showed no significant relationship with BAS-drive. A similar group effect of emotion was also observed for the second time window (200–300 ms); however, this was qualified by an interaction with BAS-drive. Further analyses showed that the low-BAS-drive group showed significant differences between angry and neutral or sad faces, whereas no such differences were found for the high-BAS-drive group. Thus, the effect of personality on the frontocentral response to facial expressions was restricted to the second time window.

The findings of the EEG study accord with the conclusions from our connectivity analysis that there are at least two successive stages in the processing of facial expressions in the vmPFC and the amygdala. A first phase (up to about 200 ms) may reflect encoding of stimulus significance, resulting in a rapid categorization of the stimulus as emotional or not. This stage may rely on interactions between vmPFC and amygdala that are unaffected by differences in personality. During a second phase (starting around 200 ms), interactive effects of facial emotion and personality (BAS-drive) take place. Here, differences in the subjective relevance or salience of affective stimuli are computed according to ‘person-specific’ criteria that assist in adaptive ongoing behaviour. During this second stage, the reduction of the vmPFC response to angry faces in high-BAS-drive individuals may result in a diminished ability of the vmPFC to downregulate amygdala activity in response to angry faces in high-BAS-drive individuals. The former is evidenced by a decreased local fMRI response and less negative (more positive) fronto-central ERP activity, while the decreased downregulation is evidenced by reduced negative connectivity from the vmPFC to the amygdala with increasing BAS-drive, but not vice versa.

In summary, our studies addressing the influence of BAS on processing angry faces identify a specific network and time window for the interaction between a personality factor linked with aggression and the processing of these facial signals. In addition, they provide a potential neurobiological account for the influence of BAS-drive on aggression in general. The effects of BAS-drive do not simply reflect variation in general emotional arousal, because levels of anxiety and threat-sensitivity were correlated with activity in other regions, including the dorsal ACC—an area implicated in fear conditioning and anticipation of aversive events—which showed altered activation or connectivity with the amygdala as a function of anxiety. Consequently, our findings may also provide a potential neural account of why angry faces are interpreted as provocative (producing an aggressive response) or frightening (producing a withdrawal response) according to an individual's personality/temperament and brain areas engaged.


Individual differences and functional imaging

This review has outlined a number of studies reporting a consistent relationship between behavioural measures of personality and the neural processing of particular facial expressions. However, this type of research, and investigations of the relationship between individual differences and neural activity in general, has recently prompted a lively debate. One group of researchers have questioned the statistical validity of many findings using this approach, and suggest that the relationship between behavioural measures and brain activation has been over-inflated. Vul et al. argue that when the reliability of both fMRI and the behavioural measures used to assess individual differences are considered, the reported correlations between the two appear ‘puzzlingly high’. They propose that this over-inflation is the result of ‘non-independence’ errors, and that such errors are widespread in fMRI studies of individual differences.

In a non-independent analysis of neuroimaging data, voxels are selected on the basis of achieving a particular threshold in an initial analysis and then a secondary analysis is performed on the data from those same voxels. Thus, the selection procedure is not independent of the relevant measure. In the case of regression analyses investigating individual differences in neuroimaging, Vul et al. argue that a relationship between a behavioural measure and brain activity is often the selection criterion, while the correlation coefficient(s) between the behavioural measure and the selected voxel(s) constitute(s) the secondary statistic. Insufficient correction for multiple comparisons means that a greater number of voxels showing a correlation with noise will pass the statistical threshold (false positives), and the results of the secondary analysis are guaranteed to be significant. Vul et al. discuss that in this way, non-independent analyses result in inflation of the correlation coefficients.

Vul et al. focused their paper on functional neuroimaging studies in social cognitive neuroscience. As others have pointed out, this type of error is not unique to social neuroscience, and has been highlighted in previous papers addressing the analysis of neuroimaging data and other multivariate datasets. However, Vul et al. argued that a number of high-profile publications in social neuroscience investigating individual differences are guilty of non-independence errors and therefore concentrated on these studies. Some associated commentaries and responses have contested Vul et al.'s criticisms, arguing that the problem is much less widespread or severe than Vul et al. imply. Others emphasize that the problem is not unique to fMRI, or discuss lessons learned from correlational analyses of other multivariate datasets or other reasons why correlation coefficients can be inflated. It is impossible to do justice to the numerous arguments outlined in these papers in the following sections, and we recommend that interested readers should consult these papers themselves.

To illustrate the non-independence error, Vul et al. present the example of temperature readings taken from a weather station that happens to predict daily changes in the value of a set of stocks on the New York stock exchange (NYSE) with an average correlation coefficient (r) of −0.87. The selected stocks were those whose correlation coefficient exceeded a particular threshold after computing the correlation between the temperature readings of the weather station and each of the 3315 stocks on the NYSE. Some of the stocks were sure to be correlated with temperature measurements simply by chance. So the selected stocks were guaranteed to show a relatively high average correlation. However, Nichols & Poline point out that such an example is based entirely on a null hypothesis argument (i.e. all of the relationships reflect noise). By contrast, they argue that correcting for multiple comparisons (e.g. p < 0.05 family-wise error (FWE) correction threshold)—a recommended procedure for analysis of neuroimaging data—should result in no false positives at all with 95% confidence. Thus, significantly active voxels at corrected thresholds are likely to reflect true positives.

Even when controlling for multiple comparisons, a valid concern of Vul et al. still remains, namely that a number of readers are likely to consider the correlation magnitude as important. Nichols & Poline suggest that correlations should be reported for what they are (i.e. suprathreshold values that are post hoc measures of significance, uncorrected for multiple testing). In analyses of neuroimaging datasets, they are equivalent to raw t-statistics, which are often reported together with corrected p-values. In short, they should not be interpreted in the same way as correlation coefficients examining the relationship between just two variables; neither should they be interpreted as an estimate of the effect size. However, the principal concern of Vul et al. is important, in that the magnitude of the correlation between neural activity and a given behavioural measure should not be inferred as representing an index of the true relationship between the two. In this respect, please note that none of the studies that we have reviewed in this paper has relied on the uncorrected p-value of a correlation coefficient as the measure of statistical significance. Rather, all but one of these studies, reported maximal raw t- or z-statistics of voxel clusters together with p-values corrected for multiple comparisons using small volume (e.g. FWE) correction. Moreover, and illustrate that the amygdala response to facial signals of threat showed a highly consistent relationship with anxiety, which was present in all studies reported. Similarly, the neural response to facial signals of aggression in the amygdala and vmPFC showed a significant relationship with BAS-drive using a number of different neuroimaging techniques. Nonetheless, the correlation coefficients in these studies may reflect an inflated estimate of the true magnitude of the relationship.

According to Vul et al., the strength of the relationship between the brain activation and a behavioural measure is further misrepresented through the inclusion of ‘visually pleasing’ scatter plots, which show the relationship between a behavioural measure and the peak voxel of a significant cluster. However, like others, we would argue that the inclusion of a scatter plot is an essential aspect of studies investigating individual differences, not least because an apparent ‘linear relationship’ between two variables can result from clearly different data distributions. Scatter plots are needed not only to demonstrate that the correlation is not driven by one or two outliers, but also can reveal the presence of a bimodal or even a quadratic distribution, for example.

Vul et al. suggest two solutions to the problems they highlight. The first is to use an independently defined region of interest (ROI), such as an anatomically defined ROI or a functionally defined ROI. For example, a comparison of fearful and neutral faces in a separate ‘functional localizer scan’ might be used to identify selected voxels in the amygdala that are responsive to fearful expressions. The signal in these voxels for the contrast of interest in the main experiment can be extracted and correlated with a specific behavioural variable. As illustrated in, however, correlations between a behavioural measure and the brain activity of a particular region can be observed in the absence of a main group effect in the same region. Consistent with this, we also discussed that 40 per cent of experiments examining brain activation to fearful facial expressions have failed to find a significant amygdala response. In contrast, all of the studies we have reported found a significant relationship between anxiety and amygdala activation to fearful faces, although we accept that more studies addressing the latter are required.

As a further alternative, Vul et al. propose that researchers split their datasets into two halves. One half can be used to identify the voxels that show a correlation between a behavioural measure and brain activation to a particular contrast. The remaining data are then used to test whether the selected voxels show a similar relationship in a separate analysis. However, Poldrack & Mumford caution that any between-subject variance will produce a correlation between runs, making this approach non-independent. Moreover, they point out that using fewer data will result in less statistical power; but see Vul et al. for a response.

One of the commentaries by Yarkoni makes an important contribution to the debate by arguing that although correlation coefficients in fMRI studies may indeed be inflated, the principal cause is different to that suggested by Vul et al. In essence, Yarkoni highlights that the relatively small sample sizes typical of fMRI research require high correlation coefficients to achieve the stringent alpha-correction levels used in fMRI. Hence, significant r-values will always be large in restricted sample sizes. In addition, they point out that as sample sizes increase, effect sizes (including correlation coefficients) typically decrease. However, larger samples provide a truer estimate of the actual population effect size. Another adverse consequence of limited power is type II error, that is, the failure to detect real effects. Of course this is a problem for all research, but the problem is exacerbated for correlational analyses because they typically require large sample sizes to achieve adequate power.

Yarkoni is careful to point out, however, that the limitations he identifies are based on the assumption that the true size of correlation coefficients observed in fMRI is approximately the same as those found in behavioural research. In the absence of any evidence to the contrary, this seems a reasonable starting point. But it is interesting to note that the correlations between the amygdala and anxiety we have reported are consistent across studies. If the magnitude of the population coefficient is relatively low, however, then we might expect that a significant relationship between anxiety and the amygdala response would be found in fewer studies than observed given their relatively restricted sample sizes in comparison with behavioural research. Note also, that given the concerns relating to type II error, the results of these studies cannot be taken as evidence that the relationship between anxiety and the brain is somehow ‘selective’ to the amygdala and other brain areas summarized in. Rather, they indicate the important and reliable influence that anxiety has on the neural response of these areas to facial signals of threat. Better estimates of the population effect will require larger sample sizes. Indeed, as Yarkoni points out, larger samples are the obvious solution to the problems he identifies.

As with all fields of science, the reliability of the relationship between variables can only be established through independent testing and replication. This review has sought to highlight the reliability of the relationship between behavioural measures of specific personality traits and the neural response to certain facial expressions. In particular, we show that the relationship between anxiety and the amygdala response to facial signals of threat is found across a number of studies (see ALE analysis reported above). Similarly, initial research shows that a relationship between BAS-drive and the neural response to facial signals of aggression can be detected using different neuroimaging techniques (EEG recordings and regression analyses and effective connectivity analyses of fMRI data).

Vul et al. and others have highlighted some weaknesses in the study of individual differences, and future studies should consider the concerns they have raised. In addition to the alternative methods of analysis suggested by Vul et al., Yarkoni suggests that where r-values are presented they should be accompanied by confidence intervals to indicate their reliability. Failing this, the correlation coefficient should probably be omitted and the z- or t-statistic and corrected p-value reported alone. In this way, any confusion regarding whether a secondary non-independent analysis has been conducted can be avoided and the magnitude of the relationship not over-emphasized. Indeed, correlation coefficients are often calculated by the experimenters in post hoc analyses, rather than being provided by the analysis software by default. However, it is important to stress once again that none of the studies we have considered has drawn conclusions on the basis of secondary statistics. Moreover, following the first demonstration of a relationship between anxiety and the amygdala response to facial signals of threat, all subsequent studies confirmed their a priori hypothesis that the amygdala would show a similar effect.

In conclusion, identifying a relationship between certain personality dimensions and the neural response to facial signals of emotion is informative at two levels. First, it provides increased understanding of the neural basis of the personality variables. Second, the cognitive neuroscientist can exploit these relationships to improve our knowledge of the neural basis of processing facial expressions and emotional stimuli in general. Variables such as anxiety vary continuously across both healthy and clinical populations. So research that takes account of this variation, by including a correlational analysis, will be better placed to delineate the neural mechanisms of emotional processing than studies that rely on the standard subtraction contrast procedure alone. The approach is not restricted to investigations of emotional dimensions, however. There is good evidence that a measure of severity of autism symptoms, the autism-spectrum quotient (AQ) varies continuously across both typical and clinical populations, and that it predicts performance in certain behavioural tasks that are impaired in people with autism. In addition, initial work in typical, healthy participants shows that AQ scores correlate with the structure and neural response of the posterior superior temporal sulcus, a brain region implicated in social processing and autism. Numerous studies have also investigated how task performance relates to neural activation. This includes recent work showing that performance on face perception tasks predicts the structure and neural responses of temporal lobe regions in congenital prosopagnosics and controls. It is hoped that future work examining the influence of individual differences may provide additional insights into other aspects of face perception. In addition, these studies may help reveal that apparent inconsistencies in the literature are attributable to variation in relevant psychological dimensions, rather than meaningless noise.


Cognitive enhancement by drugs in health and disease

Masud Husain, Mitul A. Mehta — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2011. PMC3020278, CC BY 3.0.

Attempts to improve cognitive function in patients with brain disorders have become the focus of intensive research efforts. A recent emerging trend is the use of so-called cognitive enhancers by healthy individuals. Here, we consider some of the effects – positive and negative – that current drugs have in neurological conditions and healthy people. We conclude that, to date, experimental and clinical studies have demonstrated relatively modest overall effects, most probably because of substantial variability in response both across and within individuals. We discuss biological factors that might account for such variability and highlight the need to improve testing methods and to extend our understanding of how drugs modulate specific cognitive processes at the systems or network level.


Uses of cognitive enhancement

In the last decade, pharmacological treatments aimed at improving cognitive function across a range of brain disorders have been explored and have even become established in clinical practice. In developmental conditions such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), drugs acting on the noradrenergic and dopaminergic systems, such as methylphenidate and atomoxetine, are now in widespread use. For neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEIs) and memantine [an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist] are now standard treatments.

In chronic mental disorders such as schizophrenia, cognitive deficits are a separable feature from positive (e.g. hallucinations and delusions) and negative (e.g. blunted affect, poverty of speech) symptoms, with current antipsychotic treatments having little, if any, impact on cognitive impairments. A wide range of compounds is therefore being assessed for cognitive enhancement in this disorder. Similarly, attempts to ameliorate cognitive deficits following stroke are being actively explored, although none have been established. Many such cognitive enhancers target neuromodulatory systems – cholinergic, dopaminergic, noradrenergic and serotonergic – ascending from brainstem nuclei to innervate both cortical and subcortical systems.

Although most of the reported positive effects of such drugs have been modest in magnitude overall and are highly variable across individuals, they have had an enormous impact, stimulating interest in cognitive enhancement not only for patients with brain disorders, but also for healthy individuals. Compounds such as methylphenidate and modafinil are used by students in pursuit of better grades, military personnel who need to remain awake for long missions, elderly individuals afraid of cognitive decline and even university academics keen to maintain their performance.

Here we focus on what aspects of cognition are enhanced, the magnitude of these effects and possible mechanisms underlying variations in response across individuals. Our aim is to highlight key common themes across studies of clinical populations and healthy individuals, using examples that highlight these principles. Other recent reviews provide excellent discussions of ethical issues in cognitive enhancement and illustrate the complexity of physiological, cellular and computational mechanisms underlying such effects.


What is enhanced?

What exactly do cognitive neuromodulators do? It might be tempting to assume a selective one-to-one mapping between a specific neurotransmitter system and a particular cognitive function. For example, dopamine has been strongly linked with working memory (WM) and attention, whereas serotonergic drugs have been prominently associated with affective processes. However, serotonergic modulation can also influence WM, as can noradrenaline and acetylcholine. Conversely, dopamine influences affective processing. A simple mapping between a specific neurotransmitter and a particular cognitive function described at a very general level – such as WM – therefore seems untenable. However, subtle but important differences in the precise processes modulated might provide some discriminating value: for instance, dopamine has an established role in reinforcement learning in response to rewards, whereas serotonin seems to modulate reinforcement learning for aversive stimuli.

To add to the complexity, neurotransmitters act via a suite of different receptor systems. Thus, dopamine acting at D1 receptors can have very different – even opposing – effects to that of its actions at D2 receptors; for serotonin there are 17 different receptor systems. In addition, dopamine can have very different effects at different brain regions, even within different regions of the human basal ganglia. Its release can also be modulated in a highly specific regional manner by other neurotransmitters, such as glutamate within the nucleus accumbens. Thus, interactions between neuromodulatory systems are also a probable mechanism by which some of their effects are modulated. For instance, dopamine, noradrenaline and acetylcholine release is under histaminergic H3 heteroreceptor control, whereas noradrenaline and dopamine can interact to modulate spatial WM neuronal responses in prefrontal cortex in a synergistic fashion. Again, these considerations suggest that simple conceptualizations linking a specific neurotransmitter to a single cognitive function are unlikely to be helpful.

Finally, there is increasing evidence that several neurotransmitters might have different modes of action when released in a tonic, sustained manner compared to phasic release. For instance, baseline firing of noradrenergic cells in the locus coeruleus varies with different states of alertness or arousal. Optimal responses to environmentally important events seem to be linked to phasic firing of these cells, but this occurs only when tonic levels of activity are moderate. Thus, alteration of global concentrations of a neurotransmitter might modulate the ability to respond to external events mediated by phasic firing.

How do drugs currently used as enhancers produce their beneficial effects? Is it through multiple effects on several different cognitive processes or do they enhance one cognitive mechanism – such as arousal or improved sustained attention – through which they lead to better performance across a battery of tests? For studies in clinical populations, the difficulty is that many standard cognitive test batteries used in clinical trials are very unlikely to be sensitive enough to answer questions on the specificity of cognitive modulation.

For example, AChEIs such as rivastigmine and donepezil are now widely used to treat Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) and the related condition of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Many clinical trials have reported modest global beneficial effects of such drugs on bedside cognitive screening tests. More detailed assessment using sensitive computerized cognitive tests has revealed widespread improvements in the domains of attention, WM and episodic memory. However, these positive effects of AChEIs might all be mediated via a common process such as elevated arousal. In fact, the very same issue pertains to the modulatory effects of AChEIs in healthy subjects. For example, in young volunteers, donepezil improves episodic memory, whereas healthy elderly subjects show improvements in verbal memory. Is it possible that these effects could be due simply to a generalized improvement in arousal? Studies demonstrating that donepezil attenuates decline in short-term memory and visual attention induced by sleep deprivation raise the possibility that this might indeed be the case.

Similar considerations as for AChEIs also apply to modafinil, which has become a popular drug for cognitive enhancement in healthy individuals. Although its precise mechanism of action remains to be established, modafinil is used as a wake-promoting agent for the treatment of narcolepsy, a disorder associated with excessive daytime somnolence. Analysis of the effects of modafinil in healthy subjects has revealed improvements in attention, memory and executive function in sleep-deprived individuals. However, this might simply be due to improved wakefulness or arousal induced by the drug, just as caffeine can improve performance on a variety of measures, including vigilance, and on incidental learning and WM tests. However, it is also important to appreciate that ‘arousal’ need not be a unitary process: there is evidence of different arousal systems that might be selectively modulated by different types of pharmacological intervention.

It is possible that neuroimging studies might contribute to identification of the mechanisms underpinning improvement on cognitive tests, including arousal. Although early studies assessed changes in brain activity on drug administration, more recent investigations have begun to examine the modulatory effect of compounds on brain networks. For example, the beneficial effects of reboxetine on visuomotor control are associated with strengthening of coupling between selective regions in posterior and anterior regions of the right hemisphere. Approaches to characterize the effects of drugs at a network level in brain disorders are also being applied in patient groups. Finally, it is also crucial to appreciate that non-cognitive factors such as alterations in mood, anxiety, motivation or apathy induced by a drug can have indirect effects on cognition. Hence, it is useful to control for these factors if at all possible.


How effective are the benefits?

A major issue in assessing cognitive enhancement studies is the problem of effect size. First, in studies of healthy subjects, there is no universal, standard battery of tests that has been agreed on, so comparisons across studies are not easy. It is not possible to compare effect sizes for different drugs if the tests used differ in the level of difficulty or method of measurement (e.g. reaction time vs error rate). Overall, however, the effects of cognitive enhancers such as methylphenidate, modafinil and AChEIs in healthy individuals seems to be quite modest according to recent systematic reviews. Second, many experimental investigations in healthy subjects have used single-dose assessments aimed primarily at assessing mechanisms rather than establishing optimal cognitive enhancement. Very few studies have examined the effects of repeated doses or long-term effects, which might be far more revealing and representative of the overall costs and benefits of taking cognitive enhancers on a regular basis. Third, as we have seen, although clinical trials in patients often use standardized bedside batteries, they might be hampered by their insensitivity and limited range of measurement.

Nevertheless, even for these relatively crude measures, studies in clinical populations have revealed significant effects of long-term drug use that have led to changes in practice. For example, one of the remarkable changes in the management of neurological conditions in the last decade has been the advent of treatment for cognitive deficits in neurodegenerative conditions, initially in Alzheimer's disease with AChEIs. These studies stimulated clinical trials in other conditions such as PDD and DLB, with two major placebo-controlled studies involving over 650 patients demonstrating significant positive effects of the AChEI rivastigmine on cognition and neuropsychiatric measures such as apathy, anxiety and visual hallucinations.

Although these trials have now led to widespread clinical use of rivastigmine, it is important to keep the effect size in perspective. In the larger study, rivastigmine produced only a mean 2-point improvement on the ADAS-Cog battery, which has a 70-point range. Similar degrees of change have been observed in Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia trials with AChEIs (a).

Of course, effect sizes vary across individual patients. Indeed ∼40–80% of PDD or DLB patients might not show a response to treatment on such clinical measures, but other individuals show a very strong improvement. Overall, therefore, this means that positive effects have been moderate, at best, when results are examined at the group level – at least using this currently accepted method for measuring cognition in neurodegenerative clinical trials. Similar conclusions have been reached in schizophrenia, for which there is currently no established treatment for cognitive enhancement. Thus, interindividual variability might be one potential reason for small overall effect sizes (see below).

By contrast, a first glance might indicate far more substantial effect sizes in treatment trials of ADHD, for which several drugs that target the catecholaminergic system are used in clinics. For example, a recent study using high levels of the α2 noradrenergic agonist guanfacine demonstrated a 12-point mean improvement compared to placebo on a rating scale with a range of 54 points (b). However, these effects were based on ratings by parents or caregivers, and not on cognitive tests. These might be very valid measures to rate the behavioural effects of a drug, but the point is that when considering effect size it is crucial to bear in mind the nature of the assessments. It is also important to question whether there might be negative effects of taking a compound.


The downside of cognitive enhancers

Like all drugs, those used with the aim of enhancing cognition can have side effects via body systems other than the brain. Thus, both AChEIs and methylphenidate frequently cause gastrointestinal upset or nausea, sometimes leading patients to discontinue medication altogether. These effects have the potential to offset any positive effects of the drug on overall performance, and also need to be borne in mind by anyone contemplating use of such drugs for non-medicinal purposes. More important from a cognitive neuroscience perspective is the ability of some drugs to impair certain aspects of cognition while simultaneously enhancing others in the same individual.

Thus, rivastigmine in healthy elderly subjects can improve learning on a motor task and making associations between symbols and digits, but can at the same time impair verbal and visual episodic memory. Similarly, the dopamine agonist bromocriptine can enhance spatial WM while simultaneously impairing probabilistic reversal learning in young participants. This finding echoes results in patients with PD: dopaminergic medication improves their performance on WM and task-set switching tasks, but degrades reversal learning. It has been hypothesized that such opposing effects are due to ‘overdosing’ of ventral striatal areas involved in the latter, but replenishment of dopamine in dorsal striatal areas required for the former. Thus, doses of dopaminergic medication sufficient to ameliorate motor function and some aspects of cognition in PD have the potential to worsen others.

Indeed, this conclusion might well be applicable to recent reports that some PD patients on dopaminergic agonists developed impulsive behaviours such as gambling, compulsive shopping and hypersexuality. It has been reported that such behaviour in PD is often associated with the presence of dyskinesias, involuntary movements due to excessive dopaminergic stimulation, consistent with the notion that such impulse control disorders might indeed be associated with ‘overdosing’ of some basal ganglia regions. Importantly, reducing the dose of dopaminergic drugs often leads to reductions in impulsivity. These findings show that dopamine agonists in PD can have a spectrum of effects, both beneficial and harmful, on cognition and behaviour.


Who benefits from cognitive enhancers?

A major theme that has emerged from studies of neurological patient groups is that there is a great variability of response, with many individuals not responding to treatment on (relatively crude) clinical measures, whereas others show a very strong improvement, for example in response to AChEIs. Thus, although this group of patients demonstrates a modest average cognitive change overall, the effect is likely to be diluted by the fact that many individuals show very little benefit.

The same issue has arisen in investigations in healthy individuals: some subjects respond, whereas others might show little or no benefit. As we discuss below, recent investigations have begun to question whether such differences in outcome might depend on genotype and/or the baseline level of cognitive function. These considerations also raise concerns about what has become the standard method of performing clinical drug trials. Large-scale randomized controlled trials offer protection from false positive findings, but they also have the potential to discard the fact that some subgroups might benefit from a compound, whereas others might not.

What might be the cause of such variations in response? Several studies on the effects of dopaminergic drugs on WM in healthy volunteers support the conclusion that those who benefit most are low performers, such as those with low WM capacity or span. Thus, methylphenidate or dopamine receptor agonists such as bromocriptine improve WM updating or retrieval in people who were low performers on study entry, but can actually impair performance in participants with high baseline WM spans.

One possible explanation for such contradictory effects might reside in the classic inverted U-shaped relationship between cognitive performance and dopamine receptor (particularly D1 receptor) stimulation. Such effects have been known for a long time, with investigations in experimental animals revealing that both low and excessively high levels of D1 receptor stimulation in the prefrontal cortex can impair WM. For optimal performance, a baseline level between these two extremes is required.

However, until recently, direct evidence in favour of this concept has been lacking in humans. New findings reveal that dopamine synthesis capacity in the caudate nucleus of the basal ganglia is lower in individuals with low WM spans compared to those with high spans. Participants in this study were also investigated after taking bromocriptine or placebo. Ability to update reward predictions on a reversal learning task was improved by bromocriptine far more in individuals with low baseline dopamine synthesis capacity in the basal ganglia. Indeed, high-synthesis subjects were actually impaired in their performance.

More recently, it was demonstrated using radioligand positron emission tomography (PET) imaging that individuals with small levels of dopamine release induced by methylphenidate improved on a reversal learning task. By contrast, participants with larger dopamine release in the caudate nucleus were impaired by the drug. Importantly, the authors also found that the most impulsive subjects (as indexed by their score on an impulsivity scale) were more likely to improve with methylphenidate. Thus, both baseline trait impulsivity and methylphenidate-induced dopamine release affected response to drugs.

The effects of methyphenidate on spatial WM in healthy subjects are also most prominent in individuals with the lowest performance. In ADHD it has similarly been reported that children with the poorest sustained attention or highest baseline motor activity are most likely to respond to methylphenidate treatment. The effects of baseline performance might also be evident for cholinergic modulation: whereas beneficial effects of donepezil on cognitive function were evident in healthy participants whose performance declined after sleep deprivation, those who were not much affected by sleep loss tended to deteriorate after donepezil intake. Modafinil also seems to have the most prominent cognitive effects on attention and WM in subjects who have low baseline performance. Interestingly, recent studies using magnetic resonance spectroscopy suggest that levels of GABA in specific brain regions predict differences in individual performance on cognitive tasks. Thus, one reason for baseline performance modulation of response to drugs might be the baseline level of a neurotransmitter in a critical brain region or network.


Effects of genotype on response to drugs

Genetic predictors of individual variability in response to treatments aimed at improving cognitive function would clearly be beneficial in effective targeting of therapeutic strategies. These effects might result directly from variations in efficiency of drug targets or indirectly via metabolic pathways or other risk genes. Several studies have suggested a role for polymorphisms in the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) enzyme-coding region on chromosone 22 in WM. COMT degrades catecholamines, including dopamine, at the synapse. Polymorphisms of the COMT gene seem to be associated with variability in human WM performance and associated brain activity, presumed to be via its putative influence on cortical dopamine levels.

Amphetamine responses might interact with COMT activity. When performing a test of cognitive flexibility – the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test – those with the higher-activity COMT Val-Val genotype improved, whereas those with the lower-activity Met-Met genotype deteriorated after a single dose of amphetamine. An inverted-U relationship between predicted cortical dopamine levels and performance is consistent with these findings.

Variations in COMT and the dopamine transporter gene (DAT) are both obvious candidates for modulation of response to psychomotor stimulant treatment in a condition such as ADHD. DAT is a major target of methylphenidate and amphetamine, and many treatments for ADHD, including the noradrenaline transporter inhibitor atomoxetine, are thought to increase cortical dopamine levels, consistent with a role for COMT. An association between good clinical response to methylphenidate and carriers of the high-activity Val polymorphism also suggests a role for cortical dopamine in mediating treatment response. However, the influence of variable number of tandem repeats in the DAT gene on methylphenidate response seems to be mixed.

Apoliprotein E4 (apoE4), an allele of apolipoprotein E, which is involved in lipoprotein processing in cells, increases the risk of developing dementia later in life. Perhaps paradoxically, young healthy carriers of this genotype, who have a higher risk of cognitive decline later in life, actually show better performance on decision-making and prospective memory tasks compared to their apoE3 counterparts. Moreover, nicotine – but not dopaminergic drugs – potentiate the advantage in apoE4 carriers, producing greater cognitive benefits in these individuals than in apoE3 carriers on these tasks. The reasons for this are unclear, but the findings suggest that some genetic variations influence the integrity of specific neurotransmitter systems, limiting the potential to improve function in response to drugs acting on the same systems.

For the AChEIs, extensive metabolizers of drugs as defined by gene variations in cytochrome P450 (a family of degradative enzymes) might show greater response to donepezil and rivastigmine. This has been demonstrated using the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), which is a relatively crude bedside test of cognition; selective cognitive tasks have not been used to elucidate process-specific advantages.


Drug effects and behavioural training

One area that is likely to develop in cognitive enhancement research is investigation of the interaction between drugs and behavioural approaches to improve cognition. There has been a great deal of recent interest in the potential for cognitive training, for example on WM tasks, to improve performance not only on these paradigms but also to generalize to other tasks in healthy people, as well as those with brain conditions such as ADHD. fMRI studies in healthy participants have revealed alterations in activity across parietal and frontal regions during such training. Intriguingly, radioligand PET imaging demonstrated associated changes in dopamine D1 receptor binding in parietal and frontal areas. Thus it might be possible to visualize alterations in neurotransmitter systems as a function of cognitive training using brain imaging.

An important question for future studies will be whether there can be synergistic effects of behavioural training and cognitive-enhancing drugs. Such synergism has been demonstrated for learning of new material and levodopa in healthy subjects. Whether such combined intervention might also be useful for cognitive deficits in brain disorders has yet to be explored in detail. However, there is emerging evidence of such effects. For example, both memantine and speech therapy improved dysphasia in stroke patients, but the combination of the two led to enhanced outcomes. Demonstrations of network-level interactions for drug and cognitive training in this type of context would be an important way to investigate the mechanisms underlying such synergistic effects. Taking the effects of genotype, baseline cognitive performance and the nature of brain disorder in patients into account is likely to be an important factor in understanding such synergies.


Concluding remarks

It would probably be fair to say that we are still in the first generation of studies to examine the potential for cognitive enhancement in humans. In both healthy individuals and many patient groups, the overall effects of drugs generally seem to be modest. However, there is evidence that there might be more significant effects in subgroups, such as those whose baseline performance is poorest or individuals with a particular genotype. Moreover, new drugs aimed at enhancing the phasic response of neurotransmitter systems, such as direct nicotinic agonists for the cholinergic system, might prove to have greater effects than existing modulators that globally increase levels of a neurotransmitter in a tonic fashion. The neurobiology underpinning the effects of cognitive enhancers and the mechanisms that determine responsiveness across individuals promise to be the focus of research in health and brain disorders in the future.


A review and synthesis of the first 20 years of PET and fMRI studies of heard speech, spoken language and reading

Cathy J. Price — Neuroimage, 2012. PMC3398395, CC BY 3.0.

The anatomy of language has been investigated with PET or fMRI for more than 20 years. Here I attempt to provide an overview of the brain areas associated with heard speech, speech production and reading. The conclusions of many hundreds of studies were considered, grouped according to the type of processing, and reported in the order that they were published. Many findings have been replicated time and time again leading to some consistent and undisputable conclusions. These are summarised in an anatomical model that indicates the location of the language areas and the most consistent functions that have been assigned to them. The implications for cognitive models of language processing are also considered. In particular, a distinction can be made between processes that are localized to specific structures (e.g. sensory and motor processing) and processes where specialisation arises in the distributed pattern of activation over many different areas that each participate in multiple functions. For example, phonological processing of heard speech is supported by the functional integration of auditory processing and articulation; and orthographic processing is supported by the functional integration of visual processing, articulation and semantics. Future studies will undoubtedly be able to improve the spatial precision with which functional regions can be dissociated but the greatest challenge will be to understand how different brain regions interact with one another in their attempts to comprehend and produce language.


Introduction

In the last 20 years, there has been an explosion of research into the neural basis of language processing. This has clearly established that spoken and written language relies on concurrent activation in multiple brain areas. The location of these regions has been identified with functional neuroimaging techniques such as Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) that measure hemodynamic changes, while the timing of brain activity during language processing has been identified using electromagnetic techniques such as magnetoencephalography (MEG) and electroencephalography (EEG). Although it is the combination of these spatial and temporal measurements that is needed to provide a mechanistic account of language (Demonet and Thierry, 2001), the current review focuses only on the localisation of language and reading areas with PET and fMRI.

Prior to the availability of functional imaging techniques, our understanding of language in the brain rested on studies of impairments in patients with brain damage or patients undergoing electrical stimulation during neurosurgery. The most popular neural model of language was based on the writings of Broca, Wernicke and Lichtheim at the end of the 19th Century and Geschwind in the mid 20th Century (Broca, 1861; Wernicke, 1874; Lichtheim, 1885; Geschwind, 1965). Auditory speech recognition was localized to the left posterior temporal cortex (Wernicke's area); speech production (motor word representations) was localized to the left posterior inferior frontal cortex (Broca's area); and visual word recognition was localized to the left angular gyrus (Dejerine, 1891). One of the major limitations with this classical neurological model is that it does not indicate how single words are combined into meaningful sentences. This was highlighted in the latter half of the 20th Century, when it was noted that although Broca's aphasics could comprehend heard speech based on semantic content, they had difficulty comprehending sentences that depended on complex syntactic analysis (Caramazza and Zurif, 1976). It was also noted that circumscribed damage to Broca's area only resulted in temporary speech production difficulties and that permanent speech production difficulties were observed when frontal lobe damage extended into the insula and parietal regions in patients with left middle cerebral artery infarcts (Mohr et al., 1978).

The neurological model of language also failed to explain why those with reading difficulties might have a selective impairment of the ability to read whole words with atypical spellings such as “yacht” or, conversely, a selective impairment of the ability to read nonwords with no meaning such as “yatched” (Marshall and Newcombe, 1973). Such observations suggested that there are two or more different pathways to speech output from text. The complexity of language processing and the importance of many regions outside Broca's and Wernicke's territories were therefore well appreciated prior to the availability of functional imaging techniques such as PET and fMRI.


Early PET studies

The landmark of functional imaging study of auditory and visual word processing was published in 1988 by Petersen and colleagues who used PET to identify the brain areas activated when healthy participants were presented with auditory or visual single words and were instructed either to view them passively, repeat them or generate a verb that was related to the heard or seen noun (e.g. “eat” in response to “cake”). On the basis of the results and other deductions, the authors concluded that (i) auditory word forms were processed in the left temporoparietal cortex, (ii) visual word forms were processed in the left extrastriate cortex, (iii) semantic associations involved the left ventral prefrontal cortex, (iv) word generation involved the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; (v) general response selection involved the anterior cingulate; (vi) articulatory coding and motor programming involved the left ventral premotor cortex, left anterior insula (referred to as the buried sylvian cortex) and supplementary motor cortex (SMA) and (vii) motor execution involved the rolandic cortex (the posterior part of the precentral gyrus bordering the central sulcus). Together the results provided a new anatomical model of lexical processing (Petersen et al., 1988; Petersen et al., 1989) that is illustrated in. The key features of this model were the inclusion of a small number of discrete areas with multiple parallel routes between localized sensory-specific, phonological, articulatory and semantic-coding areas.

Shortly after this study, the same authors published a PET study of reading that compared regional activation in response to visual words and word-like stimuli (Petersen et al., 1990). The association of the left medial extrastriate cortex with visual word form processing was confirmed because this area was activated by visually presented words and pseudowords that obey English spelling rules but was not activated by unfamiliar strings of letters or letter-like forms. In addition, activation in the left frontal cortex which had been associated with semantic processing during word generation (Petersen et al., 1988; Petersen et al., 1989) was found to be more activated by passive presentation of words than pseudowords. Thus Petersen et al. (1990) were able to distinguish high-level visual and semantic computations on single words and describe the underlying anatomy.

In 1991, Petersen and colleagues' early findings were replicated and extended. Wise et al. (1991a) found that the response in the left posterior superior temporal cortex (Wernicke's area) dissociated from that in other left and right superior temporal regions because only activation in the left posterior temporal area was independent of the rate of presentation of the auditory input. The importance of considering how frontal and temporal lobes interacted was highlighted by Frith et al. (1991) who demonstrated that when words were produced without stimuli (i.e. verbal fluency) activation increased in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex but decreased in superior temporal cortices, whereas, during lexical decisions on heard words, activation increased in the superior temporal cortices with no change in prefrontal activation. In a follow up paper (Friston et al., 1991), the same authors pursued the emphasis on regional interactions by correlating activation in the superior temporal gyrus and prefrontal cortex and proposing that word representations were distributed in the left superior temporal cortex and word processing in the temporal lobe was modulated by the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.

The importance of these early PET studies was far reaching. They illustrated that functional imaging could provide anatomical localization with a precision that far exceeds that attainable with human brain lesion studies. Moreover, the study of healthy subjects avoids possible confounding effects of brain lesions, such as compensatory reorganization of brain function (Haxby et al., 1991; Raichle, 1991; Wise et al., 1991b). Methodological challenges were also well appreciated particularly when the results appeared to contradict classic axioms of language organization. For example, Steinmetz and Seitz (1991) argued that data should not be averaged over subjects because intraoperative stimulation showed diversity in location of language functions and morphometrical imaging studies showed diversity of brain shape and gyral patterns that would be difficult to correct with anatomical normalisation techniques. Many other concerns were succinctly addressed in a review by Petersen and Fiez (1993) who pointed out that functional neuroimaging results should be viewed as evolutionary, rather than revolutionary and that they were most interpretable when they were backed up by supporting data from other studies. For example, after the Petersen et al. (1988), Petersen et al. (1989) observation that the right lateral inferior cerebellum was activated by cognitive rather than sensory motor computations, they demonstrated that damage to the right cerebellum impairs practice related learning and detection of errors (Fiez et al., 1992). Petersen and Fiez (1993) also emphasized that complex language functions were not localized in specific brain regions; they were distributed across networks of regions with each area making a specific contribution to the performance of the task which depends on its connections to other areas in a parallel distributed hierarchy. In this context, understanding the functional anatomy of language cannot be deduced from a single experiment; rather, it requires the integration of results from multiple experiments using multiple techniques.


Early fMRI studies

The first fMRI studies of language processing were reported by McCarthy et al. (1993), Hinke et al. (1993), Binder et al. (1994a, 1994b, 1995, 1996a, 1996b), Pugh et al. (1996) and Small et al. (1996). The results provided a reassuring demonstration that fMRI could replicate the findings of PET. For example, McCarthy et al. (1993) showed that word generation, relative to repetition, activated the inferior frontal cortices and anterior insula as previously reported using PET (Petersen et al., 1988; Petersen et al., 1989), while Binder et al. (1994b) and Dhankhar et al. (1997) illustrated that increasing the rate of presentation of simple auditory speech stimuli resulted in a monotonically proportional increase in bilateral superior temporal lobe activation, as previously reported using PET (Wise et al., 1991a,1991b; Price et al., 1992). As fMRI became more available, functional imaging studies of language could be conducted on children and females of childbearing age who had previously been excluded because of the risk of the radiation dose involved in PET scanning. As fMRI is a non-invasive procedure, the same subject could be scanned multiple times thereby providing robust data from individual subjects and this opened the way for studies of inter-subject variability (Demb et al., 1995; Huckins et al., 1998; Demonet et al., 2005).


Methods


Inclusion criteria for the review

This review focuses on papers, reported between 1992 and 2011, that aimed to identify the brain areas activated when healthy adults were engaged in speech comprehension and production tasks. Papers were selected from PubMed if their titles or abstracts included a specific combination of search words. One search word would be a language process of interest (e.g. semantics, phonology, comprehension, articulation, etc.) while the other search word would be either an imaging term (e.g. fMRI, PET or functional imaging) or a brain region (e.g. SMA, cerebellum). Papers were excluded if: (a) their aim was to infer language processing from brain activation (as opposed to reporting brain activation in response to language processing), (b) their conclusions were about abnormal populations (e.g. in dyslexics, schizophrenics, stroke patients etc.) and (c) they reported activations that varied across normal populations (e.g. due to age, gender, ability etc.). This was not from lack of interest but due to the time frame for writing the review and the overwhelming number of papers (> thousand) that needed to be considered. The papers identified are also influenced by my personal memories of how our knowledge unfolded over the past 20 years, the availability of papers on PubMed, the choice of search terms used by me and the key words used by the authors.

For each paper, I extracted the conclusions stated in the abstract; and made minimal adjustments to the functional and anatomical terms. I only changed terminology that was inconsistent with that used in other studies. For example, the terms Broca's area, BA 44, inferior frontal cortex and pars opercularis have been used interchangeably. I chose pars opercularis to make a clear distinction with other frontal regions, such as the pars orbitalis, pars triangularis and premotor cortex. Contrary to my previous review (Price, 2010) and methodology used in computational meta-analyses (e.g. Turkeltaub et al., 2002; Jobard et al., 2003; Binder et al., 2009; Vigneau et al., 2011), the conclusions are not based on the standard (Talairach or MNI) co-ordinates of peak activations. The disadvantage of not using a co-ordinate based meta-analysis is that the conclusions depend on the subjective interpretation of the authors. However, computational meta-analyses based on reported co-ordinates are also subjective because they depend on the statistical threshold used by the authors, the sensitivity of the paradigm (conditions and number of participants), the precision with which the co-ordinates describe the extent of the activation, and the inclusion criteria of the meta-analysis. The methodology used in the current review has the advantage of being able to report (a) conclusions drawn by authors who controlled the collection of the data; and (b) a historical perspective of how and when the conclusions emerged.


Organization of the conclusions

The reporting of results is structured around three sections that focus on auditory speech comprehension, speech production and reading. Within the auditory speech section, the subsections focus on auditory responses that do not distinguish speech from nonspeech; auditory responses that are greater for speech than nonspeech; and comprehension of speech at the word and sentence level. Within the speech production section, the subsections focus on word retrieval, covert articulatory planning, overt articulation and post-articulatory sensorimotor feedback. Within the visual word processing section, the subsections focus on responses that distinguish visual words from other visual stimuli and differences between the lexical and sublexical mapping of orthography (letter combinations) to phonology (sounds).

To demonstrate the progressive steps in the evolution of our knowledge, I have further divided each subsection into 4 time era according to the year of publication. These are (i) 1992–1996 when PET was in its heyday and the contribution of fMRI was being validated; (ii) 1997–2001 when fMRI was taking over; (iii) 2002–2006 when there were notable improvements in the spatial definition of language areas; and (iv) 2007–2011 when there were many further refinements as well as a much greater focus on using functional anatomy to test cognitive models of language. Within each of these time era, I have also attempted to dissociate novel conclusions from replicated conclusions.


Results

The results of the review are reported in relation to the functional–anatomical model from (Petersen et al. 1988; Petersen et al., 1989) which is illustrated in. This was edited to provide more functional terms and the anatomical attributions associated with these functions. provides a sketch of the left hemisphere anatomical locations of the activations related to different language-related functions, after rendering activations from my own data onto a canonical model of the left hemisphere. defines the functional terminology used in. provides a historical perspective of the anatomical attributions according to the time era in which they emerged. provides the full anatomical names of the abbreviations used in. reverses the inference in by listing the anatomical regions in alphabetical order for easy reference to the language functions identified in the review. The studies that contributed to the review and my synthesis of its findings are provided in the.


Discussion


Auditory processing that is common to speech and nonspeech sounds

This section is included because studies of auditory responses that are not specific to speech sounds have provided important clues for understanding how speech processing emerges. For example, “left lateralized” nonspeech processing may be a precursor to left lateralized higher-level language functions.


Auditory processing of speech and nonspeech. Time era: 1992–1996


Novel findings

One of the most surprising early findings was that the planum temporale (on the dorsal surface of the superior temporal gyri and the ventral surface of the sylvian fissure) showed similar responses to heard speech and tones (Binder et al., 1996a). This finding suggested that both the left and right planum temporale were involved in early auditory processing, which is contrary to the classic view that the left planum temporale was specialised for language (Geschwind and Levitsky, 1968). An equally surprising finding was that the left planum temporale was activated in the absence of any auditory input (McGuire et al., 1996a,b): for example, during silent speech production and when subjects imagined hearing another person's voice (McGuire et al., 1996a). This suggested a special role for the planum temporale in higher-level auditory representations that could be tapped by bottom up processing of auditory inputs or top-down processing of learnt auditory images.


Auditory processing of speech and nonspeech. Time era: 1997–2001


Extending prior findings

Further evidence was reported that the left planum temporale was involved in silent auditory imagery of speech (Shergill et al., 2001) or when recalling (imagining) the auditory relative to visual associations of a picture of a scene (Wheeler et al., 2000).


Novel findings

Functional subdivisions were described within the bilateral auditory cortices (Mirz et al., 1999) with simple auditory stimuli activating the transverse temporal gyri (BA 41), sounds with discontinuous acoustic patterns activating the surrounding superior temporal gyri (BA 42), and sounds with complex spectral intensity, and temporal structures (heard words and music) activating areas that extended into the bilateral superior temporal sulci (BA 21, 22). Zatorre and Belin (2001) also noted that anterior regions in bilateral superior temporal cortex were particularly sensitive to variation in the spectral content of nonverbal stimuli.

Left lateralized responses to nonspeech sounds were identified in the auditory cortex (superior temporal gyri) by Belin et al. (1998) when participants listened to nonverbal sounds containing rapid relative to slow frequency transitions (Belin et al., 1998; Zatorre and Belin, 2001; Giraud et al., 2000). As rapid frequency modulations are a key feature in speech sounds, the observed left lateralization was proposed to contribute to the lateralization of higher-level language functions.

Beyond the temporal lobes, speech and nonspeech sounds activated the left inferior frontal cortex (pars triangularis and pars opercularis) when they needed to be segmented and held in auditory working memory (Burton et al., 2000; Pedersen et al., 2000; Hsieh et al., 2001; Poldrack et al., 2001). This is important for appreciating that left inferior frontal activation during auditory speech processing does not necessarily indicate a speech specific function.


Auditory processing of speech and nonspeech. Time era: 2002–2006


Extending prior findings

Many studies observed activation in bilateral dorsal superior temporal cortices during early auditory processing of both speech and nonspeech sounds (Booth et al., 2002a, 2002b; Giraud et al., 2004; Hickok et al., 2003; Hickok and Poeppel, 2004; Meyer et al., 2005) with increased activation when acoustic complexity increased (Hwang et al., 2005), the rate of word presentation increased (Noesselt et al., 2003), when the listener had to segregate two simultaneously presented speech sounds (Alain et al., 2005; Scott et al., 2004), for the perception of distorted speech sounds (Davis and Johnsrude, 2003; Meyer et al., 2004), for hearing syllables relative to vowels (Jancke et al., 2002) and for auditory speech in noisy environments (Scott et al., 2004).

Auditory imagery of the sounds was again associated with left lateralised activation in the planum temporale in response to experience with tones (Xu et al., 2006) and visual stimuli (Jancke and Shah, 2004; Pekkola et al., 2006), in the silence that followed familiar music even when there was no instruction to remember the music (Kraemer et al., 2005), when passively viewing finger tapping on the piano following keyboard training (Hasegawa et al., 2004), when producing rhythmic finger sequences that had been learnt with an auditory cue (Bengtsson et al., 2005) and when imagining heard speech, music or environmental sounds in the absence of sound (Aleman et al., 2005; Bunzeck et al., 2005; Zatorre and Halpern, 2005).

The view that left lateralization for heard speech might arise at the level of detecting rapidly changing temporal features (Poeppel, 2003; Hesling et al., 2005) was strengthened by observations that posterior temporal activation was left lateralized for rapid relative to slow frequency transitions (Zaehle et al., 2004; Rimol et al., 2005; Husain et al., 2006) and for broad relative to narrow band speech envelope noises (Giraud et al., 2004; Specht et al., 2005). Alternative hypotheses were that left lateralization in both temporal and inferior frontal areas were related to a top down attentional bias (Davis and Johnsrude, 2003) or auditory-motor processing (Hickok et al., 2003; Okada and Hickok, 2006; Buchsbaum et al., 2005a,b).

Right lateralized auditory responses were observed for environmental sounds (Specht and Reul, 2003; Thierry et al., 2003; Thierry and Price, 2006), non-linguistic vocal sounds like laughter (Belin et al., 2002; Kriegstein and Giraud, 2004; Meyer et al., 2005), and the familiarity of vocalisation (Kriegstein and Giraud, 2004). These right hemisphere responses may help to explain why the perception of prosody in heard speech prosody is associated with the right hemisphere, particularly when the language demands of the task are low (Gandour et al., 2004; Meyer et al., 2004).


Auditory processing of speech and nonspeech. Time era: 2007–2011


Extending prior findings

Bilateral superior temporal activation was reported for the acoustic analysis of speech and nonspeech sounds (Turkeltaub and Coslett, 2010; Obleser et al., 2007a, 2007b; Dick et al., 2011) and shown to be sensitive to frequency discriminations (Zaehle et al., 2008), familiarity (Raettig and Kotz, 2008; Davis and Gaskell, 2009; Kotz et al., 2010; Vaden et al., 2010), spectral structure and temporal modulation (Britton et al., 2009; Leaver and Rauschecker, 2010).

Left lateralized responses were reported for the discrimination of fast changing verbal and nonverbal sounds in the planum temporale (Elmer et al., 2011a) and for the perceptual interpretation of speech sounds in early auditory areas (Kilian-Hutten et al., 2011). In contrast, right auditory areas were associated with changes of the frequency spectrum (Obleser et al., 2008), categorical perception of familiar musical chords, and the comparison of familiar versus unfamiliar musical sequences (Klein and Zatorre, 2011; Peretz et al., 2009), spectrally rotated speech sounds compared to speech masked by noise (Scott et al., 2009b) and rhythm and intonation in nonspeech (Zhang et al., 2010). This provided further support for the importance of right superior temporal activation in the prosodic processing of speech which relies on detecting variations in the frequency spectrum, rhythm and intonation.


Novel perspectives

The association of the planum temporale with auditory imagery during silent production tasks (e.g. silent humming) was replicated (Pa and Hickok, 2008) but complicated by multiple reports that the posterior planum temporale (on the dorsal surface of the posterior superior temporal gyrus) and the surrounding temporoparietal cortex were activated under a wide range of conditions including visual stimuli without auditory stimuli or auditory associations (Meyer et al., 2007). In addition, activation in the planum temporale was reported during phonation and exhalation (Loucks et al., 2007), auditory working memory (Buchsbaum and D'Esposito, 2009; Koelsch et al., 2009; McGettigan et al., 2011) and for syntactic processing of auditory and written sentences (Friederici et al., 2009; Raettig et al., 2010; Richardson et al., 2010).

The multi-functional responses reported in the posterior planum temporale may have resulted from conflating different functional regions (Zheng, 2009; Price, 2010; Isenberg et al., 2011; Tremblay et al., 2011). For example, the practice of functionally defining a region of interest that is commonly activated by auditory inputs and covert articulation (Hickok et al., 2003) might artificially merge distinct auditory and motor regions in the ventral and dorsal surfaces of the sylvian fissure particularly when data are smoothed and averaged over subjects. A second possibility is that, within the same temporoparietal region, there are multiple overlapping functionally distinct cell populations for perception and covert production (Hickok et al., 2009).

A third explanation of common responses to auditory, motor and memory processes in the same anatomical area is that they reflect a common process. For example, activation during auditory working memory, silent motor tasks and sentence processing can all be explained by the demands on auditory imagery. Models of visual processing provide a useful analogy here because it has been shown that early visual cortices (e.g. the calcarine cortex and the lateral occipital cortex) are activated during visual imagery in the absence of visual stimulation (Klein et al., 2000; Lambert et al., 2002; Stokes et al., 2009, 2011) with this early sensory activation sustained by recurrent interactions with higher-level processing areas (Stokes et al., 2009, 2011). Future studies are therefore needed to provide a more precise definition of the functional responses in both the left posterior planum temporale and the left ventral supramarginal gyrus during auditory processing.


Auditory processing of speech and nonspeech: 20 year summary

Auditory processing of speech and nonspeech sounds activates the bilateral superior temporal gyri (STG in and) that include and surround Heschl's gyri. Three observations relevant to higher-level speech processing have been described. First, left lateralized superior temporal activation during auditory processing has been observed and related to hemispheric differences in the processing of rapidly changing auditory inputs and/or the influence of left lateralized inferior frontal and temporo-parietal activation (LpOp, PT and TPJ in and) that is involved when auditory inputs need to be segmented in a meaningful way. Second, the involvement of left inferior frontal and temporo-parietal activation during auditory segmentation tasks might be a consequence of auditory short-term memory, covert articulation or vocalisation mechanisms. Third, the left planum temporale (PT in and) on the dorsal surface of the superior temporal gyrus is activated by imagining sounds (in silence) as well as hearing sounds. This suggests that the left planum temporale might be the recipient of top-down processing from higher-order language areas.


Speech selective auditory responses (= phonological processing)

Speech sound processing refers to the unique dynamic acoustic patterns that can be generated by the human speech production system. Abstract knowledge of familiar speech sounds is referred to as phonological memory and can be accessed from visual stimuli (e.g. text) as well as auditory speech. Although there was an expectation that there would be brain areas that were dedicated to auditory speech processing, none of the areas discussed below turned out to be uniquely activated by speech.


Speech selective auditory responses. Time era: 1992–1996


Novel findings

Two studies investigated speech processing during decisions on the sound structure of speech relative to nonspeech sounds (e.g. tones) and reported speech-related activation in bilateral secondary auditory cortices and the left posterior inferior frontal cortex (Zatorre et al., 1992; Demonet et al., 1992, 1994a). The interpretation of this speech related activation (Zatorre et al., 1992) was in terms of pre-lexical processing in the bilateral secondary auditory cortices with articulatory recoding (i.e. subvocal articulation of the speech sounds) in the left posterior inferior frontal cortex. However, the comparison of speech and tones in these early studies did not control for auditory complexity or auditory segmentation and, as described in the section above, activation in the bilateral auditory cortices and the left posterior inferior frontal cortex was not specific to speech.

It was also demonstrated that activation for speech depended on task. For example, passive listening tasks were associated with left lateralized activation for words relative to tones in the superior temporal sulcus, middle temporal gyrus and angular gyrus (Binder et al., 1996a), with inferior frontal activation that was more ventral and anterior to that observed during phonetic judgements and auditory repetition (BA 45 vs. BA 44; Price et al., 1996b). The same ventral inferior frontal areas were subsequently associated with semantic analysis (see section below) which is not controlled during the passive listening tasks.

Consideration was also given to the importance of the ventral part of the left anterior supramarginal gyrus (vSMG) in speech processing. One interpretation was that co-activation in this area and the left posterior inferior frontal cortex was related to articulatory rehearsal during auditory short-term memory tasks (Paulesu et al., 1993) and phonological decisions (Demonet et al., 1994b). The alternative interpretation was that ventral supramarginal gyrus activation was related to stimulus encoding rather than memory mechanisms (Fiez et al., 1996b).


Speech selective auditory responses. Time era: 1997–2001


Novel findings

The special role of the left posterior temporal lobe in speech processing was re-considered (Celsis et al., 1999; Scott et al., 2000; Wise et al., 2001). Celsis et al. (1999) reported a common response to speech and nonspeech stimuli in the upper surface of the gyrus but Wise et al. (2001) identified a more ventral region in the left lateral posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS in) that was activated by both word perception and the retrieval of words from memory (in response to a semantic cue). Wise et al. (2001) therefore proposed that this area is involved in transiently representing the temporally ordered sound structure of both heard words and words retrieved from lexical memory. This function would serve a number of key language tasks such as mimicry, repetition and the long-term acquisition of new words. The key difference between this memory function in pSTS (which is in the sulcus on the lower surface of the superior temporal gyrus) and the posterior planum temporale (which is on the dorsal surface of the superior temporal gyrus) is that pSTS is more involved in speech than nonspeech whereas the planum temporale does not distinguish speech and non-speech (see section).


Speech selective auditory responses. Time era: 2002–2006


Extending prior findings

The speech selective auditory response in the left posterior superior temporal sulcus was repeatedly demonstrated even when acoustic complexity was controlled (Narain et al., 2003; Giraud et al., 2004; Hugdahl et al., 2003; Benson et al., 2006; Rimol et al., 2006). Further evidence that these speech selective responses relate to familiarity with the patterns of spectral variation (Liebenthal et al., 2003) came from two studies that showed activation in the left posterior temporal gyrus/sulcus increased when sine wave analogues of speech were recognised as speech relative to when the same stimuli were not recognised as speech (Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2005; Meyer et al., 2005). A contrasting pattern of response was observed in the anterior processing stream where activation was typically observed when acoustic complexity was not controlled (Obleser et al., 2006; Uppenkamp et al., 2006; Binder et al., 2004), even when familiarity and conceptual content were matched by comparing speech to familiar environmental sounds (Specht and Reul, 2003; Thierry et al., 2003; Thierry and Price, 2006). Together, these studies are consistent with the previous claims that the posterior superior temporal cortex is related to sound familiarity while the anterior superior temporal gyrus is related to the acoustic complexity of speech.

Critically, speech selective responses (more activated for speech than nonspeech sounds) do not imply “speech specificity” because both the anterior and posterior temporal speech areas each respond to nonspeech stimuli (e.g. environmental sounds, pitch changes, melodies, familiarity or conceptual processes). It therefore became apparent that specialisation for speech is not localized in dedicated brain areas but is characterised by a distributed pattern of activity across many different areas that are each involved in speech and nonspeech processing, depending on the type of task (Price et al., 2005).

In the left inferior frontal areas that were activated during auditory categorisation tasks (section) and phonological discrimination tasks (Homae et al., 2002; Booth et al., 2003; Burton et al., 2005; Husain et al., 2006), there were increased efforts to dissociate different levels of processing such as selecting, segmenting and comparing (Burton and Small, 2006). Consistent with previous reports, (i) posterior inferior frontal activation (BA 44) was associated with articulatory recoding (Burton et al., 2005) or decision mechanisms (Binder et al., 2004); (ii) the left ventral premotor cortex was also associated with articulatory recoding when participants passively listened to unfamiliar speech sounds (Wilson et al., 2004; Wilson and Iacoboni, 2006); (iii) ventro-lateral prefrontal cortex was associated with working memory demands and (iv) the mid-dorsolateral prefrontal cortex was associated with stimulus monitoring (Burton et al., 2005). Altogether, there was a growing perspective that inferior frontal or premotor activations during auditory speech processing were the consequence of top-down supplementary mechanisms that constrain bottom up speech processing in temporal regions (Zekveld et al., 2006), particularly when speech is unfamiliar or ambiguous (Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2005). In addition, there were reports that the left inferior frontal cortex was activated when observing nonverbal actions with the suggestion that it might be involved in the interpretation of movements in general rather than being specific to articulation (Fadiga et al., 2006).


Speech selective auditory responses. Time era: 2007–2011


Extending prior findings

As shown previously, activation for auditory speech processing was primarily left lateralized when other factors were controlled (Wolmetz et al., 2011), the speech selective response in the left anterior superior temporal cortex was related to the acoustic content of the stimulus (Leaver and Rauschecker, 2010; Agnew et al., 2011; Leff et al., 2009; Rauschecker and Scott, 2009; Specht et al., 2009; Friederici et al., 2010; Obleser and Kotz, 2010); and the speech selective response in the left posterior superior temporal cortex was related to (a) the familiarity of auditory spectral patterns (Leech et al., 2009; Liebenthal et al., 2010; Margulis et al., 2009; Dick et al., 2011), (b) the maintenance phase of phonological working memory (Strand et al., 2008) and (c) the perception of hearing speech (Heinrich et al., 2008).

Activation in the left premotor cortex during speech processing was associated with better perceptual performance (Callan et al., 2010), particularly when the acoustic input was sparse (Osnes et al., 2011). However, as premotor activation was not found to be sensitive to articulatory complexity during speech perception, Tremblay and Small (2011a) suggested that motor representations were incompletely activated during perception. The premotor response during perception was also found for non‐speech sounds (Agnew et al., 2011). This implies that either the premotor response was not involved in articulation or that subarticulatory activation occurs during the perception of non-speech sounds.

In the left posterior part of the inferior frontal gyrus and inferior parietal regions, activation was associated with processing syllable order (Moser et al., 2009) or discriminating sounds on the basis of subtle temporal acoustic features that are typical of phoneme categories (Zaehle et al., 2008; Raizada and Poldrack, 2007; Turkeltaub and Coslett, 2010). This might be explained by prior association of these areas with auditory short-term memory (Strand et al., 2008). There was continued support for the view that the left posterior inferior frontal activation is related to articulatory processes because it was positively correlated with the phonotactic frequency (the pronounceability of combinations of phonemes) of heard sounds (Vaden et al., 2011). Less support was provided for the prior association of the left ventral anterior supramarginal gyrus with a phonological store because the fronto-parietal verbal short-term memory areas are also activated for unexpected auditory change during tasks that have minimal working memory demands (Myers et al., 2009; Zevin et al., 2010; Ravizza et al., 2011). This suggested that left fronto-parietal responses during speech may be related to nonverbazl auditory attention and categorization functions that provide top-down regulation of auditory functions (Elmer et al., 2011b; Davis et al., 2007; Ravizza et al., 2011; Zevin et al., 2010).


Speech selective auditory responses: 20 year summary

Depending on the task, left lateralized activation for speech relative to acoustically matched nonspeech sounds was reported in: (1) the left posterior superior temporal cortex (pSTS in and) where it was consistently related to sound familiarity; (2) the left anterior superior temporal gyrus (aSTS in and) where it was consistently related to the acoustic complexity of speech; (3) the left inferior frontal and premotor areas (LpOp and vPM in and) where it was consistently related to articulatory re-coding that places top-down constraints on the disambiguation of speech sounds; and (4) the ventral supramarginal gyrus (vSMG in and) where there is accumulating evidence of involvement in auditory attention and categorization functions that that are not specific to speech.

Overall, the results suggest that phonological processing of speech sounds arises from the functional integration of acoustic processing (in temporal lobe regions) and articulatory processing (in premotor and frontoparietal regions). This is consistent with the growing appreciation that speech processing areas are activated by non-speech stimuli (Zaehle et al., 2008; Schon et al., 2010) and that functional specialisation arises in the network of regions that are activated (Hein and Knight, 2008; Londei et al., 2010). Another important step forward was to consider how different parts of the network parcellated into different processing streams (Hickok and Poeppel, 2007; Rauschecker and Scott, 2009) and how these streams are supported by anatomy (Saur et al., 2008) and functional connectivity (Obleser et al., 2007a; Londei et al., 2010; Leff et al., 2008; Schofield et al., 2009; Osnes et al., 2011; Eickhoff et al., 2009; Nath and Beauchamp, 2011).


Speech comprehension

Speech comprehension occurs when familiar sounds are recognised and mapped onto their meanings. Many cognitive processes are involved. For example, short-term auditory memory is required because speech is a serial dynamic auditory signal that needs to be integrated over time, particularly when multiple words are presented in a sentence. Accessing meaning also requires selection from multiple competing representations of speech sounds that may sound very similar (sun, some) or the same (sun, son), but have different meanings that are determined by the context. Given the complexity of the processes involved, an early distinction was made between semantic representations and task dependent “strategic/executive/control” processes that are required to access, retrieve, compare and manipulate semantic knowledge.


Speech comprehension. Time era: 1992–1996


Novel findings

A direct comparison of semantic decisions on auditory words to phonological decisions on nonwords demonstrated widely distributed activation in the left middle and inferior temporal gyri, left superior frontal cortex and bilateral angular gyri (Demonet et al., 1992, 1994a). These early Demonet et al. studies also played an important role in dissociating (a) temporal lobe regions involved in pre-lexical processing (bilateral superior temporal gyri) from temporal lobe regions involved in semantic processing (left middle and inferior temporal gyri); and (b) parietal lobe regions involved in phonological decision strategies (supramarginal gyri) from parietal lobe regions involved in semantic processing (angular gyri). Subsequently, the role of the left middle and inferior temporal gyri and left angular gyrus was also reported for semantic decisions on written words and pictures (Vandenberghe et al., 1996). This highlighted an amodal semantic system that was common to auditory words, written words and (nonverbal) pictures. Together these studies suggested that semantic decisions on the meaning of words involve the left middle and inferior temporal and angular gyri while phonological decisions on the sound content of words involve the supramarginal gyri and the left posterior inferior frontal gyrus.


Sentences and narratives

At the narrative level, Mazoyer et al. (1993) demonstrated that listening to meaningful stories, relative to unmeaningful speech, increased activation in bilateral temporal poles and Bottini et al. (1994) demonstrated that comprehension of sentences (compared to a lexical-decision task) induced extensive activation in several regions of the left hemisphere, including the prefrontal and basal frontal cortices, the middle and inferior temporal gyri and temporal pole, the parietal cortex and the precuneus. In addition, when the sentences had metaphorical meanings, there was right hemisphere activation in the prefrontal cortex and middle temporal gyrus and posterior cingulate. Within this widely distributed system, activation could relate to many different levels of processing such as auditory short-term memory, grammatical deconstruction or semantic processing (Stromswold et al., 1996). Although the studies in this era were not able to interpret the contribution of each of the areas reported, the results showed that language comprehension involves widespread distributed systems in both left and right hemispheres. This pushes us way beyond the appealing simplicity of the early neurological model.


Speech comprehension. Time era: 1997–2001


Extending prior findings


The widely distributed semantic system

The involvement of widely distributed temporal, parietal and frontal brain areas in speech comprehension continued to be reported (Chee et al., 1999; Hashimoto et al., 2000; Benson et al., 2001; Newman and Twieg, 2001; Vouloumanos et al., 2001; Binder et al., 1997; Nakai et al., 1999; Newman et al., 2001). These effects are more likely to reflect amodal semantic processing than access to semantics from speech sounds because they were commonly activated irrespective of whether the stimuli were auditory or visual words (Chee et al., 1999). When access to semantic associations was made more challenging, activation in the prefrontal and angular gyri increased: for example, when speech complexity increased (Benson et al., 2001), when reading sentences with semantic violations (Newman et al., 2001) or when listening to a non-native language (Nakai et al., 1999).


Sentences and narratives

There was continued emphasis on the importance of Broca's area (BA 44 and sometimes BA 45) for syntactic processing (Caplan et al., 1998,1999; Inui et al., 1998; Kang et al., 1999; Moro et al., 2001; Nakai et al., 1999; Ni et al., 2000) even when articulation was suppressed (Caplan et al., 2000). Although the same frontal lobe regions were activated by semantic processing (Nakai et al., 1999), morphologically complex words (Laine et al., 1999) and lexical decisions on verbs relative to nouns (Perani et al., 1999), a striking double dissociation was observed with greater activation in the left dorsal pars opercularis for syntactic than semantic processing (Kang et al., 1999; Dapretto and Bookheimer, 1999) and greater activation for semantics than syntactics in the ventral inferior frontal gyrus (BA 47, pars orbitalis; Dapretto and Bookheimer, 1999) or the right inferior frontal lobe (Kang et al., 1999). However, other studies did not show such a clear cut dissociation between semantic and syntactic processing (Kuperberg et al., 2000; Tyler et al., 2001).


Novel findings

The importance of the auditory processing pathways that projected anteriorly from Heschl's gyrus was highlighted by Scott et al. (2000) who identified a region in the left anterior superior temporal sulcus (aSTS) that was activated by intelligible speech when all other characteristics of speech were controlled. Greater aSTS activation was also reported for words relative to syllables (Giraud and Price, 2001) and auditory sentence processing relative to environmental sounds (Humphries et al., 2001), with activation extending into the left temporal pole for higher-level discourse processing (Maguire et al., 1999). Other areas associated with speech comprehension included the left medial temporal cortex (Newman et al., 2001) and right temporal and frontal regions (Kang et al., 1999; Kuperberg et al., 2000; Newman et al., 2001; Robertson et al., 2000; Meyer et al., 2000), although the contribution of each area remained unclear.

The substantial overlap in the areas involved in speech comprehension as well as production was reported by Wise et al. (2001) and Papathanassiou et al. (2000). For example, Papathanassiou et al. (2000) reported activation common to both listening to stories and verb generation in the pars opercularis and triangularis of the inferior frontal gyrus (Broca's area), the posterior part of the superior temporal cortex centred around the superior temporal sulcus (Wernicke's area) but extending into the posterior part of the planum temporale and the most anterior part of the left inferior temporal gyrus at the junction with the anterior fusiform gyrus (the basal temporal language area) and the inferior and lateral parts of the right cerebellar cortex. This overlap is likely to reflect the many processes that are common to speech production and comprehension, for example, semantic processing, articulatory planning and short term memory. A review of neuroimaging studies of semantic processing in this time era can be found in Bookheimer (2002).


Sentences and narratives

New areas associated with syntactic processing during comprehension were the right inferior frontal regions (Friederici et al., 2000; Moro et al., 2001; Kang et al., 1999), the left caudate nucleus (Moro et al., 2001), insula (Moro et al., 2001), planum polare bilaterally (Meyer et al., 2000; Friederici et al., 2000) and the superior frontal cortex (Newman et al., 2001). Reviews of syntactic processing at this time can be found in Caplan (2001) and Sakai et al. (2001).


Speech comprehension. Time era: 2002–2006


Extending prior findings


The widely distributed semantic system

When accessing semantics from speech sounds, activation was reported to extend from the superior temporal gyri ventrally into the left middle temporal cortex (BA 21; Kotz et al., 2002; Booth et al., 2002a; Giraud et al., 2004; Hickok and Poeppel, 2004; Meyer et al., 2005); dorsally and posteriorly into the left posterior temporoparietal cortex (Roder et al., 2002; Hickok and Poeppel, 2004) and anteriorly into the ventral anterior temporal cortex (BA 38; Crinion et al., 2003; Giraud et al., 2004; Humphries et al., 2005; Meyer et al., 2005; Narain et al., 2003; Noppeney and Price, 2002; Roder et al., 2002). When the demands on semantic retrieval increased, activation was also observed in the ventral inferior frontal cortex (Rodd et al., 2005; Noppeney and Price, 2002), the left fusiform gyrus (Adams and Janata, 2002), and the angular gyri (Homae et al., 2002; Noppeney and Price, 2002; Schmithorst et al., 2006). All these areas were commonly activated during comprehension of spoken and written language (Spitsyna et al., 2006). They are therefore not specific for accessing semantics from auditory speech.


Dissociating the roles of different semantic areas

Within the amodal semantic system, the left anterior temporal pole was particularly involved in specific semantic representations (Bright et al., 2004) and for meaningful relative to meaningless sentences (Vandenberghe et al., 2002; Roder et al., 2002; Xue et al., 2005). The ventral inferior frontal cortex was associated with strategic semantic processing (Adams and Janata, 2002; Booth et al., 2002a; Crinion et al., 2003; Homae et al., 2002; Noppeney and Price, 2002; Noesselt et al., 2003; Badre et al., 2005), more dorsal posterior frontal areas were associated with attention demanding speech comprehension tasks (Giraud et al., 2004; Adams and Janata, 2002; Noesselt et al., 2003) and the left superior frontal gyrus was activated when a word's meaning depended on semantic context (Scott et al., 2003).


Sentences and narratives

The influence of grammatical analysis or morpho-phonological segmentation on inferior frontal activation continued to be emphasized (Sakai et al., 2003; Suzuki and Sakai, 2003; Tyler et al., 2005), with claims that the left prefrontal cortex is more specialised for syntactic processing during sentence comprehension than other domain-general processes such as short-term memory (Sakai et al., 2003). Likewise, the role of the basal ganglia in syntactic processing continued to be of interest (Friederici et al., 2003) with Friederici and Kotz (2003) proposing that, while inferior frontal and anterior temporal cortices were involved in early syntactic processing, the basal ganglia were involved in late syntactic processing. Other studies emphasized that sentence comprehension is a complex task that involves both language-specific processing components and general cognitive resources that recruit the anterior cingulate, premotor cortex and prefrontal lobe regions regardless of syntactic complexity (Peelle et al., 2004).


Speech comprehension. Time era: 2007–2011


Extending prior findings


The widely distributed semantic system

As shown previously, increasing attention to the meaning of speech involves left lateralized activation extending anteriorly, laterally, ventrally and posteriorly from Heschl's gyri in multiple different pathways (Sharp et al., 2010; Davis and Gaskell, 2009; Kotz et al., 2010; Kouider et al., 2010; Obleser et al., 2007b; Devauchelle et al., 2009; Obleser and Kotz, 2010; Hubbard et al., 2009; Kircher et al., 2009b; Mashal et al., 2009; Rogalsky and Hickok, 2009; Visser et al., 2010; Tyler et al., 2010; Ye and Zhou, 2009). In the temporal lobe, activation extended into the anterior and posterior areas in the middle temporal gyrus, posterior inferior temporal gyrus, anterior fusiform and the hippocampus (in medial temporal cortex). In the parietal lobe, semantic activation was reported in the posterior temporoparietal cortex, the left angular gyrus and precuneus. In the frontal lobe, semantic activation was reported in the left pars orbitalis and middle and superior frontal gyri. These areas were again reported for semantic processing of written words and pictures of objects (Binder et al., 2009; Diaz and McCarthy, 2009), consistent with their role in amodal conceptual processing or semantic control (Visser et al., 2010; Visser and Lambon Ralph, 2011; Rogalsky and Hickok, 2009; Snijders et al., 2009; Richardson et al., 2010).

The emphasis on left lateralized activation does not exclude the contribution of the right hemisphere homologue areas which were shown to be particularly involved during tasks that required executive processing (Vigneau et al., 2011) and/or the integration or consolidation of semantic concepts, for example, when the words “boat” and “house” occur together, they refer to a single concept meaning “a shelter for boats” (Graves et al., 2010b).


Dissociating the roles of different semantic areas

The functional role of each semantic area unravelled further, with the involvement of each area depending on the task demands and the baseline condition. Anterior temporal activation was linked to semantic associations because it was observed during passive listening (Jobard et al., 2007; Awad et al., 2007), except when the baseline task was at rest which was argued to inadvertently control for semantic processing because free flowing thought is richly semantic in nature (Binder et al., 2011). Posterior middle temporal activation was more sensitive to semantic demands because, although it was observed during passive listening (Jobard et al., 2007; Awad et al., 2007), activation increased with executive demands (Whitney et al., 2011) and when semantic information was received in both auditory and visual modalities simultaneously (Holle et al., 2010; Kircher et al., 2009a, 2009b; Robins et al., 2009; Dick et al., 2009). Activation in ventral frontal regions in the left pars triangularis/orbitalis also increased with the executive demands of the task (Whitney et al., 2011), for example during conditions where competition from semantically similar targets was high versus low (Zhuang et al., 2011). This is consistent with a role in selection and retrieval of semantic representations. Parietal activation in the angular gyrus and retrosplenial/posterior cingulate was not typically observed during passive listening but was observed during lexical decisions on words compared to pseudowords (Raettig and Kotz, 2008), during memory demanding comprehension of narratives (Awad et al., 2007). The left medial parietal cortices (precuneus and posterior cingulate) were associated with updating story representations in narrative language comprehension (Whitney et al., 2009a). In contrast, the angular gyri were associated with integrating and retrieving concepts (Binder et al., 2009) and top-down predictions of semantic content (Obleser et al., 2007b; Obleser and Kotz, 2010; Carreiras et al., 2009; Brownsett and Wise, 2010; Sharp et al., 2010). It also became apparent that there were several different functionally distinct subregions in the angular gyrus (Seghier et al., 2010). For more comprehensive reviews of the semantic system, see Binder et al. (2009) and Binder and Desai (2011).


Sentences and narratives

Dorsal frontal regions in the left premotor cortex and pars opercularis were more activated when sentence meaning was ambiguous or implausible relative to plausible (Tyler et al., 2010; Obleser and Kotz, 2010; Desai et al., 2010; Turner et al., 2009; Szycik et al., 2009; Ye et al., 2009; Bilenko et al., 2009; Mashal et al., 2009; Willems et al., 2009; Desai et al., 2010). Explanations for why activation in these areas is greater for implausible sentences include the following: (a) activation in the left premotor cortex reflects covert articulatory processing (Rogalsky et al., 2008; Iacoboni, 2008; Callan et al., 2010; Osnes et al., 2011; Adank and Devlin, 2010; Meister et al., 2007; Scott et al., 2009a; Hickok, 2009; Hickok et al., 2011); (b) activation in the ventral pars operculum reflects articulatory planning (Papoutsi et al., 2009) and verbal working memory (Koelsch et al., 2009); (c) activation in the left dorsal pars opercularis reflects linguistic and non-linguistic sequencing (Price, 2010), decision making (Heim et al., 2007) and top-down processing that attempts to predict the most likely meaning or sound (Obleser et al., 2007a; Davis and Johnsrude, 2007) while (d) activation in the right pars opercularis reflects conflicting semantic information (Snijders et al., 2009; Dick et al., 2009; Zhuang et al., 2011) and nonlinguistic executive and attentional processing (Vigneau et al., 2011). A 20 year review of semantics and syntax can be found in Cappa (2011).


Speech comprehension: 20 year summary

Many left lateralized areas are involved in accessing semantics from auditory speech and other stimuli. Anterior temporal areas (aSTS, LaMTG/LaITG in and) are involved in accessing increasingly specific semantic associations, with activation for sentences and narratives spreading anteriorly into the temporal pole. Posterior temporal areas (pMTG, pITG in and) are increasingly involved as the semantic content or task demands increase. Ventral inferior frontal areas (pOrb and pTri in and) are involved in selecting and retrieving task related semantic attributes. The dorsal superior frontal gyrus (SFG in and) is also involved, albeit less consistently, in constraining semantic processing. The angular gyri (ANG in and) have been associated with the crossmodal integration of semantic features and in predicting the semantic nature of the stimulus while more medial parietal areas (precuneus and posterior cingulate) are more involved for narrative than single word comprehension. The above descriptions of the functional role of each region are clearly vague and insufficient. The anatomical localization of the anatomical regions is also insufficiently precise. We are therefore far from understanding how the human brain supports speech comprehension.


Speech production

The processing involved in speech production overlaps with that involved in speech comprehension (Papathanassiou et al., 2000). For example, both involve access to the semantic system. In addition, subarticulatory processing may be automatically involved in discriminating auditory words while auditory imagery may be automatically involved in articulation. This section focuses on those processes that are more involved in production than comprehension. There are no separate sections for word and sentence production because these have been shown to involve the same neural structures (Tremblay and Small, 2011b).


Word retrieval from semantics. Time era: 1992–1996


Novel findings

The left prefrontal activation associated with word generation included dorsal and ventral inferior frontal areas (BA 44, BA 45, BA 47) and medial frontal areas (McCarthy et al., 1993; Raichle et al., 1994; Buckner et al., 1995). The middle frontal cortex (BA 46) and medial frontopolar prefrontal cortex (BA 10) were related to semantically driven word retrieval because they were more activated during verb generation (generate “eat” in response to “cake”) relative to phonologically constrained stem completion (generate “green” in response to “GRE”). In contrast, the posterior inferior frontal regions (near BA 44 or BA 45) were activated during stem completion as well as verb generation (Buckner et al., 1995) suggesting a less semantically determined role in word retrieval. With practice, activation in all these prefrontal areas decreased while it increased in the bilateral sylvian-insular cortex, as predicted by prior claims that the insula was more involved in automatic speech production than word retrieval (Mohr, 1978).

The temporal lobe areas associated with word retrieval tasks included: the left temporoparietal cortex, left posterior superior temporal gyrus, left posterior inferolateral temporal cortex and bilateral superior temporal gyri (Fiez et al., 1996a; Warburton et al., 1996; McGuire et al., 1996a; Paus et al., 1996a, 1996b; Price et al., 1996b, 1996c). The left posterior temporoparietal cortex and the left inferolateral temporal cortex were more involved in producing words than listening to words (Warburton et al., 1996), the left posterior superior temporal gyrus was commonly activated during speech production and perception (Howard et al., 1992; Warburton et al., 1996; Fiez et al., 1996a) and activation in the bilateral superior temporal gyri during overt speech production was attributed to auditory processing of the participants ‘own voice’ because the same regions were also activated when listening to ‘another's voice' from a pre-recorded tape (Price et al., 1996a; McGuire, 1996b), see section below.


Word retrieval from semantics. Time era: 1997–2001


Extending prior findings

The left anterior frontal areas (middle frontal/BA 46 and pars triangularis/BA 45) were consistently reported during the most demanding word retrieval tasks such as verbal fluency (Paulesu et al., 1997), sentence generation (Muller et al., 1997; Kircher et al., 2001) and some picture naming paradigms (Murtha et al., 1999), but not other plausibly easier picture naming tasks (Etard et al., 2000). Functionally, these prefrontal activations were associated with: (i) semantic working memory regardless of stimulus modality (Gabrieli et al., 1998; de Zubicaray et al., 1998; Smith et al., 1998), (ii) the selection of words from many competing alternatives (Thompson-Schill et al., 1999), and (iii) response suppression (De Zubicaray et al., 2000; Collette et al., 2001).


Novel findings

The anterior cingulate was also associated with response suppression during verbal fluency tasks (Barch et al., 2000; De Zubicaray et al., 2000; Lurito et al., 2000). For example, Barch et al. (2000) found that the anterior cingulate cortex was activated during a verb-generation task when there was competition among alternative responses. This functional account of anterior cingulate activation explains the higher response in this area during sentence completion than reading aloud (Kircher et al., 2001) because multiple meanings are generated in the course of producing an appropriate completion. Crosson et al. (1999) also showed that the part of the anterior cingulate that was relevant to word generation was a posterior dorsal subregion that is anatomically connected to lateral motor systems.

In the left posterior inferior temporal lobe, activation was again reported during semantically mediated word retrieval tasks such as picture naming (Zelkowicz et al., 1998; Moore and Price, 1999) and sentence generation (Muller et al., 1997) but the more medial aspect of this area, in the vicinity of the occipitotemporal sulcus, was also observed for the retrieval of colour and letter names that place minimal demands on semantics (Price and Friston, 1997). The association of this posterior inferior temporal region with word retrieval in the absence of visual or auditory stimuli was unexpected (Braun et al., 2001) but consistent with observations that damage to the posterior inferior temporal cortex causes anomia (Hillis et al., 2005) and electrical stimulation to the inferior temporal cortex caused receptive and expressive language difficulties (Luders et al., 1991). It was nevertheless clear that there are multiple posterior inferior temporal areas involved in word retrieval (Murtha et al., 1999; Moore and Price, 1999) including: (i) a lateral posterior inferior temporal region involved in generating verbs and nouns from heard words (Warburton et al., 1996); (ii) the anterior fusiform gyrus that was commonly activated for word retrieval and comprehension (Papathanassiou et al., 2000) but more activated for semantic than phonological decisions (Mummery et al., 1998; Chee et al., 1999); and (iii) more posterior inferior temporal/occipitotemporal regions that are more involved in naming than viewing pictures, words, letters or colours (Price and Friston, 1997).

In the left posterior superior temporal cortex, Burton et al. (2001) and Giraud and Price (2001) replicated the Howard et al. (1992) study by showing activation for word repetition when sensorimotor activation is controlled. Wise et al. (2001) advanced this finding by showing that it was the most posterior and medial part of the planum temporale, at the junction with the inferior parietal lobe (i.e. the temporo-parietal junction), which was more activated by speech production than speech perception, even though this region was consistently associated with auditory speech processing that did not involve speech production (See and).

In an extended review of studies published up until 2001, Indefrey and Levelt (2004) associated: (a) the mid part of the left middle temporal gyrus with semantically driven selection of a lexical item because it was commonly activated by word generation and picture naming but not by word reading; (b) the posterior middle and superior temporal gyri with lexical word form retrieval from a phonological store because it was commonly activated by picture naming, word generation, and word reading, but not pseudoword reading and (c) frontal lobe areas with later stages of speech production such as articulatory planning (see section for rationale).


Word retrieval from semantics. Time era: 2002–2006


Extending prior findings

There was a relative paucity of speech production studies published in this time era because fMRI scanners had largely replaced PET scanners and investigators were concerned about the potential interference from head motion on BOLD signal during speech production (Gracco et al., 2005; Lurito et al., 2000). Nevertheless, the brain areas associated with word retrieval in previous years were largely replicated with refined function and further anatomical dissociations (Kircher et al., 2004; de Zubicaray et al., 2006; Kemeny et al., 2006; Sharp et al., 2005). This resulted in a clearer appreciation that word retrieval involved: (a) the anterior rather than the posterior left prefrontal cortex (BA 45/46 versus BA 44; Amunts et al., 2004; Tremblay and Gracco, 2006; Haller et al., 2005); and (b) lobules VI and VIIB in the right posterior lateral cerebellum in those with left lateralized frontal activation (Jansen et al., 2005; Frings et al., 2006) or the left homologues of these areas in those with right lateralized frontal activation (Jansen et al., 2005).


Novel findings

In the right pars opercularis (BA 44), activation was found to be reduced for the generation of narrative (propositional) speech compared to a baseline nonspeech condition (Blank et al., 2003) with no right frontal activation for generating words relative to generating nonsense syllables (Crosson et al., 2003). Crosson et al. (2003) hypothesized that the right basal ganglia (caudate nucleus and putamen) suppressed right frontal activation to reduce interference during language and this resulted in left lateralized activation in the inferior frontal, pre-SMA, thalamus and basal ganglia regions. However, others found that right prefrontal activation increased when word selection became more difficult, for example when the constraints on word selection were reduced (Vartanian and Goel, 2005) or during the generation of narratives (Howard-Jones et al., 2005). As there are several different frontal regions being referred to, in two different hemispheres, and under various tasks, the determinants of right frontal activation remained unclear.


Word retrieval from semantics. Time era: 2007–2011


Extending prior findings

As shown previously, word retrieval was strongly associated with activation in the left anterior prefrontal cortex including BA 45 in the left inferior frontal cortex and BA 46 in the left middle frontal gyrus, even when articulation and conceptual processing were controlled (Spalek and Thompson-Schill, 2008; Whitney et al., 2009b; Jeon et al., 2009; Heim et al., 2009a; de Zubicaray and McMahon, 2009) and this was accompanied by activation in the right vermal and hemispheric components of lobule VI and Crus I and II of lobule VII in the posterior lateral cerebellum (Krienen and Buckner, 2009; Murdoch, 2010; Stoodley and Shamahmann, 2009, 2010). Right frontal activation was more likely to be observed in the context of more retrieval effort (Sachs et al., 2011) which may explain the corresponding increases during paced relative to unpaced word production (Basho et al., 2007) and for older relative to younger participants (Meinzer et al., 2009). Within the anterior cingulate, an anterior zone was associated with conflict monitoring (response suppression) which might be more related to word retrieval than the posterior zone associated with general response selection (Schulze et al., 2011).


Novel findings

When word retrieval became more semantically demanding, for example when subjects were instructed to retrieve narratives or when distracting semantic information was added, activation for word retrieval was also reported in the medial superior frontal cortex (Birn et al., 2010), the left pars orbitalis in the ventral inferior frontal cortex (de Zubicaray and McMahon, 2009; Saur et al., 2008), the left angular gyrus/inferior parietal cortex (Mechelli et al., 2007; Troiani et al., 2008; Ye et al., 2011), left ventrolateral temporal cortex (Dhanjal et al., 2008; Spalek and Thompson-Schill, 2008) and the left hippocampus (Hocking et al., 2009; Whitney et al., 2009b). However, these anatomically distributed brain areas are likely to reflect silent conceptual processing (see section) rather than word retrieval per se.

When word retrieval became more demanding, in the context of minimal semantic constraints, activation was reported at the left temporoparietal junction, for example, when producing picture names with low relative to high word frequency (Graves et al., 2007; Wilson et al., 2009), for words which lack a phonological neighbour (Peramunage et al., 2011) and in the presence of phonological relative to semantic interference (Abel et al., 2009; Peschke et al., 2012). As the same temporoparietal area was activated when the post-articulatory auditory feedback was altered to create a conflict between the expected auditory response to the spoken name and the actual auditory response (Zheng et al., 2010), the increased temporoparietal activation during challenging word retrieval tasks may simply be a consequence of increased verbal self-monitoring (Hocking et al., 2009; Price, 2010) during which the word produced is compared with the intended output; see section on post articulatory auditory motor feedback below for further discussion.


Word retrieval from semantics: 20 year summary

The most consistent activation for word retrieval from semantics when articulation and semantics are controlled were: the left middle frontal gyrus (MFG in and), Crux 1 of the right lateral (l) posterior (p) cerebellum (CB) and posterior regions in the left middle and inferior temporal cortices (L.pMTG and LpITG in and), with more dorsal superior temporal lobe regions (pSTG and TP in and) when retrieval becomes more difficult and an anterior zone in the anterior cingulate (ACC a zone in and) associated with response suppression.


Covert articulatory planning

Premotor stages of speech production can be investigated with covert articulation tasks that involve the silent production of speech sounds without movements in the articulators or phonation. In addition to motor planning, this level of processing can evoke “inner speech” because the auditory images of speech can be heard in our heads when we prepare to articulate words even though there is no auditory stimulation.


Covert articulatory planning. Time era: 1992–1996


Novel findings

During silent articulation (McGuire et al., 1996a,b) and verbal working memory (Paulesu et al., 1993; Fiez et al., 1996b; Salmon et al., 1996; Schumacher et al., 1996), activation in the left posterior inferior frontal gyrus (Broca's area, BA 44) and/or left premotor cortex (BA 6) was associated with “inner speech”. This was consistent with the view that the left posterior inferior frontal gyrus was involved in auditory-articulatory mapping which resulted in subvocal articulation during perception and auditory imagery of speech during articulation.


Covert articulatory planning. Time era: 1997–2001


Extending previous findings

Covert articulation was again associated with activation in the left posterior inferior frontal region (pars opercularis, BA 44) because this area was activated during: silent word generation (Papathanassiou et al., 2000), subvocal rehearsal of phonological information (Smith et al., 1998), silent syllable counting when presented with written pseudowords (Poldrack et al., 1999), segmentation of speech sounds (Burton et al., 2000) and by letter relative to semantic fluency (Paulesu et al., 1997). There were two unexpected observations. The first was that there was surprisingly little posterior inferior frontal activation during auditory word repetition and reading aloud (Karbe et al., 1998; Wise et al., 1999) with no significant activation difference between word or pseudoword repetition (Newman and Twieg, 2001) but consistently higher activation for reading pseudowords than words (Fiez et al., 1999; Bokde et al., 2001). This suggests that left posterior inferior frontal activation was less in the context of phonological cues and more when the articulatory associations of the word were unknown or needed to be held in short term memory. The second unexpected observation was that it became increasingly apparent that activation in Broca's area was not specific to speech. For example, Binkofski et al. (2000) reported left lateralized posterior inferior frontal activation for imagining a moving target and suggested that it was involved in mediating higher-order movement control of forelimbs as well as speech. This observation indicates that the left posterior inferior frontal cortex is more involved in motor planning than in auditory imagery or inner speech.


Novel findings

The contribution of the left anterior insula to articulatory planning was suggested in both functional imaging (Wise et al., 1999) and lesion (Dronkers, 1996) studies. This explained why the left anterior insula was activated during a range of tasks including overt picture naming (Price et al., 1996b; Zelkowicz et al., 1998; Etard et al., 2000). Greater left anterior insula activation for overt than covert articulation also suggested that the left insula might be more directly involved in the coordination of the various (up to 100) muscles engaged in articulation and phonation (Riecker et al., 2000).

Activation in the SMA and bilateral anterior cerebellum (lobules IV and V) during silent articulation tasks (Kawashima et al., 2000) suggested that the contribution of these regions to other tasks such as overt picture naming (Etard et al., 2000), vocalisation (Hirano et al., 1997) and breathing (Murphy et al., 1997) occurred prior to vocalisation. A role for the SMA in the timing of speech and nonspeech motor commands was suggested following observations that the SMA was activated during silent articulation and memory-timed finger movements (Kawashima et al., 2000). In contrast, Ackermann et al. (1998) proposed that cerebellar activation during silent articulation was the consequence of subliminal activity of orofacial and laryngeal muscles.


Covert articulatory planning. Time era: 2002–2006


Extending previous findings

The opercular part of the posterior inferior frontal cortex (pars opercularis, Broca's area, BA 44) was associated with forming or dividing words into syllables (syllabification) during both covert (silent speech) and overt (speaking aloud) production (Indefrey and Levelt, 2004; Callan et al., 2006) or translating speech into articulatory code (Hickok and Poeppel, 2004). Within the pars opercularis, a distinction was made between dorsal and ventral parts with the dorsal part activated by action observation as well as imitation but the ventral part activated by imitation more than observation (Molnar-Szakacs et al., 2005). This suggests that the ventral pars opercularis has a more motoric function than the dorsal pars opercularis.

More posteriorly, in the left premotor cortex (BA 6), activation was associated with compiling motor codes for syllables (Indefrey and Levelt, 2004) and a “speech sound map” that linked phonemes or frequent syllables to their associated motor programs (Guenther et al., 2006). Although different parts of the dorsal pars opercularis and premotor cortex were found to be responsive to the observation of hand, mouth and foot movements (Binkofski and Buccino, 2006), no speech specific areas were identified when speech was compared to nonspeech motor functions (Gelfand and Bookheimer, 2003; Brown et al., 2006). For example, the dorsal pars opercularis was associated with sequencing the motor acts required to produce hummed notes as well syllables (Gelfand and Bookheimer, 2003).


Novel findings

A rostrocaudal gradient distinction was made between the pre-SMA and the more posterior SMA-proper: During silent articulation, the pre-SMA was associated with sequencing abstract motor plans while the SMA-proper was associated with the control of motor output (Alario et al., 2006). This distinction was supported by observations that the SMA was commonly activated by word generation and reading when articulation was matched but the pre-SMA was more activated by: (a) word generation than reading, (Chung et al., 2005; Tremblay and Gracco, 2006), (b) during the covert rather than overt stage of object and action naming (Kemeny et al., 2006), and (c) pseudoword repetition when the phonological complexity of the stimulus increased (Bohland and Guenther, 2006).


Covert articulatory planning. Time era: 2007–2011


Extending previous findings

In the left pars opercularis (Broca's area/BA 44), a clearer distinction emerged to dissociate the function of the ventral and dorsal parts. The ventral left pars opercularis was activated during covert articulation (Zheng et al., 2010; Papoutsi et al., 2009) with increased activation for phonological relative to semantic retrieval (Heim et al., 2009a), consistent with a role in articulatory recoding of speech (Papoutsi et al., 2009). The left dorsal pars opercularis was associated with processing prior to articulatory recoding (Papoutsi et al., 2009) and was found to be commonly activated by both the production and observation of nonsemantic, nonsyntactic, and nonsense syllables (Fridriksson et al., 2009). The dorsal premotor cortex was associated with general action selection because it was observed during finger movements as well as speech (Meister et al., 2009) while the left ventral premotor cortex was associated with generating the motor acts related to speech sounds (Ghosh et al., 2008; Peeva et al., 2010), nonspeech sounds (Chang et al., 2009) and orofacial movements such as tongue protrusion and lip pursing that are not associated with sound production (Price et al., 2011).

In the pre-SMA, activation was associated with inhibiting rather than initiating vocal and manual responses (Xue et al., 2008). The inhibitory role for the pre-SMA may explain why activation was found to be greater for volitional relative to stimulus driven mouth movements (Tremblay and Gracco, 2010) because selecting the correct response (in volitional mouth movements) requires competing responses to be inhibited. It may also explain the numerous reports that pre-SMA activation is greater for the production of unfamiliar speech sounds (Ghosh et al., 2008; Peeva et al., 2010) in terms of the increased effort in suppressing prepotent familiar speech.

Finally, evidence that activation in the anterior insula, subcortical structures (basal ganglia and thalamus), cerebellum, planum temporale and inferior parietal lobe was reduced during the silent short-term maintenance of auditory stimuli when articulation is suppressed (Koelsch et al., 2009), suggests that these areas are more involved in articulatory activity. Conversely, it was also noted that activation in the planum temporale and inferior parietal lobe was higher during covert than overt production of sentences (Andreatta et al., 2010) and during covert (imagined) than overt singing (Kleber et al., 2007). This suggests that activation in these temporo-parietal regions might be related to the sensorimotor circuits that maintain sound representations for the production of speech and song (Koelsch et al., 2009).


Covert articulatory planning: 20 year summary

Covert articulation is a mix of processing that occurs prior to overt articulation and independently from word retrieval. The mapping of heard or intended speech to orofacial movements has been associated with activation in the ventral pars opercularis (pOpv in and) and the ventral premotor cortex (vPM in and) with subliminal motor activity in lobules IV and V of the bilateral anterior medial cerebellum (a CB). In contrast, mapping in the reverse direction (from orofacial movements to auditory imagery) involves the auditory imagery areas discussed in section (i.e. PT and vSMG in and). Covert articulation also activates areas that are engaged by other motor modalities (e.g. fingers), for example, the left dorsal pars opercularis (LpOp-d in and) associated with motor sequencing; and the bilateral premotor cortex (d-PreC in).


Overt articulation during speech production

This section considers the brain areas that control mouth movements (lips, tongue, jaw), the vocal tract (larynx) and breathing during overt speech production.


Overt articulation. Time era: 1992–1996


Extending previous findings

When syllables were articulated without using the larynx, activation increased in the left primary motor cortex that controls the face, the upper pons, the left planum temporale and the left posterior perisylvian cortex (Paus et al., 1996b). The response in auditory regions (left planum temporale and left posterior perisylvian cortex) was observed even when auditory processing of the spoken response had been minimised and masked out using low-intensity white noise. This was explained in terms of motor activity (left motor primary cortex) causing a discharge corollary of the motor command to sensory structures (Paus et al., 1996b).


Novel findings

Tongue movements were found to produce symmetrical activation at the lower primary motor cortex, with left lateralization in the same region during automatic speech and right-sided activation during singing (Wildgruber et al., 1996). There was, nevertheless, a striking overlap between the areas activated during the articulation of speech, vocalisation (Hirano et al., 1996) and the control of volitional breathing in the absence of vocalisation (Ramsay et al., 1993; Fink et al., 1996). For example, controlled breathing activated dorsal primary motor cortices bilaterally, the lateral pre-motor cortex in the right hemisphere, the SMA and left ventrolateral thalamus, with additional activation for expiration in more bilateral ventrolateral primary motor areas. This emphasizes that the motor and premotor activation during speech involves far more than simply moving the mouth.

Investigation of the role of the anterior cingulate cortex in higher-order motor control showed that speech activated the intermediate dorsal and the rostral ACC which is distinct from more anterior regions involved in the control of manual tasks (Paus et al., 1993). The authors proposed that the anterior cingulate participates in motor control by facilitating the execution of the appropriate responses and/or suppressing the execution of the inappropriate ones.

The role of the left putamen in speech production was also discussed in a paper by Klein et al. (1994) who observed that left putamen activation was higher for auditory repetition of words in a non-native language than the native language which can be explained in terms of increased demands on the articulatory system.


Overt articulation. Time era: 1997–2001


Novel findings

The control of the tongue was localized in the central sulcus (BA 3/4) at approximately 28 mm above the intercommissural plane (Pardo et al., 1997). Contrary to previous findings, activation was observed bilaterally rather than being left lateralized. Corfield et al. (1999) also identified bilateral premotor areas during tongue movements and Lotze et al. (2000) segregated these effects from the primary motor and sensory cortex activations for lip movements. Of more relevance for speech, Lotze et al. (2000) found that the activation for articulating the syllables “pa” and “ta” corresponded to activation related to nonspeech lip and tongue movements respectively.

The control of breathing was investigated by Murphy et al. (1997) who found bilateral sensorimotor and motor cortex activation that was medial to that associated with the articulators. The same study showed that the thalamus was activated during the control of breathing as well as articulation (Murphy et al., 1997) and this may explain some of the left lateralized thalamic activation observed during verbal fluency (Paulesu et al., 1997), naming objects, naming letters, naming colours and reading (Price and Friston, 1997) especially when the rate of speech production increased (Palmer et al., 2001). Activation was also left lateralized in the putamen during an overt versus silent stem completion task (Rosen et al., 2000) and in the posterior pallidum during auditory repetition (Wise et al., 1999). However, while activation in the motor cortex and left thalamus increased with the rate of speech production, activation in the left putamen was higher for slower production rates (Wildgruber et al., 2001). These findings emphasized the importance of left lateralized subcortical responses during speech production and dissociated the function of the left thalamus (associated with breathing) from that in the basal ganglia (associated with the timing of production).


Overt articulation. Time era: 2002–2006


Extending previous findings

A direct comparison of overt speech production with motor preparation activated regions in the primary motor and somatosensory cortices, SMA, insula, thalamus, basal ganglia and posterior cerebellum (Bohland and Guenther, 2006). The association of the left insula with motor processing rather than articulatory planning was emphasized again following observations that left anterior insula activation was higher for overt than covert speech (Ackermann and Riecker, 2004; Shuster and Lemieux, 2005) and unaffected by the demands on motor planning (Shuster and Lemieux, 2005; Blank et al., 2002). Left lateralized activation during overt articulation was observed in the insula and the dorsolateral premotor cortex and this was contrasted to the bilateral activation in sensorimotor cortex (Riecker et al., 2005). Similarly, left lateralized activation in the primary motor cortex for phonation was contrasted to bilateral activation for tongue movements (Terumitsu et al., 2006).

The motor function of the SMA-proper was re-iterated (Chung et al., 2005; Tremblay and Gracco, 2006; Alario et al., 2006) and associated with the voluntary control of learnt motor sequences of both speech and finger movements (Ullen et al., 2005). This is not incompatible with the involvement of the SMA in the motor control of breathing (see section) which needs to be finely timed with the mouth movements producing sounds. In the cerebellum, the areas activated by speech articulation were in the left and right medial superior posterior cerebellum (paravermal lobule VI) and these areas were separated from the right lateral superior posterior cerebellum (HVI/Crus I) associated with word generation (Frings et al., 2006) and the right inferior posterior cerebellum (HVIIIA) that was activated by vocalisation and breathing during articulation (Nota and Honda, 2004) and during passive listening to auditory clicks that varied in frequency (Ackermann et al., 2001). A distinction was also made between activation for articulation in the left and right medial posterior cerebellum and the striatum (caudate and putamen) because increased rate of articulation had a positive influence on activation in the cerebellar regions and thalamus but a negative influence on activation in the striatum (Riecker et al., 2005, 2006). Thus, the putamen and caudate were more activated for slower (more controlled) speech production. This might explain why left putamen activation was associated with counting (Hinton et al., 2004) and reading written syllables (Bohland and Guenther, 2006) and is consistent with prior claims that the putamen is involved in the timing of speech production.


Novel findings

All the above areas (left anterior insula, bilateral premotor and sensorimotor cortices, posterior cerebellum, SMA, thalamus and striatum) were activated for producing melodies (Brown et al., 2006) and whistling (Dresel et al., 2005) as well as speech. This is consistent with specialisation for speech production emerging from the co-ordination of the language system (semantic processing, word retrieval and the sequencing of this information) with mouth movements, vocal tract movements and breathing.


Overt articulation. Time era: 2007–2011


Extending previous findings

As shown previously, the areas that are activated by speech were also activated by nonspeech orofacial movements and vocal tract gestures (Chang et al., 2009), sniffing (Koritnik et al., 2009), singing (Zarate et al., 2010), volitional exhalation and phonation (Loucks et al., 2007). The contribution of phonation to activation in the bilateral sensorimotor cortex during articulation was also emphasized in several studies (Loucks et al., 2007; Brown et al., 2008, 2009; Grabski et al., 2011; Simonyan et al., 2009; Simonyan and Horwitz, 2011). Brown et al. (2008) identified a larynx-specific region in the motor cortex by comparing vocal and nonvocal laryngeal tasks (phonation) relative to vowel, lip movement, and tongue movement. Grabski et al. (2011) investigated this further describing a dorso-ventral somatotopic organization of lip, jaw, vocal/laryngeal, and tongue movements.

Activation in the left anterior insula, on the junction of the frontal operculum, was sensitive to the complexity or novelty of subsyllabic verbal utterances (Shuster, 2009; Riecker et al., 2008; Moser et al., 2009). Opinions on the role of the insula during articulation changed again with a new focus on its role in the voluntary control of breathing (Ackermann and Riecker, 2010). This is consistent with observations that bilateral insula regions are involved in phonation for speech, volitional exhalation (Loucks et al., 2007) and syllable singing (Brown et al., 2009; Zarate et al., 2010). A role for the insula in the control of breathing may explain why this area is activated during non-verbal orofacial functions including lip movement, tongue movement and vocalisation (Brown et al., 2009) because mouth movements interfere with the regular pattern of breathing thereby increasing the demands on the control of breathing. A similar explanation may account for why bilateral insula activation increases during overt picture naming when phonological/articulatory interference increases (Mechelli et al., 2007). However, it is more difficult to explain how the control of breathing explains bilateral insula activation during silent tasks such as silent rehearsal of tone (pitch) and verbal information (Koelsch et al., 2009) unless breathing is automatically adapted during subvocal articulation.

In the SMA-proper, activation was greater for complex articulation than prolonged vowel production or exhalation (Loucks et al., 2007) and maintained during production consistent with a role in execution as well as initiation (Brendel et al., 2010). In the anterior cingulate, the most posterior zone was associated with motor execution, rather than conflict monitoring or response selection (Schulze et al., 2011) but the anterior zone associated with conflict monitoring (Schulze et al., 2011) was found to be more activated by speech than nonspeech (Chang et al., 2009). Other studies also found the anterior cingulate cortex involved in the suppression of inappropriate and unintended speech (Christoffels et al., 2007; Basho et al., 2007; Ali et al., 2010; Schulze et al., 2011). Such suppression may be less involved in producing nonspeech sounds because selection and production of nonspeech may be slower with less competition from highly similar motor programs.

In the bilateral medial superior posterior cerebellum, activation related to articulation was located in lobule VI/Crus I (Stoodley and Schmahmann, 2009, 2010; Peeva et al., 2010; Durisko and Fiez, 2010). The cerebellum is thought to have a modulatory role in motor functions (Murdoch et al., 2010) and, during articulation, activity in bilateral superior cerebellar regions may contribute to the timing of consonant–vowel syllable production (Ghosh et al., 2008) and the online sequencing of syllables into fast, smooth and rhythmically organized larger utterances (Ackermann, 2008). Lobule VI is associated with lip and tongue movements, therefore Callan et al. (2007) have proposed that it is involved in instantiating internal models of vocal tract articulation during both speech and singing. This contrasts to the function of the right posterior lateral inferior cerebellum (Lobule VII) that was associated with word retrieval (and sections above); and the very ventral and medial parts of lobule VIIIA that are activated when sensorimotor feedback is disrupted (see section below).

Finally, the left putamen and thalamus were incorporated into a motor loop that passes activity from the SMA via the putamen to the thalamus and into the motor cortex (Bohland et al., 2010). This is consistent with the basal ganglia being involved in the innervations of vocal tract muscles (Brendel et al., 2010). A somewhat different view is that the basal ganglia (putamen and caudate) are involved in the timing, predictive coding and sequencing of events and this can be compensated for by a cerebellar-thalamic-pre-SMA pathway (Kotz et al., 2009; Kotz and Schwartze, 2010). There are also claims that the insula (rather than the SMA) activates the basal ganglia and cerebellum prior to motor output (Eickhoff et al., 2009). These connectivity studies showing the interactions between different regions are intriguing but further investigation is required to tie all sources of evidence together.


Overt articulation: 20 year summary

Producing the sounds of speech involves more than sensorimotor activity in the pre- and post-central regions (PrC and PoC in and) that control the orofacial muscles. It also involves activation related to laryngeal activity, phonation and the voluntary control of breathing. A distinction has also been made between areas involved in motor execution (e.g. ACC in) and the cerebellum (CB in and) and subcortical areas (PUT in and) involved in the timing and control of motor activity.


Auditory‐motor feedback during speech production

Articulation of speech produces sound for the listener that will also be heard by the speaker. During language acquisition, auditory processing of self-produced speech is used to tune motor production so that the produced auditory output matches the intended auditory output. In this sense, auditory feedback is useful for monitoring and correcting speech errors. Once speech is mastered, auditory feedback is less useful and we do not actively attend to the sound of our own voice. We may even inhibit auditory processing of the spoken response. Nevertheless, to anyone who has struggled to speak normally on a telephone line that delays the auditory feedback, it is clear that auditory feedback during speech production is not completely inhibited.


Auditory-motor feedback during speech production. Time era: 1992–1996


Novel findings

Auditory processing of self generated speech was inferred from observations that bilateral superior temporal gyri were activated during speaking aloud relative to making the articulatory movements of the same words without generating any sound (Price et al., 1996b). There were two qualifications to this observation: (a) superior temporal activation during self-vocalisation was less than that expected when perceiving another's voice (Hirano et al., 1996) and (b) left posterior temporal activation (in the planum temporale and perisylvian cortex) was observed during unvoiced syllable production when auditory processing was masked by low-intensity white noise (Paus et al., 1996b). To explain the activation in auditory processing areas during silent speech production, Paus et al. (1996b) emphasized that when we engage in motor activity, a discharge corollary to the motor command is sent from motor to sensory structures. Support for this hypothesis came from observations that the left posterior superior temporal cortex, extending into the left planum temporale, was activated when subjects imagined hearing another person's voice in the absence of any auditory input (McGuire et al., 1996a). Together these results suggested that auditory imagery during articulation resulted in left lateralized posterior temporal activation whereas auditory processing of the heard response after articulation resulted in bilateral superior temporal activation. This implies that left posterior temporal activation occurs prior to bilateral superior temporal activation but, to my knowledge, the differential timing of these responses has still not been tested.


Auditory-motor feedback during speech production. Time era: 1997–2001


Extending previous findings

Processing of self-produced vocalisations in bilateral auditory cortices was shown to be less than that of another's speech unless the speech fed back to the auditory system was altered to make it different from the articulated voice (Hirano et al., 1997). This suggests that, although auditory processing is normally less during articulation, it increases when the heard sounds are not expected. The response in the left planum temporale was again consistent with auditory imagery because it was observed when silently imagining speech (Shergill et al., 2001) or for recalling (imagining) the auditory relative to visual associations of a picture of a scene (Wheeler et al., 2000).


Auditory-motor feedback during speech production. Time era: 2002–2006


Extending previous findings

As shown previously, bilateral superior temporal activation was found to increase when there was a mismatch between the expected and actual auditory feedback (Hashimoto and Sakai, 2003; Fu et al., 2006). In the left planum temporale (previously associated with auditory imagery), activation was observed during subvocal articulation or the presentation of visual stimuli that had previously been experienced with auditory activity. For example, activation in the left planum temporale increased during the silence that followed familiar music even when there was no instruction to remember the music (Kraemer et al., 2005), when passively viewing finger tapping on the piano following keyboard training (Hasegawa et al., 2004), when producing rhythmic finger sequences that had been learnt with an auditory cue (Bengtsson et al., 2005) and when imagining heard speech, music or environmental sounds in the absence of sound (Aleman et al., 2005; Bunzeck et al., 2005; Zatorre and Halpern, 2005). These studies are consistent with the prior hypothesis that the left planum temporale is involved in auditory imagery and would explain why activation in the left planum temporale increased with the rate of covert (silent) speech production (Shergill et al., 2002), if we assume that auditory imagery (or inner speech) occurs automatically during covert speech production.


Novel findings

Auditory imagery during speech production might play an essential role in predicting the intended speech production, or even providing an internal model to which the auditory feedback should be matched (Heinks-Maldonado et al., 2005). There then needs to be a process by which the anticipated auditory response is integrated with the actual auditory response. This was addressed by Guenther et al. (2006) who proposed that there were “error cells” in the posterior superior temporal gyrus and planum temporale that respond when there is a mismatch between the intended/expected speech and the sound of the speech. The error signal is then fed back to the primary motor cortex to adjust the speech output so that it can be closer to that which was intended. Likewise, Guenther et al. (2006) proposed that there were “error cells” in the parietal (somatosensory) cortex that monitor the tactile and proprioceptive sensations.


Auditory-motor feedback during speech production. Time era: 2007–2011


Extending previous findings

In the bilateral superior temporal gyri associated with auditory processing, further studies showed that activation related to processing the sound of the speaker's own voice was less during the process of producing the speech than when hearing a recording of the spoken response (Ventura et al., 2009; Christoffels et al., 2011). This suppression of auditory processing was proportional to the quality of the feedback; consequently, superior temporal activation increased when speech was distorted (Christoffels et al., 2007; Tourville et al., 2008; Christofells et al., 2011; Zheng et al., 2010) or when auditory feedback was delayed (Takaso et al., 2010).


Novel findings

Six new findings emerged. First, in the left posterior planum temporale/temporoparietal area that previous studies had associated with the silent imagination of heard speech, activation was found to increase when speech production was more error prone due to interference or speaking in a second language (Hocking et al., 2009; Abel et al., 2009; Simmonds et al., 2011; Parker Jones et al., 2012). This is consistent with the mental imagery of the intended speech playing a role in monitoring speech production when it is error prone. Second, the left pars opercularis and left posterior superior temporal sulcus were reported to be more activated for making silent articulatory speech movements relative to silent nonverbal mouth movements, but the left posterior planum temporale was equally activated by verbal and nonverbal mouth movements (Price et al., 2011). This was interpreted in terms of the higher-order language areas that predict the auditory consequences of articulation. It also distinguishes the functional response in the left posterior planum temporale from that in the left pars opercularis and posterior superior temporal sulcus but does not elucidate the distinct contribution of each of these areas. Third, bilateral superior temporal activation was reported to be negatively correlated to that in the SMA (Van de Ven et al., 2009) which suggests that the role of the SMA in suppressing auditory feedback should be investigated. Fourth, activation in the right prefrontal cortex and rolandic cortical activity increased with bilateral superior temporal activation during distorted feedback (Tourville et al., 2008) which suggested a role for these areas in modulating subsequent speech output, or in resolving interference. Fifth, the posterior medial dorsal surface of the superior temporal gyri, including the planum temporale, were found to be activated during repetitive (silent) movements of the jaw and tongue as well as during auditory feedback (Dhanjal et al., 2008) and nonspeech vocal tract movements (Loucks et al., 2007). This highlighted a role for the posteromedial supratemporal plane in polysensory integration. Sixth, bilateral postcentral gyri were associated with somato-sensory feedback (Peschke et al., 2009; Zheng et al., 2010) and the consequences of this on compensatory speech motor commands were considered by Golfinopoulos et al. (2010) who found that jaw perturbations during speech increased activation in the left and right ventral motor cortex, inferior frontal cortex and inferior posterior cerebellum (lobule VIII).


Auditory-motor feedback during speech production: 20 year summary

Extrapolating from the findings so far, my speculation is that auditory monitoring of the spoken voice starts with an internal model of the intended speech which is generated in the core language areas (pOp and pSTS in and). This results in auditory imagery (in STG and PT in and). As the predictions become more precise, activity in the auditory cortices (L&R STG) decreases (with more activation when predictions are less precise).


Visual word processing

Written words access the language system via the visual system. The sensory processing is therefore different from that required for the comprehension and production of auditory speech. The mapping of visual stimuli to articulation is also different from that involved in object naming. For example, words written in alphabetic script are composed of a limited number of visual features (letters) that provide clues to the pronunciation of the whole word. Phonology can therefore be retrieved from novel letter combinations that do not have learnt semantic associations (e.g. THACY). This means that there are infinitely more meaningful words that can be read than objects that can be named. Words can also be combined into sentences and narratives. The review of visual word processing below focuses only on the results of studies that aimed to find brain areas that are more activated by reading than either auditory word processing or visual object naming. The first section focuses on brain areas activated by written words more than other types of stimuli. The second section considers brain activation that might differ according to whether orthography is mapped to phonology at the lexical, sublexical or semantic level.


Early visual word form processing. Time era: 1992–1996


Novel findings

The early neuroimaging studies of reading suggested a special role for the left extrastriate visual cortex in visual word processing (Petersen et al., 1988, 1990, Petersen et al., 1989). Although the extrastriate cortex is clearly involved in orthographic (letter) processing (Pugh et al., 1996), subsequent studies emphasized the importance of three different regions in visual word form processing. The first was the left posterior middle/superior temporal gyrus which was more activated for reading aloud than viewing ‘false fonts’ (non-existent letter-like forms that controlled for visual input) and saying a single word (e.g. “crime” or “range”) to control for speech production (Howard et al., 1992; Small et al., 1996). The second was the left angular gyrus that was more activated for viewing words than pictures (Menard et al., 1996), and also the site of the “visual word form area” in the classical neurological model of reading (Dejerine, 1891; Geschwind, 1965). The third was the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex that was more activated by reading the Japanese script Kanji than Kana (Kiyosawa et al., 1995); and more activated when younger relative to older adults read English words (Madden et al., 1996).

Explanations for the inconsistent localization of visual word form processing focused on the experimental design and emphasized that activation changed with the task (Sergent et al., 1992; Price et al., 1994), the exposure duration of the stimuli (Price et al., 1994), their rate of presentation (Price et al., 1996d) and difficulties selecting a suitable baseline task because word-like stimuli automatically access the language system irrespective of the task (Sergent et al., 1992; Price et al., 1996c). In brief, subtle variations in experimental design influenced brain activity during reading tasks and it was therefore premature to associate specific processing functions with individual anatomical areas.


Early visual word form processing. Time era: 1997–2001


Extending prior findings

The involvement of the left occipitotemporal cortex in visual word form processing was not disputed (Fiez and Petersen, 1998; Fujimaki et al., 1999; Cohen et al., 2000; Hart et al., 2000; Dehaene et al., 2001; Leff et al., 2001). Meanwhile, reading-related activation in the left extrastriate cortex was attributed to early visual processing (Indefrey et al., 1997) and that in the posterior middle temporal and angular gyri was associated with semantic processing (Vandenberghe et al., 1996).

The strongest and most influential claim was that the left occipitotemporal cortex housed abstract representations of visual words (Cohen et al., 2000; Dehaene et al., 2001). This led to the left occipitotemporal cortex being labelled the ‘visual word form area’ (VWFA). Although damage to the left occipitotemporal cortex is known to impair reading (Leff et al., 2001), confusion and controversy emerged at the level of functional specialisation and anatomy. At the functional level, the abstract visual word processing claim was challenged by observations that activation for written words (that have abstract visual word form representations) was less than that for stimuli that don't have abstract word representations such as (a) unfamiliar pseudowords (Brunswick et al., 1999; Fujimaki et al., 1999; Tagamets et al., 2000; Xu et al., 2001) or (b) pictures of objects (Vandenberghe et al., 1996; Chee et al., 2000; Moore and Price, 1999). At the anatomical level, the left occipitotemporal activation associated with reading was located on the medial surface of the inferior temporal gyrus, at the boundary with the fusiform gyrus and at the junction between the occipital and temporal lobes. Hence it was referred to with multiple names: posterior inferior temporal, fusiform, occipitotemporal and the “VWFA”. Different sub-divisions of the left occipitotemporal reading area were also dissociated with different functional attributes (Moore and Price, 1999) leading to a situation where the same activation could be given different anatomical and functional labels.


Early visual word form processing. Time era: 2002–2006


Extending prior findings

Reports of activation during visual word form processing continued to focus solely on the role of the left occipitotemporal cortex which was also referred to as the left mid-fusiform gyrus and visual word form area (VWFA). All studies agreed that this area was consistently activated by visual word processing across languages and orthographies (e.g. Cohen et al., 2002; Turkeltaub et al., 2002; Fu et al., 2002; Price and Devlin, 2003; Reinholz and Pollmann, 2005; Vigneau et al., 2005). Activation was also reported to be higher for written words than spoken words (Booth et al., 2002a, 2002b; Cohen et al., 2002), written words than chequerboards or consonants (Cohen et al., 2002); and to be invariant to the spatial location of the stimuli (Cohen et al., 2002) or the case and font of the letters (Dehaene et al., 2002). The anatomical location of the visual word processing activation was also distinguished from other surrounding areas involved in single letter processing (Flowers et al., 2004) and amodal semantic processing (Nakamura et al., 2005; Cohen et al., 2004; Price and Mechelli, 2005).

Observations that left occipitotemporal activation was observed for pseudowords with increased activation as letter strings became more word-like (Binder et al., 2006) led to suggestions that learning to read tuned the receptive properties of the underlying neurons to combinations of letters (such as bigrams and trigrams) that are found within familiar words (Cohen and Dehaene, 2004; Binder et al., 2006). However, this perspective did not explain why left occipitotemporal activation was less for (a) words with high relative to low lexical frequency (Kuo et al., 2003; Kronbichler et al., 2004) or (b) familiar words than pseudowords (Mechelli et al., 2003; Kronbichler et al., 2004). To explain these “lexical familiarity effects”, Kronbichler et al. (2004) proposed that the left occipitotemporal cortex was specialised for extracting and storing abstract whole word patterns. According to this account, the amplitude of the activation increases with the difficulty encountered when matching a visual word form to its lexical representation (i.e. low > high frequency words; pseudowords > words). This lexical account can explain why left occipitotemporal activation is reduced by the repetition of a word (“sold–sold”) but not to a repetition to a pseudoword (“solst–solst”) but cannot explain why left ventral occipitotemporal activation was sensitive to sublexical similarities between words (e.g. “corner–corn”) that had different lexical representations (Devlin et al., 2006).

A third perspective was that the same left occipitotemporal neurons were activated by object recognition and colour naming tasks and therefore the function of this region was not specific to either letter combinations or whole word forms (Price and Devlin, 2003; Joseph et al., 2003, 2006). Instead, the function appeared to be one that integrated visual information with higher-level processing (Price and Devlin, 2003; Price and Friston, 2005; Vigneau et al., 2005; Devlin et al., 2006). This would explain why activation in this region was sensitive to lexicality effects (Kronbichler et al., 2004) and prior experience (Dehaene et al., 2001). It also explains why the left fusiform responses to letters relative to unfamiliar shapes were task dependent (Pernet et al., 2005) and why left occipitotemporal responses to novel orthographic stimuli changed with the type of training experienced (Sandak et al., 2004; Xue et al., 2006). For example, Xue et al. (2006) found that activation increased after phonological and semantic training but decreased after visual form training. These findings highlighted the influence of higher-level phonological and semantic associations on left occipitotemporal activation.


Early visual word form processing. Time era: 2007–2011


Extending prior findings

There was a continued focus on the role of the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex in visual word form recognition (Wandell, 2011). As previously documented, activation for processing word and word-like stimuli that have access to learnt abstract visual form representations was observed relative to unfamiliar nonword stimuli matched for visual complexity (Liu et al., 2008), irrespective of the hemifield of presentation (Woodhead et al., 2011a) and the physical form that the words were presented in Qiao et al. (2010) and Kronbichler et al. (2009). More details of the perceptual feature-to-whole word gradient along the posterior–anterior axis of the left occipitotemporal cortex were described for both alphabetic texts (Vinckier et al., 2007; Brem et al., 2010; Nosarti et al., 2010; Seghier and Price, 2011; Woollams et al., 2011) and Chinese/Korean texts (Chan et al., 2009).

Several studies also replicated prior observations that there was remarkable similarity in the response to visual form processing of letters, words and objects (Eddy et al., 2007; Wright et al., 2008; Turkeltaub et al., 2008; Burgund et al., 2009; Kherif et al., 2011; Shinkareva et al., 2011). The only studies that claimed to have found greater activation for words than pictures in the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex did not control for semantic and phonological attributes of the stimuli (Baker et al., 2007; Szwed et al., 2011) and used low level perceptual tasks such as the one back task (is the stimulus the same as the previous stimulus) that permit stimulus specific strategies. For example, greater activation for words, particularly in the anterior fusiform part of the ventral occipitotemporal cortex (Szwed et al., 2011) that has previously been associated with semantic processing (see section above), may reflect the use of a semantic strategy for words that were not used for pictures.

The effect of learning/experience on left ventral occipitotemporal activation was reported in two contrasting ways. In the early stages of children or adults learning to read, left ventral occipitotemporal activation increased with learning (Brem et al., 2010; Dehaene et al., 2010b) and this correlated with the rate of improvement in word recognition (Ben-Shachar et al., 2011). However, in skilled readers, activation decreased with experience/exposure to the same stimuli (Wong et al., 2009; Xue et al., 2010; Song et al., 2010a, 2010b; Xue and Poldrack, 2007) and for stimuli with high relative to low orthographic familiarity (Kronbichler et al., 2007; Bruno et al., 2008) and lexical frequency (Kronbichler et al., 2007). These experience-dependent effects illustrate that the response in the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex changes with learning but the interpretation of the learning effect was debated.

One interpretation is that, during the course of learning to read, the response properties of the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex (or left mid-fusiform) become selective to learnt orthographic representations (Dehaene and Cohen, 2007, 2011) with orthographic familiarity effects observed independent of phonological or semantic familiarity (Kronbichler et al., 2007). Some authors further argued that specialisation for orthographic processing is at the whole word (lexical) level (Kronbichler et al., 2007, 2009; Glezer et al., 2009; Schurz et al., 2010) but agreed that orthographic processing in the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex is a precursor for mapping visual forms onto meaning and articulatory representations (Yarkoni et al., 2008).

A second perspective is that the left occipitotemporal cortex is involved in the perceptual processing of generic visual features that are present to varying degrees in all visual stimuli including words, objects, letters and faces (Barton et al., 2010; Mei et al., 2010; Braet et al., 2011; Reinke et al., 2008). Within this framework, evidence was presented to support a role for the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex in (a) generic visual memory (Mei et al., 2010); (b) convergence of features (Rauschecker et al., 2011); (c) high spatial frequencies that may bias the lateralization of processing irrespective of its higher-order properties (Woodhead et al., 2011b); and (d) attention to spatial and feature processing that is related to activity in dorsal parietal regions (Vogel et al., 2011). Although left occipitotemporal activation is not specific to written words in these accounts, specialisation for words arises in the unique network of brain regions that are activated during the word condition (Reinke et al., 2008). In other words, the process of learning to read integrates generic visual processing with higher-order language areas and there is no need for brain areas that are specialised for orthographic processing.

A complementary perspective is that the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex contributes to written word recognition by integrating bottom up (feed forward) generic visual processing with top-down influences from phonological, and semantic areas (Cai et al., 2010; Hellyer et al., 2011; Price and Devlin, 2011; Wang et al., 2011; Woodhead et al., 2011a). After learning to read, these top-down influences are generated automatically (irrespective of task) in response to written words, but their strength can also be modulated by task and attention (Guo and Burgund, 2010; Borowsky et al., 2007; Hellyer et al., 2011; Twomey et al., 2011; Yoncheva et al., 2010; Woodhead et al., 2011a). This integration of visual, semantic and phonological information is not unique to written words but is required by other tasks, particularly object naming. The same left ventral occipitotemporal site also appears to function as a multi-modal integration area in the absence of visual inputs as indicated by its response during non-visual braille reading in congenitally blind participants (Büchel et al., 1998; Reich et al., 2011).

This interactive account of left ventral occipitotemporal cortical responses can explain a wide range of observations including increased activation to orthographic forms when learning to read and decreased activation as reading becomes easier (Price and Devlin, 2011). It also explains why left occipitotemporal activation is sensitive to the left-right orientation of single letters and words but not to pictures (Dehaene et al., 2010a; Pegado et al., 2011) in terms of the learnt relationship between the visual form and higher-level language associations (which are orientation-specific for letters/words but not for objects). The early influence of language on visual word processing in the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex is consistent with observations that (a) the response to written words in a left-lateralized inferior frontal region (pars opercularis) peaks at the same time as that in the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex (Cornelissen et al., 2009); and (b) activation during picture naming or reading aloud is reduced when the target stimulus to be named is preceded by an unconscious masked prime that has the same name as the target but a different physical form (Eddy et al., 2007) as when a word is primed by a picture or a picture is primed by a word (Kherif et al., 2011).

Finally, the degree to which the response in the ventral occipitotemporal cortex was left lateralized for words was found to correlate with the degree to which inferior frontal activation was left lateralized during word generation (Cai et al., 2010). The determinants of lateralization also varied with the subregion of occipitotemporal cortex tested (Seghier and Price, 2011). In the posterior subregion, lateralization depended on the spatial frequency of the visual inputs. In the anterior subregion, lateralization depended on the semantic demands of the task. In the middle part that has been the focus of the discussion above, lateralization was explained by decreased activation in right occipitotemporal cortex as visual expertise increased. Therefore, left lateralized activation in the ventral occipitotemporal cortex depends on the subregion tested and does not necessarily indicate a specialisation for orthography in left ventral occipitotemporal cortex.


Early visual word form processing: 20 year summary

There is no doubt that an extensive region of the ventral occipitotemporal cortex is involved in skilled reading. Within this region, posterior areas are involved in visual feature extraction and more anterior areas are involved in lexico-semantic processing of the whole word. How the response properties in this system differ for written words and other stimuli is still a matter of debate.


Dissociating neural pathways for mapping orthography to phonology

This section considers studies that have attempted to dissociate neural pathways for converting spelling (orthography) to sound (phonology) via sublexical, lexical and semantic routes. The sublexical route involves assembling the phonology associated with the whole word from its sublexical parts (sublexical orthographic to phonological conversion). The lexical route involves retrieving phonology directly from the orthography of the whole word. The semantic route involves retrieving phonology from the semantic properties of the word (similar to picture naming).

The sublexical route is particularly important when reading new words (e.g. for pseudowords like THACY). In contrast, the lexical or semantic routes are particularly important when the sublexical spelling to sound relationships are “inconsistent” with the whole word representation (e.g. for reading irregularly spelled words like YACHT). One approach for segregating sublexical and lexical reading routes has therefore been to contrast activation for reading pseudowords with activation for reading words with irregular spellings. Another approach has been to compare reading of different alphabetic or nonalphabetic scripts that differ in the depth and consistency of their phonological clues. For example, the relationship between orthography and phonology is most consistent in Italian and least consistent in Chinese. Conversely, Chinese relies more heavily on lexical knowledge than English because Chinese is a logographic orthography that has weak phonological clues. Japanese is particularly interesting because the same words can be written in different scripts with different properties. For example, the Japanese script Kana can be read on the basis of sublexical phonological clues whereas the Japanese script Kanji must be processed at the level of morphemes (the smallest unit of meaning). Comparison of activation for different scripts (Italian versus English; English versus Chinese; Kanji versus Kana) can therefore provide clues to the neural basis of different reading pathways.


Dissociating neural pathways for mapping orthography to phonology. Time era: 1992–1996


Novel findings

A comparison of activation for reading the Japanese scripts Kanji and Kana found greater activation for Kanji in the posterior part of the primary visual cortex but did not find any areas that were significantly more activated for Kana (Kiyosawa et al., 1995). A dissociation between the scripts was, nevertheless, observed at the level of functional connectivity because, within the common set of areas that were activated for Kanji and Kana, functional connectivity was stronger in ventral reading areas for Kanji reading, and in dorsal reading areas for Kana reading (Kiyosawa et al., 1995). This study therefore provided evidence that morphemic reading could be differentiated from sequential (sublexical) reading. A less optimistic start was reported for the comparison of word and pseudoword reading. A double dissociation in brain activation proved to be elusive because, throughout the reading system, activation for pseudowords was greater than that for words (Price et al., 1996a). The interpretation for this was that activation was higher when the links between orthography and phonology were unfamiliar or unsuccessful (pseudoword reading) compared to when they were familiar and successful(real words). Critically, however, there was no report of any study that directly compared activation for reading pseudowords with activation for reading irregularly spelled words.


Dissociating neural pathways for mapping orthography to phonology. Time era: 1997–2001


Extending prior findings

Several studies compared activation for familiar words and unfamiliar pseudowords (Herbster et al., 1997; Rumsey et al., 1997; Fiez and Petersen, 1998; Hagoort et al., 1999; Mechelli et al., 2000; Pugh et al., 2000, 2001; Tagamets et al., 2000; Xu et al., 2001; Bokde et al., 2001). Overall, there was a general agreement that a common neural network was activated by words and pseudowords with the most consistent difference between word types being greater activation for pseudowords, particularly in the left posterior inferior frontal cortex (Herbster et al., 1997; Hagoort et al., 1999; Fiez and Petersen, 1998; Haist et al., 2001; Xu et al., 2001). One interpretation of this effect was that pseudowords increase the demands on sublexical conversion of orthography to phonology (Hagoort et al., 1999; Pugh et al., 1996). The alternative interpretation was that pseudoword reading was more difficult. Fiez and Petersen (1998) and Fiez et al. (1999) demonstrated this by showing that left posterior inferior frontal activation was also higher for reading words with irregular spellings (e.g. KNIFE) than regular spellings (e.g. BROOM) and was proportional to response times.


Novel findings

One study found that reading aloud words with irregular spellings increased activation in the left anterior ventral occipito-temporal cortex relative to reading aloud pseudowords (Herbster et al., 1997). As irregular word reading is reliant on lexico-semantic processing, the result is consistent with prior and new claims (Kiyosawa et al., 1995; Tokunaga et al., 1999) that ventral parts of the reading system were more activated for semantic reading (Kanji) than sublexical reading (Kana).

Plausibly, other studies of word and pseudoword reading in alphabetic scripts did not identify increased activation in the left anterior occipito-temporal cortex because they didn't specifically assess activation for words with irregular spellings or didn't scan the anterior parts of the left occipitotemporal cortex/fusiform which lie on the ventral surface of the brain and are therefore often excluded from the field of view. Evidence that a more posterior left ventral occipitotemporal area was involved in lexical compared to sublexical reading came from the observation that activation in this area was stronger in English than Italian readers, (Paulesu et al., 2000), particularly when the stimuli were pseudowords. This was interpreted in terms of reading strategy differences because Italian is a regularly spelled language and therefore sublexical links between orthography and phonology are reliable. In contrast, English is an irregularly spelled language and therefore lexical influences are always in place, even during pseudoword reading.

Lexical and sublexical orthographic processing were also dissociated at the level of the functional interactions between shared processing areas. Specifically, Bokde et al. (2001) demonstrated that, relative to pseudowords, words increased the functional coupling between left occipitotemporal cortex and the left ventral inferior frontal areas associated with semantic processing while decreasing the coupling between the left occipitotemporal cortex and inferior frontal regions associated with phonological processing. Pugh et al. (2000, 2001) also distinguished different reading pathways from the occipitotemporal cortex with: a ventral pathway sustaining fast, fluent word recognition, and a dorsal pathway via the temporoparietal cortex supporting the analytic processing required for learning to integrate orthographic with phonological and semantic features of printed words. Overall, these findings were consistent with cognitive models of reading, where multiple pathways are activated by word-like stimuli with the level of activation in each pathway depending on the familiarity of the stimulus and the consistency between the orthography (letters) and phonology (sounds). There was also evidence that there might be other reading pathways in the right hemisphere (Pugh et al., 1997; Hart et al., 2000; Mayall et al., 2001) particularly for reading in Chinese (Tan et al., 2001a, 2001b).


Dissociating neural pathways for mapping orthography to phonology. Time era: 2002–2006


Extending prior findings

In a meta-analysis of 35 previous neuroimaging studies of reading, Jobard et al. (2003) dissociated two routes for reading: (a) a lexicosemantic route involving the left anterior ventral occipitotemporal cortex (basal temporal language area), the posterior part of the middle temporal gyrus, and the triangular part of inferior frontal gyrus; and (b) direct links between orthography and phonology involving left lateralized superior temporal areas, supramarginal gyrus, and the opercular part of the inferior frontal gyrus; all regions that are also involved in the articulatory loop component of short term memory which is required for phonological decisions on pseudowords.

The involvement of an anterior fusiform/ventral occipitotemporal area in the semantic route was confirmed in a study showing that regional activation in the anterior ventral occipitotemporal cortex and the left ventral inferior frontal cortex was stronger for irregularly spelt words than pseudowords or words with regular spellings (Mechelli et al., 2005). Moreover, the functional connectivity between these two areas was also stronger for irregular words than pseudowords (Mechelli et al., 2005). Other regions associated with the semantic reading route were the left posterior temporal and parietal cortices, where activation was higher for familiar words than pseudowords (Fiebach et al., 2002; Binder et al., 2003, 2005; Jobard et al., 2003; Ischebeck et al., 2004; Vigneau et al., 2005; Borowsky et al., 2006) and for words with irregular compared to regular spellings (Senaha et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2004; Frost et al., 2005). Because these areas were also more activated by semantic than phonological decisions, their role in irregular word reading was again attributed to increased demands on semantic processing when sublexical access to phonology was not possible (McDermott et al., 2003; Price and Mechelli, 2005; Booth et al., 2006).

While irregular word reading was associated with semantic activation, it also became evident that there was a correspondence between the areas that are more activated for reading pseudowords than real words and the areas activated by phonological relative to semantic decisions. Specifically, the left opercular part of the inferior frontal gyrus, left precentral gyrus, insular cortex, supramarginal gyrus and superior temporal areas that were more activated for phonological than semantic decisions on written words (McDermott et al., 2003; Booth et al., 2006; Price and Mechelli, 2005) corresponded to activations that were stronger for reading pseudowords than words (Fiebach et al., 2002; Binder et al., 2003, 2005; Mechelli et al., 2003, 2005; Jobard et al., 2003; Owen et al., 2004; Xiao et al., 2005; Dietz et al., 2005; Borowsky et al., 2006), for Japanese words presented in Kana relative to Kanji (Thuy et al., 2004); for reading Spanish than English (Meschyan and Hernandez, 2006), for reading words than naming pictures (Price et al., 2006) and for unfamiliar than familiar words (Fiebach et al., 2002; Ischebeck et al., 2004).

An appealing interpretation of increased phonological activation for pseudowords compared to words was that it reflected the demands on accessing phonology from sublexical orthographic codes. Indeed, Bitan et al. (2005) noted that left posterior inferior frontal activation was greater for novel words in an artificial script after new letter decoding instructions had been learnt. However, as pointed out previously by Fiez et al. (1999), Binder et al. (2005) noted that there were no areas where activation corresponded to increasing demands on phonological decoding (i.e. irregularly spelled words < regularly spelled words < pseudowords) but instead activation depended on overall response times (regularly spelled words < irregularly spelled words < pseudowords). Xiao et al. (2005) also pointed out that left inferior frontal activation for pseudowords was not necessarily reflective of grapheme-to-phoneme conversion because this area was more activated by auditory lexical decisions on pseudo Chinese words than real Chinese words, even though the auditory task did not involve grapheme-to-phoneme conversion. Likewise, the demands on sublexical phonological processing do not easily explain why activation in the left inferior frontal cortex was higher for pseudohomophones that sound like familiar words (e.g. BRANE) than pseudowords (e.g., BLINT) that don't sound like familiar words (Edwards et al., 2005).

Overall, definitive interpretations of word and pseudoword activation differences were difficult because words and pseudowords differ in more than one way (e.g. visual familiarity, access to semantics and phonological decoding) and because differences in activation are only relative (rather than absolute) within areas that are commonly activated by a range of stimuli and tasks (Jobard et al., 2003; Mechelli et al., 2003).


Dissociating neural pathways for mapping orthography to phonology. Time era: 2007–2011


Extending previous findings

Studies comparing activation for reading scripts with consistent (or transparent) and inconsistent (opaque) orthographies (Matsuo et al., 2010; Hu et al., 2010; Das et al., 2011) reported left inferior parietal or posterior superior temporal activation for more consistent orthographies (Italian and Hindi versus English; and English versus Chinese) and left middle frontal activation when phonological information was minimal or conflicting (Chinese versus English and Kanji versus Chinese). Nevertheless, predominantly common activation across all scripts and the task dependent nature of the script differences (Ino et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2009) make it difficult to dissociate the anatomical components of different reading pathways on the basis of script differences alone.

Studies comparing word and pseudoword reading within script provided further evidence that the left posterior occipitotemporal cortex was more activated by pseudowords than real words (Levy et al., 2009; Nosarti et al., 2010; Woollams et al., 2011) while the left anterior occipitotemporal cortex was more activated by irregular (inconsistently spelled) words than regular words (Nosarti et al., 2010; Graves et al., 2010a). With respect to other regions in these pathways, semantic reading in the anterior ventral occipitotemporal cortex was again associated with activation in the ventral inferior frontal cortex (Graves et al., 2010a), non-semantic serial decoding in the left supramarginal gyrus (Graves et al., 2010a) was associated with auditory short term memory and more dorsal parietal activation was associated with visual attention (Cohen et al., 2008).


Novel findings

A rather different dual route neural model of reading was proposed by Levy et al. (2009) who suggested that the left posterior occipitotemporal cortex was involved in sublexical processing and was only necessary for pseudoword reading. In contrast, familiar words could be read without left occipitotemporal activation by virtue of direct connectivity between occipital and parietal regions. Some support for the hypothesis that not all reading pathways involved the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex was later reported by Levy et al. (2008, 2009) and Richardson et al. (2011) who found evidence for links between inferior occipital and posterior superior temporal areas that were independent of activity in the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex. These studies therefore raise the interesting possibility that the left occipitotemporal cortex is not essential for accessing phonology from orthography. Future functional imaging studies are now required to test whether patients with left occipitotemporal damage who are able to read short familiar words activate the left occipital and parietal areas proposed by Levy et al. (2009) and/or the left occipital and superior temporal areas proposed by Richardson et al. (2011).

The availability of different reading routes, for the same word stimuli, offers the potential for inter-subject variability in which routes are most strongly activated. This has been demonstrated in several studies. For example, Seghier et al. (2008) found that, when reading a single set of familiar words, some skilled readers showed more activation in the anterior occipitotemporal–inferior frontal semantic pathway while other skilled readers showed more activation in a left posterior occipitotemporal–right inferior parietal non-semantic pathway. This and other studies (Bolger et al., 2008a, 2008b; Levy et al., 2009) have also shown that the effect of spelling-sound consistency on brain activation depends on reading skill. Another important result for disambiguating the function of different reading areas was the observation that producing the visual forms associated with articulated words (i.e. spelling to dictation) activates the left ventral occipito-temporal cortex and left pars opercularis that also sustain reading (Purcell et al., 2011; Rapp and Lipka, 2011, Rapp and Dufor, 2011). Thus these areas are activated by both the translation of visual forms to articulation as well as the translation of articulation to visual forms.


Dissociating neural pathways for mapping orthography to phonology: 20 year summary

The clearest dissociation so far is between a lexico-semantic reading route that integrates the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex (LvOT in and) with the left ventral inferior frontal gyrus, and a non-semantic phonological decoding route that links the superior temporal and ventral inferior parietal cortices to the dorsal precentral gyrus. Preliminary evidence suggests that the point of initial divergence is prior to activation in the ventral occipitotemporal area that some refer to as the visual word form area. However, it remains unclear how these pathways overlap and dissociate in the rest of the neural system for reading. My prediction is that there are multiple brain regions and multiple interconnections that underlie the reading system and these provide many possible reading pathways that are not yet appreciated in cognitive models.


Conclusions

In the words of Raichle (1996): “Modern functional brain imaging with PET and fMRI provides a new perspective on the organization of language in the human brain; a better definition of the distributed nature of the brain circuits involved, an appreciation of the flexibility of these circuits in adapting to the different aspects of speech production, an identification of areas not previously associated with the cognitive aspects of language, and a new understanding of the implications of specific brain lesions.”

Indeed, our understanding of the functional anatomy of language has come a long way since the neurological model of Broca's and Wernicke's areas that dominated the field 20 years ago. For example, we now appreciate the importance of the cerebellum for word generation (Ackermann et al., 1997) and the involvement of the basal temporal language area, anterior cingulate and left inferior prefrontal cortex in a range of different language tasks (Chertkow and Murtha, 1997). In contrast there are other areas where activation was predicted by lesion studies but not observed during functional imaging studies, such as the absence of activation in the left angular gyrus during reading aloud (Ackermann et al., 1997; Price, 2000).

A striking feature is that the same conclusions have been produced over and over again. Although this results in repetitive reading, it is important for validating the findings and demonstrating the remarkable consistency of the functional anatomy across individuals and studies. Yes, there are interesting and relevant sources of inter-subject variability but these are small relative to the consistent effects. The next 20 years will need to focus on understanding how different regions interact with one another and how specialisation for language arises at the level of distinct patterns of activation in areas that participate in many different functions.


Studying the freely-behaving brain with fMRI

Eleanor A. Maguire — Neuroimage, 2012. PMC3480644, CC BY 3.0.

Given that the brain evolved to function in the real world then it seems reasonable to want to examine how it operates in that context. But of course the world is complex, as are the brain's responses to it, and MRI scanners are inherently restrictive environments. This combination of challenges makes the prospect of studying the freely-behaving brain with fMRI disconcerting to anyone sensible. When designing naturalistic fMRI experiments it is necessary to ensure that the thoughts or behaviours under scrutiny are not unduly perturbed or constrained by the imaging process, while still being amenable to experimental manipulation and control, and result in meaningful and interpretable data. This is difficult to achieve. Here, briefly, and in a highly subjective and selective manner, I consider: why we might want to deploy free-behaviour designs in an fMRI context, how to go about it, review some examples of it in action, and decide finally whether it is worth it (it is).


Why do it?

Back in the mid-late 1990's, we and others had already conducted some PET studies of the freely-behaving brain (e.g. navigation in large-scale environments, recollection of autobiographical memories), and were making the move into fMRI (Aguirre et al., 1996; Ghaem et al., 1997; Grön et al., 2000; Maguire et al., 1996, 1997, 1998a,b; Roland and Friberg, 1985; Roland et al., 1987). Despite sensible results, studies such as these remained niche, and instead the main focus in the field was on conducting experiments with simple, easy to control and manipulate stimuli (e.g. word pairs) derived from the experimental and cognitive psychology traditions. In fact, studying the freely-behaving brain was explicitly frowned upon in some quarters. I was a post-doc with Chris Frith at the time, and was dispatched to meet and greet an eminent imaging speaker visiting our unit. During the conversation that ensued, he said “Why on earth are you wasting your time doing such uncontrolled experiments?” He explained that nothing useful could come of such an endeavour, that I was just adding layers of unnecessary complexity, resulting in essentially uninterpretable data. This, not uncommon, view, combined with the distain of some electrophysiologists for the value of functional neuroimaging studies of memory, meant these were occasionally disheartening times.

But thanks to the encouragement of Chris Frith, the methodological insights of Karl Friston, and the enthusiastic ‘can do’ attitude of Richard Frackowiak, we persevered; and for good reason. While fMRI experiments involving systematic manipulations of simple, static, controlled stimuli are undoubtedly desirable and appropriate for addressing many research questions, there are some situations where this approach falters. If one wants to understand how the brain perceives the continuous and complex multi-modal inputs it receives (Bartels and Zeki, 2004; Hasson et al., 2004), and parses them into meaningful events (Moran et al., 2004; Zacks et al., 2001) then simple, static stimuli simply will not do. Likewise, to appreciate how the brain interacts with the environment, learns and navigates a spatial layout through direct experience, then dynamic naturalistic stimuli are clearly required (Burgess et al., 2002; Maguire, 2007; Maguire et al., 1999; Spiers and Maguire, 2007a). Similarly, having people learn and recall single or sets of items certainly affords insights into memory processes, but does not capture the personally-experienced, rich, vivid, and often dynamic nature of autobiographical memories (Cabeza and St Jacques, 2007; Gilboa, 2004; Maguire, 2001; McDermott et al., 2009; Svoboda et al., 2006). In particular, without recourse to the free recall of people's unique and complex personal experiences over a lifetime, it is not possible to examine the neural basis of remote memories in a convincing manner.

Studying how people engage in other critical functions such as imagining and planning for the future (Hassabis and Maguire, 2007, 2009; Hassabis et al., 2007a; Schacter and Addis, 2007), social interactions (Frith, 2007; Frith and Frith, 2006; Frith and Singer, 2008) and also more practical behaviours such as driving a vehicle (Calhoun and Pearlson, 2012; Spiers and Maguire, 2007b) further emphasise the need for free-behaviour designs in fMRI. Moreover, it is vital to verify whether results obtained in experiments that use simplified stimuli actually hold true under natural conditions, especially as findings are typically assumed to generalise. For example, functional specializations observed in traditionally-designed fMRI experiments might not be found in real-world contexts (or indeed vice versa), with potentially important theoretical implications. The point is that we need both constrained and free-behaviour designs in fMRI, although the latter remain in the minority. This is not surprising, given that fMRI experiments that seek to capture the freely-behaving brain are difficult to execute effectively.


How to do it?

Having established that one's research question cannot be addressed using a standard protocol, then a number of issues need to be considered (see Spiers and Maguire, 2007a for more details), including the stimuli to be employed, the task design, and the nature of the data analysis. Mental simulation is one obvious source of naturalistic stimuli, be that imagining navigation (Kumaran and Maguire, 2005), recollecting autobiographical memories (Maguire, 2001; Svoboda et al., 2006), or thinking about the future (Schacter and Addis, 2007). These internally-generated experiences are the most challenging to control, manipulate and verify. The other key type of stimuli are those that are externally-generated and under the control of the experimenter to a greater degree. For instance, movies have been employed in order to understand how participants parse continuous and complex stimulation into more manageable and meaningful events (Zacks et al., 2001), and to examine the response profiles of functionally specialised regions during dynamic and naturalistic viewing (Hasson et al., 2004, 2010; Bartels and Zeki, 2004).

One particularly significant advance that facilitated ecological fMRI experiments was the explosion in computer simulation technology in the eighties and nineties. Commercially-available video games are dynamic and interactive, with a first-person ground level perspective, and can have complex and naturalistic large-scale environments as their backdrops. These virtual reality (VR) games are sometimes accompanied by editors, allowing experimenters to manipulate (and record) aspects of the game to produce environments and scenarios suitable to address experimental questions. While such games offer exciting opportunities for real-world research in the scanner, their implementation is not always easy.

Early neuroimaging studies exploited both internal and externally-generated stimuli. Initially, these experiments had block designs, where activity associated with each task (e.g. navigation in a VR environment, or recalling an autobiographical memory) was averaged across 30–60 second duration (e.g. Grön et al., 2000). Perhaps to the surprise of some, activations in predicted brain areas emerged, and where higher level control tasks were employed, focal activations, in for example the hippocampus, were also apparent (Maguire and Frith, 2003). Nevertheless, there were issues, not least of which was the control task. When dealing with highly complex stimuli, it was difficult to design an appropriate control task — in this situation what exact process does one control; how does one get the ‘level’ of the control task right? Even employing what was regarded by some as the lowest level of control, namely rest, proved problematic, not only because the contrast between rest and a very active task was interpretationally useless, but also given what emerged about the often highly active nature of rest (Stark and Squire, 2001), and the existence of the default mode (Mazoyer et al., 2001; Raichle et al., 2001; Shulman et al., 1997).

It became clear that for some experiments, the block design, while easiest to implement in the free-behaviour context, lacked fine-grained temporal resolution, and also reduced the correspondence to the real world, which is rarely organised in a blocked and orderly manner. Attempts to deal with this came in the form of experiments where the exposure to naturalistic stimuli, e.g. a large scale VR environment, occurred prior to scanning, while during scanning participants were exposed to particular aspects of the stimuli which were analysed as mini-blocks or in an event-related fashion (e.g. landmarks, VR characters they encountered; Aguirre and D'Esposito, 1997; Burgess et al., 2001; Janzen and Van Turennout, 2004). Others pursued a parametric approach by correlating aspects of performance (e.g. accuracy of navigation in a VR environment; Hartley et al., 2003; Peigneux et al., 2004; Addis et al., 2004) with the BOLD signal.

But the desire still persisted to capture real world interactions as they occurred and to derive temporal specificity for events within the unfolding interactive experience. This led to a range of further developments in the analytic techniques applied to fMRI data acquired during free-behaviour tasks; these included methods in three broad categories. First, where participants' classification of events (usually subsequent to scanning) was used to retrospectively analyse scanning data acquired during passive viewing, e.g. of movies (Zacks et al., 2001). Second, where participants' behaviour, content analysis, or subsequent verbal reports were used to analyse the fMRI data acquired during interactive tasks (Mathiak and Weber, 2006; Spiers and Maguire, 2006a). Third, stimulus-blind analyses, where ‘hidden’ patterns in brain activity were sought using mathematical algorithms such as independent components analysis (Calhoun et al., 2002; Malinen et al., 2007; now also available in model-free form – e.g. Schopf et al., 2011), reverse correlation procedures (Hasson et al., 2004), multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA; Haxby et al., 2001; Haynes and Rees, 2006; Norman et al., 2006), and decoding using receptive field models (Kay et al., 2008). The reader is referred to Spiers and Maguire (2007a) for a full discussion of these approaches and their advantages and disadvantages in the context of free-behaviour fMRI experiments. For illustrative purposes, and with blatant bias, here I describe our experience of executing such experiments that embodied some of the above methods.


Some examples of it

I remember thinking about navigation experiments one morning in 2003 and subsequently calling my then post-doc Hugo Spiers to come and chat about this ‘bit of an idea’ that I had. The premise was simple, we get participants to navigate to destinations in a realistic VR town during fMRI. After the scan we play them back a video of their performance and ask them what they had been thinking during scanning, and use these retrospective verbal reports to analyse the fMRI time series; it seemed straightforward. However, months of research, pilot testing and technical manoeuvring, followed by gruelling training, scanning and debriefing of participants, and an 18 month data analysis tour de force meant this was the most ambitious fMRI study ever undertaken before or since in my laboratory.

Fortuitously, around this time a highly accurate and interactive VR simulation of central London, UK, became available, developed as the backdrop for commercial video game, enabling in situ navigation to be assessed in a controlled manner. ‘The Getaway’ (© Sony Computer Entertainment Europe) has over 110 km (70 miles) of London's driveable roads, accurately recreated from Ordinance Survey map data, covering fifty square kilometres (20 square miles) of the city centre. The one-way systems, working traffic lights, the busy London traffic, and an abundance of Londoners going about their business are all included (see snapshots in). Conveniently, one can simply navigate freely (with the game scenarios suspended) around the city using the game console, with a normal ground-level first person perspective, in a car of one's choice.

During fMRI, we had participants (who were licensed London taxi drivers) respond to customers' requests by delivering them to their required destinations in VR London, while driving a London taxi (Spiers and Maguire, 2006a). To gain an understanding of the navigation process on a second-by-second basis, immediately post-scan and without prior warning participants watched a video replay of their performance and were interviewed using a retrospective verbal report protocol. This involved getting participants to review their performance and report on what they had been thinking during the task in the scanner. Participants were able to produce detailed accounts of what they had been thinking during navigation, and were also clear about exactly when they had experienced particular thoughts. This enabled a complete specification of each participant's fMRI time series in terms of onsets and durations of event/epochs related to specific categories of thoughts (a) (12,484 events/epochs were identified overall). The precision of the timings was further tested using independent eye-tracking data acquired during the scan.

Analysis of the fMRI data revealed a complex choreography of neural responses comprising focal and distributed, transient and sustained brain activity, which fluctuated depending on circumstances and priorities (b). Not only did the study reveal the dynamic brain systems underpinning real world navigation to a degree that was not previously appreciated (see also Spiers and Maguire, 2008), but it provided new insights into the roles of specific brain areas. For example, the only change in hippocampal activity during the course of prolonged navigation was an increase during initial route planning. This was a striking revelation that provoked a re-think on our part about the role of the hippocampus, and fed into our subsequent ideas about a key function of the hippocampus being scene construction (Hassabis and Maguire, 2007, 2009; Hassabis et al., 2007b). This incredibly rich dataset also gave rise to novel findings about how the human brain processes proximity and distance to goal locations in an environment during navigation (Spiers and Maguire, 2007c), enabled a systematic characterisation of the neural substrates of driving behaviour in a real city (Spiers and Maguire, 2007b), and provided new insights into how the brain supports spontaneous mentalising during real-world experiences (Spiers and Maguire, 2006b).

But it is not only in relation to navigation in large-scale space that naturalistic fMRI studies make potentially important contributions. Perhaps one of the ultimate ecological challenges is to take each participant's individual, complex and unique autobiographical memories, and devise a means to understand how they are instantiated in the brain, and how they are influenced by time, age and pathology. This has been of long-standing interest in neuroscience (Scoville and Milner, 1957) and, as with navigation, fMRI has revealed a distributed set of brain regions supporting autobiographical memory (Maguire, 2001; Svoboda et al., 2006). Indeed fMRI allowed us to appreciate that the brain network that supports navigation is highly overlapping with that underpinning autobiographical memory and also imagination of the future, an observation that continues to generate significant theoretical interest (Buckner and Carroll, 2007; Hassabis and Maguire, 2007, 2009; Schacter and Addis, 2007; Spreng et al., 2009).

A relatively recent development in fMRI data analysis offers further opportunities for moving our understanding of autobiographical memory forward. Facilitated by high spatial resolution fMRI (Carr et al., 2010), multi-voxel pattern analysis using support vector machine linear classifiers takes into account the patterns of fMRI BOLD response across multiple voxels, the idea being that important findings could be missed from conventional analysis of fMRI data (which focus on responses in individual voxels) if information is represented in distinct patterns across voxels rather than in the number of separate voxels that reach a threshold of activation. If a classifier is successful at predicting the correct stimulus solely from the patterns of fMRI BOLD, it must mean that there is information about that stimulus represented in the brain region where the pattern of voxels was identified. This ‘decoding’ approach is interesting, therefore, not only because it reveals pattern information that eludes conventional fMRI studies, but one can examine these patterns in individual participants, and most crucially, look at patterns of fMRI activity associated with specific stimuli or specific memories.

Using this approach we found that patterns of activity across voxels in the hippocampus could be used to predict which of three movie clips was being recalled (a; Chadwick et al., 2010). We interpreted this to imply that memory representations (or ‘traces’) of the movies were present in the hippocampus, with more information about the memories available in the hippocampus compared with adjacent medial temporal lobe regions such as entorhinal and parahippocampal cortices.

We have since moved on to consider what specific aspects of episodic memories can be decoded by MVPA. Using green-screen technology we created four highly-overlapping movies of everyday events (Chadwick et al., 2011). Participants were scanned using high-resolution fMRI whilst recalling the movies. MVPA revealed that the hippocampus supported distinct representations of each memory, while neighbouring regions did not, demonstrating that the human hippocampus maintains unique pattern-separated memory traces even when memories are highly overlapping. The hippocampus also contained representations of spatial contexts that were shared across different memories, consistent with a specialised role in processing space (O’Keefe and Nadel, 1978). Together, this set of findings suggests that the hippocampus is capable of supporting at least two different types of representation — each memory has a unique representation created through a process of pattern separation, and at the same time spatial backdrops that are common to different memories are also represented in the hippocampus.

One of the key debates in memory neuroscience concerns the issue of system-level consolidation and the timescale of hippocampal involvement in representing episodic/autobiographical memories. Consolidation Theory suggests that once consolidated, autobiographical memories are no longer represented in the hippocampus and instead become neocortically-dependent (Squire, 1992). By contrast others (e.g. Multiple Trace Theory — Nadel and Moscovitch, 1997; Scene Construction theory — Hassabis and Maguire, 2007) posit that the hippocampus is necessary for supporting rich and vivid autobiographical memories whether recent or remote. Given that MVPA permits us to examine individual memory representations (e.g. Chadwick et al., 2010, 2011), it may be possible to use MVPA to explore recent and remote autobiographical memories, offering new leverage on this long-standing and controversial issue. For example, might it be possible to decode remote autobiographical memories from patterns of activity in the hippocampus, or have such memories been consolidated out of the hippocampus and so no longer leave a detectable trace there? Thus, the combination of MVPA and naturalistic stimuli such as autobiographical memories may open up a range of new opportunities to make genuine conceptual advances.


Conclusions

Here, briefly, and in a highly subjective and selective manner, I considered the study of the freely-behaving brain using fMRI. I conclude by noting that it is not always necessary to employ a naturalistic approach, it is not better by default, and to deploy ecological paradigms properly can be very challenging. Is it worth it — yes, undoubtedly. The judicious use of naturalistic stimuli and designs, where key neuroscience questions cannot be addressed effectively in other ways, is an invaluable addition to the cognitive neuroscience armamentarium. From my perspective, coming from a background in clinical neuropsychology, and seeing patients struggle with the everyday tasks of navigating in familiar places and trying to maintain some sense of their personal past, the opportunity to look directly at the neural instantiation of such behaviours in vivo using fMRI is still a wondrous thing. Early free-behaviour designs were simple, and in some sense the findings were largely confirmatory. However, the increasing sophistication of stimuli and in particular innovations in data analysis mean that naturalistic fMRI studies are now able to contribute novel insights to key theoretical debates. In short, the future is bright for keeping it real.


The history of the future of the Bayesian brain

Karl Friston — Neuroimage, 2012. PMC3480649, CC BY 3.0.

The slight perversion of the original title of this piece (The Future of the Bayesian Brain) reflects my attempt to write prospectively about ‘Science and Stories’ over the past 20 years. I will meet this challenge by dealing with the future and then turning to its history. The future of the Bayesian brain (in neuroimaging) is clear: it is the application of dynamic causal modeling to understand how the brain conforms to the free energy principle. In this context, the Bayesian brain is a corollary of the free energy principle, which says that any self organizing system (like a brain or neuroimaging community) must maximize the evidence for its own existence, which means it must minimize its free energy using a model of its world. Dynamic causal modeling involves finding models of the brain that have the greatest evidence or the lowest free energy. In short, the future of imaging neuroscience is to refine models of the brain to minimize free energy, where the brain refines models of the world to minimize free energy. This endeavor itself minimizes free energy because our community is itself a self organizing system. I cannot imagine an alternative future that has the same beautiful self consistency as mine. Having dispensed with the future, we can now focus on the past, which is much more interesting:


Introduction

A history of scientific ideas is a history of people. What follows is a series of anecdotes about the people who have shaped our current thinking about the brain and, in particular the Bayesian brain. This is necessarily a personal account and some of the anecdotes may or may not be true but they are at least colorful. It should be noted that this account is just one of many perspectives on the Bayesian brain. Furthermore, I have tried to give this account an autobiographical narrative, which means the stories (and their characters) are somewhat selective.


Prologue

For me, the story starts when I was 8 years old. My mother had sent me outside to play in one of those hot summers of the 1960s. In a Gerald Durrell moment I overturned an old log and found myself absorbed in the antics of some woodlice (miniature armadillo-like bugs) that were fleeing for cover of darkness. After a few minutes observing them closely I had my first (and possibly last) scientific insight: they were not purposefully (mindfully) seeking darkness, they were simply moving faster (in any random direction) when warmed by the sun. Over the next 40 years, I was to draw on this early notion when learning about natural selection, information theory, machine learning and statistical thermodynamics. What follows is a story about some of the people in these disciplines who gave us the Bayesian brain.


The Bayesian brain

To understand the role of the Bayesian brain in imaging neuroscience, it is necessary to unpack the ideas that it entails. In essence, the Bayesian brain says that we are trying to infer the causes of our sensations based on a generative model of the world. This idea has a long history dating back to the students of Plato and probably most clearly articulated by von Helmholtz (1866). The idea has gathered momentum over the past century, as reflected in the notion of perception as hypothesis testing (Gregory, 1968, 1980; Kersten et al., 2004) and the central role of Bayesian probability theory in computational neuroscience (Dayan et al., 1995; Lee and Mumford, 2003). Particular instances of the Bayesian brain, such as predictive coding (Rao and Ballard, 1998) and optimal decision (game) theory in neuroeconomics have now come to dominate much of neuroscience at the systems level (Knill and Pouget, 2004), particularly in functional imaging. It is important to appreciate that the Bayesian brain hypothesis is just a description of optimal behavior: it does not prescribe how Bayes optimal perception, sensorimotor integration or decision-making under uncertainty emerges. To understand this one has to look at the functional architecture of the brain. Perhaps one of the most remarkable aspects of this architecture is its connectivity. But why does the brain have (axonal and synaptic) connections? Many other functionally specialized organs like the liver or blood do not have a delicate connectivity, so why does the brain? The answer, from point of view of the Bayesian brain, is straightforward: if the brain is making inferences about the causes of its sensations then it must have a model of the causal relationships (connections) among (hidden) states of the world that cause sensory input. It follows that neuronal connections encode (model) causal connections that conspire to produce sensory information. This is an important point, because it means that to understand the Bayesian brain one needs to understand connectivity and the distributed processing that it supports. In short, the Bayesian brain entails an understanding of connectivity and, by implication, functional integration in the brain. This understanding is informed by the fact that functional integration must be optimizing something, in the sense that the Bayesian brain hypothesis just says that perception and decision making are (approximately) Bayes optimal. This is where my story starts, namely, with the inception of functional integration and the attending notion of optimization:


Prehistory: the functional integration club

In 1990, 2 years into my first research appointment at the MRC Cyclotron Unit in London, I received a phone call from Semir Zeki who asked, “what do you think about integration?” It was an odd question, which I answered politely, from a mathematical perspective. Semir Zeki had just completed a successful collaboration with our fledging (PET) neuroimaging group at the MRC, establishing functional segregation in the human brain using a visual activation paradigm (Lueck et al., 1989). Semir Zeki was (and is) a world-renowned visual neuroscientist, whose physical stature and childlike delight in conceptual challenges are at odds with his intellectual largesse and wisdom (for many, Semir Zeki is the father of modern functional segregation in the brain). Semir has a provocative mischief about him that is impossible to resist. In this instance, Semir wanted to invite Richard Frackowiak and me to a ‘functional integration club’ he had conceived with Horace Barlow. Horace Barlow was an established and respected theoretician, probably most famous for his principle of maximum efficiency (or minimum redundancy) that casts perception in terms of information theory (Barlow, 1961). This club was a remarkable experience for Richard and me (in our late 30s and 20s respectively) and my first exposure to deep conversations about how the brain worked. We met sporadically, in UCL common rooms populated with Formica-topped tables and discarded blackboards or (my favorite) rooms in Cambridge with an old perfume of leather armchair and pipe smoke. The conversation was informal (although I hardly spoke because I was intimidated by Horace Barlow's authority and the fact that he only seemed to smile with his eyes) and wide ranging as was the group's membership. It included people like Graeme Mitchison and a protégé of Horace Barlow's, Peter Földiák. Graeme Mitchison was among the first people to propose an optimality criterion for cortical wiring lengths in the cortex (Durbin and Mitchison, 1990), a theme that resurfaces every few years and has become more acute recently with graph theoretical analyses of connectivity data. I remember Graeme showing us his simulations with a gentle and repressed excitement in a tiny office that was dwarfed by a (moderate sized and probably arcane) computer. Peter Földiák went on to become one of the key players in information theoretic formulations of visual processing and the importance of lateral brain connections in forming orthogonal (sparse) representations (Földiák, 1990). There were many themes discussed in these meetings that have stayed with me for decades. From the point of view of this story, the two key themes were the distinction between functional segregation and functional integration and the notion of optimality. I do not know how or why Semir and Horace chose that group (or that time) to have these seemingly undirected discussions but, from my point of view, they were visionary. First, the dialectic between the brain's attempt to segregate and integrate neatly accommodated our empirical efforts to analyze neuroimaging data in terms of regionally specific activations and their interactions mediated by effective connectivity (the former becoming Statistical Parametric Mapping and the latter Dynamic Causal Modeling). The notion of optimization was, theoretically, central here; whether it was the optimization of cortical wiring lengths or mutual information between sensory input and neuronal responses, the underlying message was that the brain was optimal in some sense. But what was being optimized? Whatever the answer, it was clear from Horace Barlow's work that it should be quantified in terms of information theory or, more simply, probability measures. At this stage, Bayes optimality was not an accepted currency in these conversations and it would be two decades before the equivalence between principle of minimum redundancy and Bayesian treatments of sensory processing would become formally apparent (at least to me; Friston, 2010). When one thinks about optimality in decision making and motor control, one usually turns to optimal control theory. This brings us to next part of my story and the other side of the Bayesian brain, namely, optimal decision theory and value learning. However, my introduction to this was not straightforward.


History: optimality, natural selection and value

Twenty years ago, I was seconded to the Neurosciences Institute under the Directorship of Gerry Edelman. The Neurosciences Institute is associated with the Neuroscience Research Program (founded in 1962, a few years before the Society for Neuroscience in 1969). Gerry Edelman is an enigmatic Nobel laureate probably most famous in theoretical neuroscience for Neural Darwinism (Edelman, 1993). Marc Raichle once described Gerry Edelman as a “complicated man.” Marc said this with a smile that belied the kindness of his description. In fact, Edelman was (is) a brilliant man with an incisive (invasive) manner that is almost malignant. The atmosphere the Neurosciences Institute was a world away from the armchairs of Cambridge. It was exhilarating and oppressive, echoing its Manhattan environs (before the days of zero tolerance). Edelman himself had an incredible presence and imbued our working atmosphere with an almost homophilic intensity. He had a remarkable and unique perspective on the natural world, which he articulated with nuance and craft. I recall daily lunches in New York cafes, enthralled by his insights and stories. I heard many years later, from Read Montague, that even his jokes were crafted—Read found him memorizing “One Hundred and One Jewish Jokes” as they were disembarking an internal flight. Whether this is true or not, I do not know but it speaks to the fact that impresarios like Edelman (and many others in this story) are never quite what they seem.

It is remarkable that Edelman attracted young people who have become so prominent in our field (and in this story). On arriving, I replaced Read Montague, who had just left under some deliciously unspecified ‘dark cloud.’ Read had been working on theories of value and optimization, in the context of neuronal group selection. This theory rests on the notion that selective pressure could optimize cortical wiring and connectivity to form neuronal groups (or assemblies); in the same way that natural selection operates on phenotypes in evolution. Read went on to publish, with Peter Dayan and others, seminal work linking dopamine firing to value learning (Montague et al., 1995). Interestingly, as I write this, Read is settling into his new office next to mine and Peter Dayan is now Director of the Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit next door, which we will come to later. When I arrived, two key young men were Giulio Tononi and Olaf Sporns. Again, it is remarkable that these two scientists have now become world leaders in their own right, Giulio in the context of consciousness and sleep research, while Olaf invented the connectome (Sporns et al., 2005) and is now a key player in our community. I remember clearly Olaf describing his ambition to use empirical connectivity data to understand the complexity of neuronal dynamics on these structures in 1994. Giulio's work on complexity (Tononi et al., 1994) again addressed the fundamental dialectic between functional segregation and integration and how one can be accommodated optimally in the context of the other. I have often wondered whether the focus on this issue reflected in some way the early friendship between Semir Zeki and Gerry Edelman, which, like all true passions, turned into something much darker and enduring.

As a student of probability theory and quantum physics at Cambridge, I had assumed that all formal theories should, ultimately, be cast in mathematical terms. Edelman, on the other hand, considered this as ‘mathematosis’ and about as desirable as halitosis. When I pointed out, at an early group meeting, the formal links between value learning and dynamic programming there was genuine fear and horror in the room about how Edelman would respond. His response was to rusticate me to the library for a period of 6 months. My task was to sanitize my thinking and immerse myself in the writings of the great biological thinkers from Charles Darwin to Ernst Mayr. I complied with this formative (if somewhat brutal) therapy. Six months later, Edelman presented me with a copy of Mayr's ‘The Growth of Biological Thought’ (1982), which I still treasure today. We then wrote on the neurobiology of value learning (with all the maths in an Appendix; Friston et al., 1994). In one sense, Edelman was right; the deep questions about optimality were embedded in selectionist thinking, population dynamics and self organization. However, his puritanical convictions left others to meet the challenge of relating value to more formal treatments in information and probability theory. An approach one could now understand as the Bayesian brain. This brings us to the mid 90s and the rise of Bayesian thinking:


The Bayesian paradigm

We now move on to 1994, which found me back in London at the opening of the Functional Imaging Laboratory at Queen square (that Richard Frackowiak had moved from the MRC Unit at the Hammersmith Hospital). This was an exciting time: Tim Shallice had overseen the inception of the Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, which co-occupied a neighboring building with the Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, directed by Geoffrey Hinton. Like Semir Zeki, Geoffrey Hinton exudes a sense of childlike enthusiasm for new insights and conceptual toys. His lectures were considered and profoundly engaging but could not disguise a breathless impatience to get to the point. For me, and I suspect many others, Geoffrey Hinton's ideas placed the Bayesian brain center stage in a tangible and formal fashion. In more general terms, Bayesian formulations of problems in machine learning provided an inescapable metaphor for neuronal computations (e.g., Hinton and van Camp 1993). Notions like the Helmholtz machine and the central role of generative models not only became a natural way of thinking about the brain but also prescribed a principled approach to data analysis, particularly in the context of the ill posed problems we were dealing with at that time. Geoffrey Hinton presented himself with an infectious exuberance but there was also a touch of pathos about him. One story, which I cannot forget, is that he became increasingly unhappy living in London: he had chosen to live in a culturally lively part of town, which the inhabitants of his building chose to celebrate with loud parties that were not sympathetic to the needs of a quiet academic. Hinton's solution to this was to build himself a room within a room; a soundproof cage, within which he slept. Here was a man who had an inventive approach to life's little problems. This inventiveness is clearly apparent in the long history of his contributions to machine learning and computational neuroscience. He was deeply committed to the Bayesian perspective and a great advocate for generative models. A more subtle but terribly important contribution was to cast the generally intractable problem of Bayesian inference in terms of optimization. The insight here was that the same problems that Richard Feynman (1972) had solved in statistical physics, using path integral formulations and variational calculus could be applied to the problem of Bayesian inference, namely, how to evaluate the evidence for a model. This is where free energy minimization comes in, the sense that minimizing free energy is equivalent to (approximately) maximizing the evidence for a model. Note again the underlying role of optimization, which here finessed a difficult but fundamental problem in Bayesian inference.

I remember the last time I spoke to Geoffrey Hinton before his return to Toronto (leaving Peter Dayan in charge of the Gatsby). I do not remember why I went to his office (I suspect he had forgotten why he asked me). He was clearly very excited and spent an hour trying to explain a new approach to unsupervised learning based upon products of experts (Hinton, 2002). I left with my head spinning and a sense that I should try and reciprocate his intellectual generosity. I wrote to him shortly after, trying to summarize my thoughts on biological minimization of free energy. I never heard from him, probably because of his return to Canada that was somewhat complicated by his refusal to fly in airplanes. The notes I sent him were eventually published as the free energy principle about 4 years later (Friston, 2005).


Bayesian brain and optimization

So how do the legacies of functional integration, information theory, value learning and free energy minimization constitute a history of the Bayesian brain in imaging? The answer lies in optimization: all four perspectives rest on optimizing a single quantity-evidence. In information theory, this corresponds to maximizing the mutual information between sensory information and internal representations; in value learning and selection, the optimization is in terms of value or adaptive fitness, while free energy minimization optimizes the evidence or marginal likelihood of a model. All these processes are the same thing. In other words, maximizing the evidence for a model maximizes the mutual information between successive samples and internal representations (under complexity constraints). This is exactly consistent with the principles of maximum efficiency or minimum redundancy (complexity). But why would Bayesian model evidence be equivalent to adaptive fitness or value? The answer is simple but abstract and again calls on information theory and statistical physics: it turns out that time average of Bayesian model evidence is the same as the (negative) entropy of sensory data sampled by a brain. This means that a Bayesian brain that tries to maximize its evidence is implicitly trying to minimize its entropy. In other words, it resists the second law of thermodynamics and provides a principled explanation for self organization in the face of a natural tendency to disorder. This means the Bayesian brain gracefully accommodates ensemble or population dynamics in evolutionary thinking within a statistical framework. In functionalist terms, such a self organizing system that minimizes its entropy would appear to be making Bayesian inferences about its sensory exchanges with the environment, which, of course, is just the Bayesian brain hypothesis. So is this the end of the story?


Epilogue

This is not the end of the story but probably its beginning. It is one thing to understand the fundamental imperative that lies behind the Bayesian brain. It is another to understand how selective pressures at an evolutionary and somatic timescale have shaped its anatomy and physiology to meet this imperative. In short, we come back to the nature of functional integration. There are many compelling schemes that may implement the Bayesian brain. Perhaps the most popular is predictive coding, in which bottom-up prediction errors (reporting on those parts of sensory information that have yet to be explained) are suppressed by top-down predictions (Mumford, 1992). In this context, prediction error can be regarded as free energy, such that minimizing free energy is effectively the same as minimizing prediction error. There are all sorts of interesting issues that arise from these considerations, such as the use of hierarchical models and their relationship to the functional logic of cortical connections (e.g., Zeki and Shipp 1988). However, I am approaching my word limit for this essay and it is time to close, where it started.

To understand the mechanisms behind the Bayesian brain, one needs to characterize and quantify the underlying message passing and neuronal infrastructures. In other words, the challenge ahead remains one of functional integration and the measurement of effective connectivity. This has been the focus of many researchers over the past decade and, as intimated in the abstract, appeals to exactly the same principles that underlie Bayes optimality per se. This goes beyond dynamic causal modeling and covers any (Bayesian) evidence-based modeling scheme we apply to neuroimaging data. However, the history of functional and effective connectivity in neuroimaging is another story with its own characters, which can be found in the other articles of this special issue.

I appreciate that I have only covered the first 10 (of the 20) years properly and that I have omitted many important people and issues. However, the next part of the story of the Bayesian brain, along with all its architects, is probably best left for the ‘Future of the History of the Bayesian Brain.’


Disintegrating Brain Networks: from Syndromes to Molecular Nexopathies

Jason D Warren, Jonathan D Rohrer, John Hardy — Neuron, 2012. PMC3389343, CC BY 3.0.

In this issue of Neuron, Raj et al. (2012) and Zhou et al. (2012) use graph theory to suggest that neurodegenerative diseases spread diffusively via intrinsic brain networks. These studies provide a powerful model for understanding and predicting disease-specific profiles of neurodegeneration.


Main Text

Neurodegenerative brain diseases are collectively characterized by two core features: abnormal protein deposition and distinctive profiles of damage across the brain and over time (Frisoni et al., 2010; Rohrer et al., 2011). If we understood in detail how proteinopathies translate to clinical phenotypes, we might anticipate and perhaps prevent the devastating impact of these diseases. While we have recognized for some time that spatiotemporal brain atrophy profiles track neuropathological patterns of disease evolution (Frisoni et al., 2010), we have lacked a principled framework for understanding and predicting the profiles observed. The brain is composed of neural networks and graph theory provides a methodology for representing and analyzing those networks (Bullmore and Sporns, 2009). Work in animal models has demonstrated a correspondence between mathematically derived network characteristics and the hierarchical and distributed architectures of neuroanatomy (Modha and Singh, 2010). Network-level analysis is an ideal approach to understanding neurodegenerative diseases, due both to the fundamentally coherent and distributed nature of the underlying pathological processes and the failure of conventional approaches to adequately explain the distinctive phenomenology of these diseases. However, the potential clinical value of network-based approaches remains largely unrealized.

Two papers in this issue of Neuron (Raj et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2012) take us further toward this goal, by applying the methods of graph theory to quantify and predict network disintegration in a range of neurodegenerative diseases. These papers capitalize on two key recent insights: the expression of neurodegeneration within specific, distributed, intrinsic brain networks (Zhou et al., 2010) and the propensity of culprit proteins to “template” further protein aggregation and spread of disease along neural pathways (Hardy, 2005; de Calignon et al., 2012). Raj et al. (2012) model network diffusion based on tractography data in the healthy brain and derive robust spatial eigenmodes that correspond closely to atrophy profiles observed in Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal dementia; their model makes no prior assumptions about selective neuronal vulnerabilities or protein-specific factors. Zhou et al. (2012) show that common neurodegeneration syndromes seed distinctive connectivity structures derived using task-free fMRI in the healthy brain: their data suggest that the neurodegenerative process spreads primarily between neurons according to the functional proximity of specific brain regions acting as critical hub-like “epicenters,” rather than various alternative candidate mechanisms. Both papers agree that transsynaptic diffusion plays a core role in the spread of neurodegenerative pathologies, and together they provide a succinct framework for characterizing network disintegration in these diseases.

For clinical neurologists and molecular biologists, these elegant and sophisticated studies hold a strong intuitive appeal. That being said, the studies raise as many issues as they resolve. So where do we go from here? Viewed critically, these two studies are directed chiefly toward the “deep phenotyping” of neurodegenerative syndromes: the mapping between clinical profiles and permissive brain architectures. Less widely pursued has been the reverse mapping, from specific molecular pathologies via network breakdown to clinical disease; yet accurate prediction and tracking of molecular pathology from phenotype will be essential for the rational application of specific protein-targeting therapies. As Raj et al. (2012) and Zhou et al. (2012) point out, large-scale connectivity approaches have yet to settle such fundamental issues as the basis for initial targeting of particular brain regions by neurodegenerative pathologies, the role of protein-specific mechanisms in disease evolution and (perhaps most problematically of all) the typically wide variation in phenotypic expression among individuals with a particular molecular diagnosis. On the other hand, we already know that particular canonical syndromes can be produced by genetic mutations with radically different group-level brain atrophy profiles (Rohrer et al., 2011;). A complete network account of neurodegeneration will need to resolve such apparently paradoxical observations. In our view, progress is likely to depend on incorporating molecular pathological “minutiae” (Raj et al., 2012) into existing network models.

One way forward may be to assess patterns of network breakdown that segregate according to the morphology of network elements rather than networks in their neuroanatomical entirety. The idea that particular network components may be differentially vulnerable to neuropathological processes is implicit in the work of Zhou et al. (2012) and compatible with the results of Raj et al. (2012). Intrinsic brain connectivity and transsynaptic disease spread may be overarching principles, while within damaged networks, proteinopathies may operate via subsidiary mechanisms such as those delineated by Zhou et al. (2012) to produce specific profiles of network breakdown. Recent rapid progress in characterizing genetic and histopathological substrates of the frontotemporal dementias has enabled, for the first time, a more or less complete analysis of these diseases in molecular terms. Such analyses suggest that specific clinicoanatomical signatures of proteinopathies can be identified (Rohrer et al., 2010, 2011; Whitwell et al., 2012). In particular, there appears to be a partitioning between pathologies that produce largely symmetrical versus strongly asymmetrical cerebral degeneration and between pathologies that produce relatively localized versus widespread degeneration at a given disease stage. Although the common sporadic neurodegenerative diseases are the ultimate targets of molecular phenotyping approaches, rare genetic proteinopathies meanwhile constitute crucial test cases. Rather than mapping simply to a particular brain network, molecular specificity in these diseases may emerge as an interaction between large-scale configurational and local morphological factors (Rohrer et al., 2011). As acknowledged by Raj et al. (2012), complex systems may generate relatively simple outputs; with respect to disintegrating brain networks, one such simple dichotomy may apply to short- versus long-range connections. The “small-world” properties of brain networks (Bullmore and Sporns, 2009) lead us to expect that a short-range/long-range dichotomy should be functionally meaningful, and pathways might in turn show differential vulnerability to molecular lesions (we outline this as a testable hypothesis in). “Short-range” and “long-range” here could be specified using anatomically grounded methods (Modha and Singh, 2010). Importantly, protein-specific mechanisms might also operate at the level of events that trigger the neurodegenerative cascade. For example, whereas initial targeting of entorhinal cortex in Alzheimer's disease may reflect locally enhanced beta-amyloid-precursor protein deposition during age-related neuronal resprouting (Roberts et al., 1993), progranulin-associated neurodegeneration may be triggered by an initial discrete stochastic (e.g., vascular hypoxic) event which becomes catastrophically amplified by failure of synaptic repair mechanisms (Piscopo et al., 2010).

As the work of Raj et al. (2012) and Zhou et al. (2012) shows, graph theory gives us a means to test specific hypotheses of brain network disintegration. We suggest that models of network degeneration will need to be informed by data from a wide variety of sources. For example, recent work on the selective vulnerability of network nodes to extinction under sociological and ecological events (Saavedra et al., 2011) may help generate models for the selective targeting of the epicenters identified by Zhou et al. (2012). In addition, the power of anatomical methods should not diminish the role of behavioral metrics: if appropriately generic computations can be measured, these are likely to inform our understanding of network organization. Models of human semantic processing, for example, make relatively specific predictions about permissive network architecture in semantic dementia (Lambon Ralph et al., 2010). Similar arguments favor the use of task-based as well as task-free fMRI to characterize damaged networks. Empirical longitudinal data on the evolution of network disintegration are sorely needed in order to determine the validity of predictive models (Raj et al., 2012). Finally, clinical neurologists and neuroradiologists, by identifying the sometimes counterintuitive (e.g., highly asymmetric) profiles thrown up by particular neurodegenerative diseases, can help inform and constrain the search for candidate mechanisms to explain such profiles. The power and beauty of data such as those presented by Raj et al. (2012) and Zhou et al. (2012) will be fully realized if we can move beyond syndromic disease maps to a taxonomy of protein-based network degenerations: “molecular nexopathies.”


Triadic (ecological, neural, cognitive) niche construction: a scenario of human brain evolution extrapolating tool use and language from the control of reaching actions

Atsushi Iriki, Miki Taoka — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2012. PMC3223791, CC BY 3.0.

Hominin evolution has involved a continuous process of addition of new kinds of cognitive capacity, including those relating to manufacture and use of tools and to the establishment of linguistic faculties. The dramatic expansion of the brain that accompanied additions of new functional areas would have supported such continuous evolution. Extended brain functions would have driven rapid and drastic changes in the hominin ecological niche, which in turn demanded further brain resources to adapt to it. In this way, humans have constructed a novel niche in each of the ecological, cognitive and neural domains, whose interactions accelerated their individual evolution through a process of triadic niche construction. Human higher cognitive activity can therefore be viewed holistically as one component in a terrestrial ecosystem. The brain's functional characteristics seem to play a key role in this triadic interaction. We advance a speculative argument about the origins of its neurobiological mechanisms, as an extension (with wider scope) of the evolutionary principles of adaptive function in the animal nervous system. The brain mechanisms that subserve tool use may bridge the gap between gesture and language—the site of such integration seems to be the parietal and extending opercular cortices.


Introduction

In the course of human evolution and human history, our ancestors have created new habitats from modified hunter–gatherer environments to agricultural landscapes with villages, and then to modern civilized technological cities. The evolution of various new cognitive capacities, including those underwriting the manufacture and use of tools and the production and comprehension of languages, has enabled these ecological transformations. Such new cognitive capacities in turn are an outcome of the dramatic expansion of the human brain and of new functional brain areas. Humans have constructed a new ‘niche’ in each of these ecological, cognitive and neural domains. ‘Niche-construction’ denotes an evolutionary process whereby the activities of organisms modify their habitat, to which in turn the organisms evolve to adapt, thus creating their own ‘ecological niche’ in the environment. This concept will be extended in this paper to include the ‘cognitive niche’ as a newly acquired class of cognitive capacity, and the ‘neural niche’ as a portion of neural tissue added through expansion of the brain.

The above three classes of niche have coevolutionary interdependencies. Such interactions might have accelerated hominin evolution, which seems remarkably rapid if it was simply the product of natural selection driven by exogenous environmental change. It is possible that ecological changes to habitats have occurred not as a cause of hominin cognitive evolution, but rather as a result of it, with consequent selection pressures acting on the neural basis of behavioural adaptations to the modified environment. New brain functions would constitute the basis for further innovation in cognitive functioning and thus further modifications to the ecological niche, providing a feedback loop for ‘triadic niche constructions’. In this paper, a potential evolutionary scenario that led humans to invent successively more complex forms of tools, and eventually to acquire the language faculty, will be proposed based on this dynamic interaction. The brain's functional characteristics play a key role in the above triadic interactions. The relevant neurobiological mechanisms are explored in this paper in order that the proposed evolutionary scenario should not be seen as teleological. Finally, we will try to locate these mechanisms as an extension of the evolution of the animal nervous system in general: human higher cognitive activity can then be viewed as continuous with that of other animal species comprising the wider terrestrial ecosystem.


Construction of the ecological niche


Hominin ecology structured through incorporating different classes of tools

Humans are peculiar, compared with non-human species, in the extent to which they try to ‘improve’ their habitual environment. To make such improvements, particularly in our modern urban environment, we make and use various kinds of tools and technologies, and often the tools themselves are incorporated into the fundamental structure of the environment to create a distinctive human ecological niche. For example, cars running on paved roads or air-conditioned skyscrapers are essentially artefacts in which to travel and to reside, yet also comprise an environment to which city inhabitants adapt both physically and perceptually. In earlier times, hominins may also have typically constructed their niche by gradually and consecutively incorporating artefacts into the habitual environment. Thus, one can ask whether the tools that comprise our environment can be classified and structured in hierarchical order and if so, how different modes of brain function subserve their use.

The classical definition of the tool, as used in most existing tool-use studies, is restricted to external objects held by the hand and interacting with the external environments. Namely, the tools so defined and studied are the ones that extend and externalize our hand, or more generally the motor organs or effectors. Indeed, the first series of tools that early hominins are known to have used, and those used by non-human animals are these ‘motor tools’ (c, bottom row). We modern humans also use tools to extend or externalize our existing sensory organs, or to support the detection of information that is outside our natural sensory range (c, middle row). The optical telescope, endoscope or stethoscope would be examples of the former and the radio telescope or Geiger counter would be examples of the latter. Non-human animals rarely use this class of ‘sensory tools’. In monkeys, our own previous studies have demonstrated that they can be trained to use a sort of endoscope only after having acquired an ability to use a motor tool (a rake)—as if attaching an additional visual cue to the tip of an extended body schema that was acquired through initial training to use a rake (see §2b for details). These results suggest that the class of sensory tools comprise a higher layer, superimposed onto previously acquired motor tools as the fundamental layer. Indeed, the history of our own technology suggests that sensory tools appeared much later, after motor tools were incorporated into human cultures.

What then would be the tool class of the third layer? If we looked at ourselves through our own externalized eyes (the second layer of the tools), we would observe ourselves as external objects by shifting from the first-person to the third-person perspective, in other words by ‘self-objectification’. This leads to the perception of our own intrinsically intransitive movement as transitive, i.e. to the acquisition of a sense of the self (as the subject), and leading to the movement of ourselves or our body parts perceived as objects. We may hypothesize that once the ‘self’ has been bifurcated into a subjective self and an objective self, the mind and/or intentionality emerges as a function that bridges those fragmented ‘selves’ and reunites them; this hypothesis has been proposed in detail elsewhere. As a result of this self-objectification and emergence of the ‘mind’, a recognition of the ‘core self’ that continues across time from the past through the present towards the future may subsequently arise. Once the future self is recognized as having a core that is identical to that of the present self, one might wish to save the present information for future use. This can be accomplished by taking notes or drawing pictures, which requires an external device for memorizing facts; thus, an ‘externalization of the brain’ is produced as the tool class of the third layer (c, top row).

How could the three different classes of tools outlined above be incorporated into humans' habitual environments? The scenario outlined proposes that successive layers of tools (motor extensions, sensory extensions and symbolic externalized memory) can be incorporated into the environment by building on the pre-existing acquisition and incorporation of tool classes of the immediately lower level. Thus, a positive feedback would have emerged between new brain functions and resulting modifications of the habitual environment. In the course of such positive feedback processes, a brain function emerged for the mind and for future-directed ‘intentionality’, after which the feedback became guided by human intentions (‘intentional niche construction’).


Parietal plasticity when incorporating tools into the body schema

In using these tools, what kind of neural mechanisms and what modes of operation are employed, and what kinds of neural changes, if any, are induced upon acquisition of the ability to use tools? Our previous studies, as illustrated below, demonstrate one such example. Although Japanese macaques normally do not use tools in their natural habitat, two weeks of extensive training will enable these animals to use a hand-held rake to retrieve a distant food object located out of reach. This training must imply the ability to reorganize the image of the body to one in which the rake is incorporated as an extension of the forearm. The body image is thought to form by integrating somatosensory and visual information relating to the body. Thus, its modification after tool use could be physically observed as changes in the receptive field properties of the neurons that code such images—when the tool was incorporated, the receptive field that codes the image of the hand was elongated to include the rake (a(iii)). This modification seemed to match the monkeys' internal states, whether or not the rake was incorporated into the image of the forearm. Here, an equivalence is established between body parts (hands) and tools, i.e. hands are extended towards tools (externalization of the innate body) or tools are assimilated into the body schema (internalization of external objects). Hence, these representations of the body image comprise an internal model of the bodily structures used to control various movements, as a concrete neural correlate of the ‘enactive representation’, a class of representation that first emerges at a very early stage of postnatal development in human infants (b).

As the training proceeds further, we might postulate that the monkey's mode of representation may advance to ‘iconic (visual)’ and even close to ‘symbolic’—during human development, these appear later during childhood or after maturity. This expectation implies that motor-tool-use-trained monkeys could be further trained to use a video monitor to retrieve food that is out of their direct line of sight, and that the receptive field of the parietal neurons that code the hand and the tool incorporated into it will be activated by visual feedback when images of the hand and tool are seen on the video monitor (a(ii)). Thus, the body image is visually projected onto the distant monitor screen. In fact, we have found that monkeys that acquire the ability to use a rake and a video monitor to retrieve food objects in this way can immediately combine multiple tools purposefully to accomplish the goal, as if they are able to logically structure body parts using (proto-)symbolic representations (a(i)). Here, we can recognize that the hierarchical structures of motor tools/sensory tools/brain tools resemble the hierarchy of representations from enactive (motor) to iconic (sensory) to symbolic (brain) structures of development, as described earlier (see a–c for these comparisons). Thus, reorganization of the modes of visuomotor integration in the parietal cortex must be crucial for the acquisition of these successively more advanced modes of representation.


Construction of the neural niche


Brain expansion by tool-use training

Is the neural plasticity depicted above limited within the range of the individual's learning capacity, or could it cumulatively evolve over generations? In other words, is it purely subserved by ‘cultural inheritance’, or alternatively, could it be a part of an epigenetic evolutionary mechanism in which the information embedded in the environment contributes to modification of phenotypic expression in succeeding generations? Although the latter has a flavour of Lamarckism—inheritance of acquired phenotypic traits—there may be a biological mechanism that could channel the evolution of adaptations to an environment in which cultural information is embedded. Macroscopic expansion (up to 23% of MRI grey matter signal) of cortical grey matter, including the intraparietal region, was detected in monkeys undergoing two weeks of tool-use training (a) in our recent Voxel Based Morphometry analysis (a kind of digital neuroanatomy using the magnetic resonance imaging technique). During the same period, microscopic changes (axonogenesis and synaptogenesis, as detected by tracer-injection histological examinations) together with elevated expression of immediate-early genes and of neurotrophic factors were also shown to have been induced in these cortical areas. The grey matter expansion extended to include adjacent areas, such as the secondary somatosensory area (a(iii)) and the surrounding opercular cortex. Although the evidence obtained to date remains fragmentary and more detailed biological examinations are in progress, these initial findings indicate that the brain is much more adaptive than was previously believed: exposure to a novel cultural environment induces the brain to exhibit not only functional plasticity, but also extensive and persistent morphological change.

This implies that once a novel cognitive demand, such as incorporation of motor tools into the body schema, has become embedded in the environment, modifications of brain structure would be induced automatically through the normal developmental processes in succeeding generations. The occurrence of such a plastic response during the lifespan as a result of behavioural modifications that lie within the existing adaptive capacity of individuals, and its subsequent consolidation (under selection acting on changing gene frequencies) as a default state that is stable over generations is termed the ‘Baldwin effect’, and comprises one potential component of the evolutionary process.


Redundant and polysemic systems as pre-adaptations for a novel neural niche

What could be the biological principles that allow brain expansion as an evolutionary mechanism of the kind just outlined? Biological systems are never ultimately efficient—systems require some redundancy for stability, to avoid over-specialization that might threaten the capacity to survive new challenges. Some redundancy in brain structure would allow representational bistability, for both the originally adapted functions and functional response to the new challenge. Increased redundancy to stabilize this functional capacity for flexible adaptive responses, perhaps via rapid brain expansion, would also then allow rapid construction of new and specialized neural resources. As has been discussed earlier, monkey intraparietal neurons that normally code body image can be trained to code a tool in a way that is equivalent to that for the hand holding it. Thus, these neurons are bistable or polysemous for the hand or the tool. This functional plasticity may be an inherent property at the margins of a neural coding system prepared for gradual elongation of the arm during body growth, and which can then also adapt to a ‘sudden elongation’ by using the tool. This accidentally established equivalence between body parts (hands) and tools in turn leads to additional polysemic and bistable interpretations, i.e. hands may be extended into the tool representation (externalization of the innate body) or tools may be assimilated into the body schema (internalization of external objects).

Thus, redundancy in the brain, initially adapted to stabilize this system against unexpected environmental noise (or developmental changes, following the above speculation about body growth) has occasionally allowed the system to be polysemous. This newly acquired bistable state enables the reuse of cortical systems for different functions in the future, as in the case of tool use, perhaps in combination with other parts of the brain. This bistability, or ‘polysemy’, could enable the use of metaphors in conceptual structure—so as to comprise a novel cognitive niche, as will be described in the next section. However, how human higher cognitive functions appear to have ‘evolved’ much more quickly than might be expected from ordinary biological evolutionary processes of adaptation to changing external environmental contingencies remains an open question. Humans can induce such changes intentionally, to construct a better-fitting ecological niche. The capacity of human intention, or of the human mind, to plan for the future emerged through the process described in the previous section in relation to the hierarchy of classes of tool use (motor, sensory and brain). Subsequently, the neural systems which process the information that is necessary to inhabit the tool-modified environment (the neural niche of the brain; b(ii)) could be reinforced further by extragenetic or epigenetic triggering factors embedded in such an environment.

In addition, because hominin species have attained an unusually long post-reproductive lifespan, particularly females, accumulation of knowledge continues over the whole lifespan of an individual, tending to peak in middle-to-old age. Thus, some extragenetic mechanisms are indispensable for inheritance of these later acquired ‘cognitive niches’ over generations to occur. Species with a short lifespan and mass reproduction adapt to environmental changes through variations in their numerous offspring, as they expect that at least a few will survive, whereas species with a long lifespan—such as primates, and most typically humans—and low birth rate do so through an individual capacity to adapt. This process would be enhanced by expansion of an organ that controls adaptive behaviours, namely the brain, which are stabilized as the typical phenotype of the species through epigenetic mechanisms. The evolutionary process driving such expansion may not simply be natural selection acting on random mutations, but rather something like the Baldwin effect as depicted earlier.


Construction of the cognitive niche


Parietal ‘neural niches’ for processing spatial and non-spatial cognition

Debate exists on the comparative anatomy of the primate parietal cortex (b). One view claims that the inferior parietal area is evolutionarily new and uniquely expanded in humans, and that therefore the monkey posterior parietal cortex corresponds to the human superior parietal lobule. This is the position illustrated in the scheme presented in b(iii), independent of b(i). Evidence supporting this view would include the fact that, for example, the superior parietal lobule tends to process spatial information in a conventional way, whereas the inferior parietal lobule is often credited with non-spatial cognition. Many recent human imaging studies demonstrate that this cortical area additionally supports various forms of high-order non-spatial cognition that are not necessarily directly related to physical space itself. Indeed, a comparison of the brain areas responsible for tool-use behaviours in monkeys and humans detected a patch of the parietal cortex specific to humans that might be responsible for perception and manipulation of abstract causal relationships required for human tool-use behaviours. This could be evidence of a function that was derived from a polysemic mechanism as described above, in which an additional resource of brain tissue (a neural niche) functions to enable an additional cognitive process (a cognitive niche).

However, there is another view in which the monkey parietal cortex includes functional homologues of both regions, which allows viewing b(i–iii) as a continuum. Various kinds of non-spatial cognition can be grouped and ordered based on the levels of abstraction of the ‘objects’ and the conceptually defined spaces which are represented. The assumed coordinate systems for such ‘spaces’, with citations to research literature analysing the brain mechanisms which encode such spatial coordinates (for monkeys and humans), are summarized in. The pseudo-spatial nature of the high-order cognition supported by the posterior parietal cortex may be derived from the essential characteristics of the objects represented; alternatively, it may be derived from the nature of the pre-existing information-processing mechanisms of this area, namely as a hub for multi-sensory integration and for representing physical environmental space. A meta-analysis of the references listed in (refer to its legend for a detailed classification of various cognitive niches handled by this brain area) shows that the posterior parietal areas responsible for these novel forms of cognition are not necessarily clearly segregated, either in monkeys or in humans, and suggests a trend of gradual expansion towards the lateral sulcus as the level of abstraction increases (c). Thus, it seems that the parietal area gradually incorporated high-order cognition as it expanded during hominid evolution, while preserving its original principles of operation. This could be an example of exhibiting a novel cognitive niche by re-using the functions that have derived from a polysemic mechanism described previously. If this was the case, the gradual emergence and differentiation of functions in the transitional state might not be detected until the intensity of activation and the quantity of tissue recruited to serve this new neural niche exceeded some threshold of detection. In this sense, the above two views of parietal evolution are not necessarily mutually exclusive.

What, then, is the explanation for this series of additions of novel cognitive niches? Mechanisms for ‘selecting’ and ‘switching’ between objects among different represented spaces (a) could be hypothesized to contribute to this process. That is, initially in classical (physical) space, spatial attention towards concrete objects was typically expressed as the direction of the eye axis to represent ‘perceptual space’ (see legend of for details of respective references, and also for other classes of ‘spaces’ described below). Secondarily, when such attention had to be sustained or the attending content had to be memorized, invisible ‘time’ was ‘visualized’ in the mind's eye, becoming a new virtual dimension in the existing suite of spatial-coordinate systems, namely ‘temporal space’. And then, once one was able to visualize an invisible virtual entity, a similar objectification process could have been extended further, enabling intentional perspective switching. Acquiring representations of ‘social space’ might have accelerated this process. Via self-objectification processes mentioned in the earlier section, and the development of ‘virtual eyes’, flexible and mutually integrated representations of the bodily self, of the analogous selves of others, and of tools used as equivalents of body parts (and vice versa) may have served as a bridge between concrete physical and abstract conceptual spaces. Finally, as the posterior parietal cortex expanded in both physical volume and in range of function, a positive feedback process could have been established to achieve further human-specific forms of non-spatial conceptual cognition, or ‘conceptual space’. In this way, crucial components of human intelligence would derive their character from the precursory spatial cognition process of the parietal cortex. Language is full of spatial metaphors for abstract thoughts.


Opercular cortex as a cradle for language by re-using spatial processing principles

During evolution, whenever organisms are faced with a novel and unforeseen environment, they have no other means to overcome immediate problems than to reuse any materials at hand. Thus, cognitive capacities are extended by diverting pre-existing functions. In hominin evolution, according to the scenario outlined in the previous section, the expanded inferior parietal area and surrounding opercular region have taken on distinctive functional characteristics. Basic continuity from monkeys to humans as described above seems to be present in this general area, which includes Broca's area (anterior operculum), Wernicke's area (posterior operculum) and the middle operculum corresponding to the supramarginal and angular gyri, and which appear to be an extension of the inferior parietal lobule of the monkey brain; the continuity underwrites opercular language representations. Fundamentally, the argument from continuity implies that such representational capacity should be a simple extension of a coding system for reaching and grasping. Initially, this extension would derive from the coding of spatial integration and of a reorganized representation of space, which could be extrapolated further using a principle identical to the non-spatial higher-order coding of more abstract objects. In particular, this extrapolation could be subserved by the ‘abstraction’ of free and unconstrained polysemous handling of the space and of the body, which would comprise a fundamental component of language representations, and perhaps also by common neural mechanisms that share a mode of information integration and processing.

Human-specific illogical cognitive biases for symmetrical inference (the tendency to incorrectly infer ‘if B then A’ from a conditional relationship ‘if A then B’) and for inference by exclusion (the tendency spontaneously to assume that an unfamiliar label goes with an unfamiliar object) involve these same brain areas. The mind, human language and human cultural transmission, all of which contribute to the semantic inheritance of the benefits acquired during the unusually elongated human post-reproductive lifespan, are aspects of cognitive functions that have evolved recently and result from such neural niche construction. Once a fundamental syntactic SVO (subject/verb/object) structure emerges and is generalized, abstraction and concept formation and their manipulation become possible and constitute a basis for further intellectual advancements, such as polysemic interpretation of phenomena (which enables metaphorical inference). Such redundancy and polysemous representation would allow equivalence and symmetric inferences and would lead to the emergence of symbols. All of these functions seem to be carried out in the expanded inferior parietal and surrounding areas in humans. Hence, the human language faculty seems to draw on these fundamental neural mechanisms, which are found in these late-myelinating brain areas, which retain a large degree of flexibility until adulthood.


Parietal cortex as the centre of triadic interactions


A site for multiple sensory and motor integrations and coordinate transformations

The posterior parietal cortex plays a central role in multi-sensory integration and recognition of environmental space. Such integration provides a basis for the production of movements of various body parts, including eyes, hand-arm, head and whole body through transformations between different coordinate systems. The principle of neural reuse, as depicted above, seems to apply here in enabling the evolution of higher cognitive functions and thus of human cultural niches. Once these fundamentals were established in the parietal cortex, prefrontal cortex could have developed further so as to use the information for further executive functions involving working memory and syntactic operations, which are often argued to have been crucial for the evolution of human intelligence. How, then, could this function have been extrapolated from the general evolution of the nervous system? In this section, we shall sketch a possible sequence of grades of gradually increasing complexity that might take us from reaching movements to tool use and language.

Throughout evolution from primitive protozoa to mammals, the mouth was the organ used both to grasp and to intake prey, after reaching it through locomotion along the body axis. Some animals, especially primates, finally developed the hand to reach and grasp. The target to reach (prey) is detected by sensory organs of various modalities. The nervous system links these sensory and motor apparatuses to produce appropriate actions. The site of such integration within the neuraxis expanded continuously, to finally form the parietal cortex in primates; and its further extrapolation enabled the use of tools, as depicted above. The emergence of bipedalism constituted another evolutionary path for such expansion, as it differentiated the body axis from the movement axis, thus demanding a dramatic increase in spatial information transformation. In turn, this drove the evolution of the parietal operculum in the neural niche. illustrates this scenario, of which fundamental behavioural and neural correlates are summarized below.


Head reaching

Primitive animals, in which the locomotor apparatus (such as fins or limbs) has not yet evolved, ‘crawl’ with the whole body to prey (a). The ‘mouth’ is located at the front end of the body axis, where sensory organs cluster to efficiently acquire environmental information. Moving in the direction of the mouth (i.e. ‘head reaching’) is still common in extant taxa, including vertebrates. Fish swim in the water three-dimensionally along the body axis (b). Terrestrial amphibians (and essentially also reptiles and most mammalian species) were constrained to move two-dimensionally on the land surface, yet they still move in the direction of the main body axis and crawl to reach, having evolved limbs for locomotion and resistance against gravity (c). Head reaching requires information on the target from a self-centred perspective. Animals align the body axis (the direction to move) towards the object and then approach it by travelling with the whole body until arriving at the target. The neural machinery used need only be the rather stereotyped projection of the body onto the environmental space, which requires minimal resources of neural tissue, and of which even insects' tiny brains are capable.


Neck reaching

Avians further developed, from forelimbs, the wings to fly. After a flight to reach prey, two final precise reaching-and-grasping procedures emerged. Raptors grasp the prey object by a hind limb and finally eat it using the mouth/beak—they use organs other than the mouth just to grasp, but not directly to eat. Species with long flexible necks, like herons or cranes, reach and grasp directly with the beak using neck movements. Here, a discrepancy emerges between the axes of the body and the head (d). As long as the mouth and eyes remain relatively fixed, the neural processing to reach with the mouth/head remains the same. But, once the neck can move independently of the trunk, object locations need to be represented in multiple spatial-coordinate systems—not only for the original coordinates with the body/trunk at the origin, but also with the head moving relative to the body. Such transformations between coordinate systems would have required their brains to evolve further neural resources.


Arm reaching

In mammals, particularly primates, the forelimbs have evolved as apparatuses to reach and grasp, diverging from their original locomotor function. Such evolution occurred via (i) substantial elongation of the forelimbs; (ii) increased degrees of freedom of movement at the shoulder, elbow and wrist joints; and (iii) elongation of digits to grasp objects of various sizes, shapes and orientations. These changes dramatically increased the diversity of kinds and orientations of reaching-and-grasping motions in the space around the body axis (e). However, as a trade-off, it requires complex information processing by the brain to harmonize the movement of different body parts by translating positional information between different coordinate systems—body-centred, eye–head-centred and hand-centred systems. Such situations demand more neural resources and the evolution of highly developed spatial perception, resulting in the expansion of parietal cortex. This was a cradle for the further evolution of transformations and modifications between coordinate systems, even for other working spaces. These served as a preadaptation by increasing the degrees of freedom for spatial information acquisition, thereby enabling further expansion of the brain areas that are responsible for those calculations.


Rotation of moving axis

These processes could be immediately extrapolated onto further evolutionary events. One of those would be the emergence of constant bipedalism. This consists in the maintenance of an upright head-lifted posture, with locomotion perpendicular to the axis of the body trunk for the first time in evolution (f). Additional constraints emerged, i.e. visual axes became fixed to the direction of locomotion (horizontal), thus also perpendicular to the axis of the body. As a result, various axes (body, hand, head and eyes) became dissociated and the directions of locomotion and of reaching/grasping became independent, depending on the ongoing behaviour. The brain mechanisms for processing such information remain incompletely understood, and open for future investigations.


Extension of axes from concrete to virtual spaces for locomotion, tool use and language

In evolution, the parietal cortex expanded initially as an adaptation to demands from the environment, perhaps for control of different movements of the various body parts, while prefrontal cortex may have expanded later to control such information coded in the parietal cortex through prefronto–parietal interactions. In this way, neural mechanisms became embedded in the brain which served as pre-adaptations for further neural evolution through neural reuse, ultimately enabling the language faculties and (via prefrontal expansion) advanced modes of executive control. The emergence of bipedalism, through its associated demand on multi-sensory integration and very complex sensorimotor coordinate transformations, also pressurized expansion of the greater opercular regions of the cerebral cortex, and thereby facilitated subsequent reuse of such structures for higher cognitive functions including language.

Neural evolution in the first stage of this extension of axes put in place conditions for the emergence of tool use (derived from the usage of innate organs for a purpose not originally planned for). This polysemous pattern of organ usage, and the discovery of novel types of usage, would be key elements in inducing the re-evaluation of existing spatial structures in relation to the body axis as a second stage. The emergence of bipedalism triggered further extrapolation of such faculties and initiated the usage of the externalized body, i.e. extension of body parts into the tool representation. Such freedom from existing physical and bodily constraints in the understanding of the environmental space would allow a novel mode of spatial perception using novel tools (perspective transformation) that would be the basis for the next jump in the acquisition of abstract and transcendental thoughts—stage three. This development has served, in a final stage, as a cradle for the language faculty, principally by developing its neural basis for information processing, both for the use of polysemous and conceptual thoughts and for the articulation of oro-facial organs, to finally subserve language.


Conclusion

Expansion (or increase in capacity) of organs as an adaptive response to ecological pressures seems to be a general biological and evolutionary tendency to make the phenotypic system robust—the brain will not be an exception. Multi-sensory integration and coordinate transformation for the control of reaching movements in the inhabited space is an essential function of the nervous system, for which evolution finally endowed primates with a well-developed parietal cortex. The shift of body-space structure associated with the emergence of hominin bipedalism may have further pushed this trend forward to give this area, and the extended opercular cortex, further resources. Such neural enhancement (construction of the neural niche) happened to enable the processing of abstract information, detached from actual physical constraint, by applying and re-using existing principles for spatial information processing to realize novel mental functions (construction of the cognitive niche)—ultimately leading to language. Purposeful manipulation of the body image in space, required for tool use, would have accelerated interactive links between the neural and cognitive niches—tool use requires transformation of various bodily and spatial coordinates, as well as logical and sequential relations of action components.

Tools represent materialized cognitive brain functions. They have been created one after another and incorporated into hominin habitats as constituent elements (construction of the ecological niche). A human-modified environment puts pressure on succeeding generations to adapt to it, perhaps by acquiring further resources for the relevant organs. Epigenetically induced plasticity (including developmental or learning mechanisms) would participate in such processes—and this is a subject for future biological investigations. In this way, extra genomic information could be transmitted between generations via mutual interactions among ecological, neural and cognitive domains of niches, which may have contributed to hominin evolutionary processes (that is, ‘triadic niche construction’). This scenario would locate the human brain as part of an evolving holistic ecosystem.


Multistability and metastability: understanding dynamic coordination in the brain

J. A. Scott Kelso — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2012. PMC3282307, CC BY 3.0.

Multistable coordination dynamics exists at many levels, from multifunctional neural circuits in vertebrates and invertebrates to large-scale neural circuitry in humans. Moreover, multistability spans (at least) the domains of action and perception, and has been found to place constraints upon, even dictating the nature of, intentional change and the skill-learning process. This paper reviews some of the key evidence for multistability in the aforementioned areas, and illustrates how it has been measured, modelled and theoretically understood. It then suggests how multistability—when combined with essential aspects of coordination dynamics such as instability, transitions and (especially) metastability—provides a platform for understanding coupling and the creative dynamics of complex goal-directed systems, including the brain and the brain–behaviour relation.


Introduction

In addressing the subject of multistability, we are advised to follow Socrates: first ask what? Then ask why? So, what is multistability and how do we understand it? In previous work, my colleagues and I have considered multistability and its cognate aspects (fluctuations, instability, transitions, metastability, hysteresis, adaptation, etc.) in vision, speech, language, motor and neural dynamics (see also earlier studies for related approaches). In the last 15 years, many empirical generalizations and modelling developments have taken place on the subject, at least in part owing to the advent of structural and functional neuroimaging and increasingly sophisticated analysis and computational modelling tools. Here, however, after a few general words on what multistability is, I wish to focus on the question of why multistability occurs in the first place. For that one has to go beyond traditional disciplinary boundaries and fully embrace the science of complex systems tailored to the goal-directed and functional aspects of living things—coordination dynamics—where multistability is not some freak phenomenon, but rather is close to the very core of the way things are. The hope is that asking the why question may reshape our perspective by providing not only a language for understanding multistability but also a rationale for its occurrence, indeed its ubiquity.


What is multistability?

Multistability is a universal, essentially nonlinear aspect of matter and its organization—from molecular arrangements and chemical reactions to multistability in the meaning of words and actions and beyond. When we talk of multistability, we are usually talking about stable states or attractors; the stability of a state depends on how quickly the system returns to a state following a perturbation. In the brain, attractors correspond to stable patterns of reverberating activity in neural populations that support and sustain themselves. The image is one of a changing dynamic landscape where population activity shifts from one attractive state to another. Fluctuations in the nervous system occur on many levels, from channel noise in synaptic transmission to neural populations and neural networks (for review), destabilizing self-sustaining patterns and causing switching from one attractor state to another. A specific example comes from recent biophysical modelling in which multistability and scale-invariant fluctuations arise in resting state cortical activity as a result of noisy input into thalamic neurons modulated by cortical feedback. In short, if a system has multiple coexisting attractors and noise is sufficiently strong to cause switching among stable states, it may be said to be multistable.

Understanding multistability may proceed in (at least) two ways. In the first, one may seek specific mechanisms for a given instance of multistable phenomena. The search for specific mechanism proceeds by identifying the physico-chemico-bio-psycho- basis of a chosen exemplar of interest. A second way is to seek dynamic laws and principles of multistability. In this approach, the same dynamic laws of multistability are expected to exist across multiple scales of observation regardless of their specific mechanistic realization. Such a ‘law-based’ perspective leads us to notice parallels between different expressions of multistability across a wide range of systems, functions and timescales, seeing the connections between them and trying to uncover the functional roles that multistability may play. As we shall see, multistability appears in unexpected guises, playing a central role where we might not even expect it to such as in skill learning and intentional change.

Universal dynamics springs from inferred principles, specific mechanisms from close examination of particular cases. Dynamical laws and specific mechanisms can thus be seen as complementary: both are needed for a comprehensive understanding of multistability and cognate phenomena. This apparent tension between dynamics and mechanism may be seen as an advantage: universal dynamics allows us to see the connections across manifold expressions of multistability in a level- and mechanism-independent way. At the same time, we need particular realizations if we are ever to extract general laws and principles, thereby focusing our attention on mechanisms. It should be noted that many physicists take the word mechanism to mean that dynamical laws at one level are connected to, if not to be eventually replaced by, dynamical laws at lower levels (as in the case of quantum mechanics). Whether one accepts it or not, such a perspective does not deny the possibility of eventually identifying universal (dynamical) mechanisms for multistability and related phenomena across scales and levels of observation. The present contribution may be seen as a move in that direction.


Why multistability?

Why are systems, particularly complex biological systems (including, but not necessarily restricted to the brain) composed of very many interacting parts and processes and capable of producing a large repertoire of coordinated patterns of behaviour, multistable in the first place? Any answer to the question ‘why multistability?’ is likely to be complicated and have many layers, yet—viewed from the perspective of coordination dynamics—appears to involve a sequence of steps. In what follows, degeneracy and multifunctionality are proposed as fundamental aspects of living things (step 1) inextricably tied to the emergence of synergies (step 2) which are shown to be formed by self-organizing processes (step 3). The basic mechanism of self-organization is the non-equilibrium phase transition, the resulting dynamics of which gives rise to multistability (step 4). In step 5, some useful modelling tools are used to illustrate multistability and switching in behaviour and the brain, including learning (step 6). Step 7 goes beyond multistability and discusses why metastability is crucial to understanding brain and cognitive function. In this light, multistability appears as just one ingredient of a series of phenomena in which progressive coupling and broken symmetry between individual heterogeneous components enable switching from constant ‘invariant’ behaviour to creative dynamics. Metastability thus plays the role of a pivot towards the emergence of stable collective states, whether monostable or multistable. Finally, we propose that the weak coupling and broken symmetry that give rise to metastability are both the basis of and based upon the principle of complementarity.


Step 1: degeneracy

First and foremost is the need to recognize that complex biological systems at all relevant scales are degenerate. Degeneracy means that at every conceivable level of description, the same outcome or function can be achieved in many ways using different components. Edelman & Gally provide evidence of degeneracy from the level of the genetic code (where multiple gene products contribute to almost any behaviour or function and every gene has the potential for pleiotropy) to social communication (where there are a near infinite number of ways to communicate the same message). In perception, many different stimulus configurations can give rise to the same percept (‘invariance’). In movement, many different muscle configurations can produce the same outcome. The same network activity in central pattern-generating circuits can be produced using many different combinations of synaptic strengths and neuron properties (see also Cymbalyuk et al.). I have called this ‘The principle of functional equivalence’ because the principle appears to operate at every level of biological organization. The complement of degeneracy or functional equivalence is multifunctionality: the same anatomical structures can play multiple functional roles. For example, fronto-parietal regions of the brain are involved in many other executive functions beyond their ‘top-down’ influences in multistable perception. The same neural circuitry even in lowly creatures such as Caenorhabditis elegans or the stomatogastric ganglion of the lobster participates in multiple functions. Degeneracy and multifunctionality imply that there is no one-to-one mapping between structure and function. On the contrary, from gene networks to neural networks to social networks, degeneracy and multifunctionality rule: multifunctional circuit mechanisms are conserved across vertebrate and invertebrate species. From the perspective of coordination dynamics, multifunctionality and degeneracy/functional equivalence can be understood in terms of multistability.


Step 2: synergies

Edelman & Gally provide compelling evidence and argument that degeneracy is both a prerequisite for and an inescapable product of natural selection. But Nature has another mechanism to generate degeneracy not considered by Edelman: it synergizes. Synergies are exquisitely context-sensitive functional groupings of elements that are temporarily assembled to act as a single coherent unit. Depending on context, synergies may accomplish different functions using some of the same components (e.g. the jaw, tongue and teeth to speak and chew) and the same function using different components (e.g. ‘hand’ writing with a pen attached to the big toe). Operationally, the hallmark of a synergy is that during the course of ordinary function a perturbation to any part of the synergy is immediately compensated for by remotely linked parts in such a way as to preserve functional integrity. As a complex system composed of billions of cells and synapses which in turn is capable of displaying a complex repertoire of coordinated behaviours, the brain is likely to be highly synergized. To identify brain synergies, it would be necessary to perturb one member of the synergy (e.g. a piece of cortical tissue known to be engaged for a given task or function) and observe remote and near-immediate compensation by other putatively linked brain areas. A modern tool such as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) when combined with sophisticated imaging technologies to record remote effects may be a way to discover synergies in the human brain. There are probably other techniques such as microstimulation (L. Ungerleider 2010, personal communication).


Step 3: self-organization and dynamic instability

The basic mechanism for the formation and change of synergies—complementing natural selection—is self-organization, a mechanism (not known to Darwin) that Nature uses to form spatial and temporal patterns in non-equilibrium systems that are open to exchange of energy, matter and information with their environments. The most primitive form of self-organization is the non-equilibrium phase transition, which appears near the so-called critical ‘tipping’ points or instabilities when a control parameter crosses a threshold. Close to instability, the individual elements, in order to accommodate current conditions, order themselves in new or different ways: the faster (typically microscopic) individual elements or variables in the system become ‘enslaved’ to the slower (typically macroscopic) collective variables. The macroscopic patterns that emerge may be defined as stable attractive states of the collective variable dynamics. Fluctuations are always present, testing whether a given pattern is stable and allowing the system to discover new, more adaptive patterns (for a related view called self-organized criticality see Chialvo and Plenz & Thiagarian for reviews). Why is the non-equilibrium phase transition—which can take many forms in nature—so important for our present concerns? The answer is that (i) it is a fundamental mechanism for pattern formation in open systems; (ii) used as a methodology, it enables the identification of relevant (collective) variables and their dynamics in complex systems—which in neuroscience are often not known a priori; and (iii) the non-equilibrium phase transition qua dynamic instability (whether a switch from randomness to order and vice versa or from one ordered state to another) implicates multistability as an inherent aspect of nature and of tremendous selective value.


Step 4: multistable coordination dynamics

Non-equilibrium phase transitions have been demonstrated to be the basic self-organizing mechanism for the assembly and formation of functional synergies. Consider some basic forms of coordination from a variety of complex systems studied in laboratory settings. Whether coordinating the movements of the limbs, whether coordinating individual body parts with tactile, visual or auditory stimuli, whether two people are coordinating together, spontaneously or intentionally, whether a human is coordinating with an avatar or even riding a horse, just two stable patterns among the interacting components and processes predominate: in-phase and anti-phase (see earlier studies for reviews). Despite (or perhaps because of) the numerous neurons, muscles, joints and metabolic processes involved in these coordinations, despite the numerous differences between the parts and processes that are doing the coordinating and the multitude of ways the parts can be coupled with each other and with the environment, all these different systems have been demonstrated to exhibit bistability, the simplest form of multistability.

To better understand how bistability originates at phase transitions requires one to use some concepts, methods and formal tools that we can only mention briefly here. Key ones concern the identification of collective variables, the control parameters that move the system through its collective states and the minimum form taken by the dynamics. Many variables are changing in the experimental circumstances described above, but one that captures the essence of the coordination patterns under scrutiny here and changes abruptly at transitions is the relative phase, ϕ. Notice that this quantity ‘enfolds’ different domains: much evidence shows that relative phase characterizes the synergic interaction between parts that range from neurons to body parts to people and machines. As a key coordination variable, ϕ spans the processes that couple stimuli and responses, perception and action, organism and environment, brain and body, and even brains acting together.

A general form of the coordination dynamics referred to as the Schöner–Kelso conjecture in Turvey is:where the temporal change of the coordination variable ϕ (phi dot or) is a function of the variable itself subject to both specific and non-specific parametric influences, ci.

A particular elementary form of the coordination dynamics called the extended HKB model (after Haken, Kelso and Bunz) iswhere ϕ is the relative phase, is the derivative of ϕ with respect to time, a and b are coupling parameters the ratio of which (k = b/a) is a non-specific control parameter in experiments, δω = ω1 − ω2 reflects intrinsic differences between the components and ξt is a stochastic noise term of strength Q reflecting the fact that fluctuations are present in all real systems. We say b/a is a non-specific control parameter because it simply moves the system through its coordinative states but does not specify or ‘encode’ them.

An equivalent form of the extended HKB equation is

With the potentialThe coordination dynamics can be visualized as a particle moving in a potential function, V(ϕ). The minima of the potential are points of vanishing force, giving rise to stable solutions of the coordination dynamics. For δω = ω1 − ω2 = 0 and for low values of the control parameter (b/a), the system has two stable attractive coordination states at ϕ = 0 and ϕ = ±πrad. Thus, two coordination states coexist for exactly the same parameter values, the essentially nonlinear feature of bistability.

As the ratio b/a is decreased, the formerly stable fixed point at ϕ = ±πrad becomes unstable and turns into a repellor. Any small transient perturbation or fluctuation will now kick the system into the basin of attraction of the stable fixed point at ϕ = 0. Notice also that once there, the system's behaviour will stay in the in-phase attractor, even if the direction of the control parameter is reversed. Such hysteresis, a basic form of memory in nonlinear dynamical systems, is exactly what is observed in experiments.

The switching from bistability to monostability as function of a control parameter is called a bifurcation. However, it is the presence of stochastic fluctuations that establish the existence of non-equilibrium phase transitions in biological coordination and that allow quantitative evaluation of key predictions. Critical slowing down is easy to understand. As the minima of the potential at ϕ = ±πrad become shallower and shallower (a, solid curve, as k decreases) the time it takes to adjust to a small perturbation takes longer and longer. Thus, the local relaxation time (b) is predicted to increase as the instability is approached because the restoring force (given as the gradient in the potential, V(ϕ)) becomes smaller. Likewise, enhancement of fluctuations predicts that the variability of ϕ should increase owing to the flattening of the potential and broadening of the probability distribution, p, near the transition point. Both predictions have been confirmed in a wide variety of experimental systems, including magnetoencephalography and electroencephalography recordings of the human brain. Indeed, a remarkable study by Meyer-Lindenberg et al. demonstrated that a transition between bistable coordination patterns can be elicited in the human brain by transient TMS. As predicted by the HKB model of coordination dynamics, TMS perturbations of relevant brain regions such as premotor and supplementary motor cortices caused a behavioural transition from the less stable anti-phase state to the more stable in-phase state, but not vice versa.

That the stability of coordination states is a governing factor in how the brain works is further illustrated in a recent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study by Jantzen et al.. In a sensorimotor coordination paradigm, Jantzen et al. demonstrated a clear dissociation between those neural regions that are activated when a control parameter changes and those connected to a pattern's stability. A key result was that the activation of cortical regions supporting coordination (e.g. left and right ventral premotor cortex, insula, pre-supplementary motor area and cerebellum) scaled directly with the stability of the coordination pattern. As the anti-phase pattern became increasingly less stable and more variable, so too did activation of these areas: thus it is that these parts of the brain—which form a functional circuit—have to work harder to hold coordination together. And thus it is that the difficulty of a task, often described in terms of ‘information processing load’, is captured by a dynamic measure of stability that is directly and lawfully related to the amount of energy used by the brain. Importantly, for identical control parameter values, the same brain regions do not change their activation at all for the more stable (less variable) in-phase pattern. Given the constraints, a path is chosen that tends to favour the most stable state, here the potential minimum of a collective variable, the relative phase.

The Jantzen et al. paper shows how multistability is realized by the same cortical circuitry which itself is exquisitely sensitive to thestability of behaviour. Together with the Meyer-Lindenberg et al. study this work illustrates the power of coordination dynamics to predict the dynamical behaviour of the brain at the level of cortical circuitry. Dynamic stability and instability appear to be major determinants of the recruitment and dissolution of brain networks, providing both flexibility and stability in response to control parameter changes. Multistability confers a tremendous selective advantage to the brain and to nervous systems in general: it means that the brain has multiple patterns at its disposal and can switch among them to meet environmental or internal demands. Shifting equilibria among coexisting functional states on exposure to a new set of conditions is potentially more efficient than having to create states de novo. This hypothesis can be examined further by studying how different combinations of sound, touch, vision and movement come together and spontaneously split apart in time as parameters are varied.


Step 5: specific parametric influences on multistable systems

Standard theories of self-organization do not incorporate goal-directedness; for that one needs to consider the interplay between multistability and specific parametric influences, the second cornerstone of coordination dynamics. In the perceptual multistability literature, the latter are variously categorized in terms of top-down effects; it is well-known, for example, that perceivers can consciously switch from one interpretation of a stimulus pattern to another, and that attention and emotion can affect which alternative is selected. In coordination dynamics, intentional processes parametrize the dynamics, that is, they can stabilize or destabilize the coordination states of a multistable dynamical system. In turn, the relative stability of the coordination states dictates the nature of the intentional switching process. Both theory and data afford insight into this interplay of forces. Experimental observations show (i) that intention can stabilize coordination states even under conditions where they would otherwise become unstable and spontaneously switch; (ii) the relative stability of the states—the intrinsic dynamics—determines how fast one state can switch to another: intentionally switching from a more stable to a less stable state takes longer than the reverse; and (iii) much greater blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) activity is observed in bilateral putamen when human subjects are required to switch from a more stable to a less stable state than vice versa, indicating that the basal ganglia (BG) are highly sensitive to pattern stability.

In the potential function of the coordination dynamics (equation (3.4)), the specific influence of intention may be represented aswhere cint is a parameter proportional to the strength of intention and θ is the intended relative phase. The modified dynamics resulting from the summation of these two functions (equations (3.4) and (3.5)) is illustrated by the black and grey curves in.

The theoretical model illustrated in operates under two assumptions. First, the level of activity in the BG represents the level of intentional ‘forcing’ or parametrization of the dynamics. This allows the BOLD estimates of putamen activity in the DeLuca et al. experiment to be used to scale the variable cint in equation (3.5). Second, the intended relative phase (θ) is assumed to follow task instructions: when participants start out in-phase (a), the intended pre-switch pattern (black) is in-phase and the intended post-switch pattern (grey) is anti-phase—and inversely when participants start out anti-phase (b). The result shows how the process of intention, stemming from the BG, is governed by the intrinsically multistable dynamics. Prior to the switch, the BG is active in both in-phase and anti-phase states. The result seen in black in a,b is to increase the stability of the required pattern. During the switch (when the intended pattern switches and θ goes from 0° to 180° or vice versa), activity in the BG remains high when switching from an in-phase pattern. The result is to allow for a stable anti-phase pattern as shown (in grey) across the top row. However, when switching from anti-phase to in-phase, the DeLuca et al. experiment shows that BOLD activity in the BG dramatically decreases. The result is to release the dynamics from intentional control and thereby allow the intrinsic dynamics to accomplish the switch from the less stable (anti-phase) to the always more stable in-phase pattern. From these data we can conclude that multistable coordination dynamics places lawful constraints on what is possible to realize and what is not. It is the joint forces of intention (equation (3.5)) and the gradients defining the relative stability of the coordination states (equation (3.4)) that dictate the switching time between them—implemented in this specific example by the BG and related cortical circuitry.


Step 6: multistability in learning

Multistability plays an unforeseen but central role in learning: theoretically, it corresponds to pre-existing dispositions in an attractor landscape (intrinsic dynamics) that is shaped by learning and dictates the very nature of change. Although the hypothesis is intuitive that learning and development involve a modification of the individual's current behavioural repertoire, identifying and tapping into the latter has proved difficult in the extreme. To address changes owing to learning, it is necessary to devise an operational means to probe the individual learner's repertoire before, during and after the learning process. Because much is known about them, bimanual rhythmic coordination patterns in response to visual input have proved to be a useful window into skill learning. These patterns can be changed by gradually manipulating the relevant coordination variable (here, relative phase) over its full range, thereby allowing the experimenter to probe the entire repertoire of possible patterns that subjects can produce before a learning task is introduced. This experimental procedure is called a ‘scanning probe’: in a typical experiment, two light-emitting diodes display 13 relative phases ranging from 0° to 180° in steps of 15°. Participants are required to move each index finger in coincidence with each visual stimulus. The significance of such scanning probes is that they reveal the presence of preferred behaviours—a pre-existing repertoire that constrains what can be learned and thus the very nature of the learning process.

What does the pre-existing repertoire look like in naïve participants before learning and how is this related to multistability? In the normal adult population, scanning probes reveal two sets of results. In one sub-population, the behavioural repertoire prior to learning is composed of just two stable or preferred coordination patterns corresponding to minimum root-mean-squared error (RMSE) and illustrated by wells in a potential function shown in a. The attractor landscape pre-learning is thus bistable with attractive states located at 0° and 180°. In the other, a smaller number of individuals exhibit an additional minimum RMSE at 90° indicating that this attractive state is also part of their pre-existing repertoire (c). Thus, their initial dynamics is multistable before learning, with three potential minima.

Learning means the acquisition and persistence over time of a new pattern of behaviour. Knowledge of the pre-existing repertoire is thus instrumental in defining what a new pattern is, that is, one not already in the learner's repertoire and, therefore, likely to conflict with the existing intrinsic dynamics. Given the two types of repertoire that exist before learning, the required relative phase is set to 90° for initially bistable people and to 135° for those with tristable dynamics. Performance feedback is provided during the learning phase, but not in the scans. How do learners handle the new learning tasks? Regardless of whether one is initially bistable or tristable before learning, the mismatch between the produced and required relative phasing pattern diminishes, giving rise to an increase in accuracy of the produced pattern. Stability, not just error, is also a key factor. Whereas learning 90° is accompanied by a significant increase followed by a significant decrease in the variability of performed relative phase, no such changes occur when learning 135°.

Scanning probes of the behavioural repertoire after learning reveal what is going on. Initially, bistable learners now exhibit three wells: a new well at the learned pattern (90°) now appearing along with the two that existed prior to learning (b). Learning has reorganized the entire landscape, the initially bistable coordination dynamics becoming tristable. Because the transition from bistable to tristable dynamics is accompanied by changes in stability, we refer to this mechanism of change as the bifurcation route to learning. In the case of initially tristable learners confronted with the novel task of learning a bimanual phasing pattern of 135°, all that happens is that the original well at 90° shifts towards the just-learned pattern. As a result, learning takes the form of gradual change: the learner's attractor landscape is altered not in terms of number of attractive states (which does not change), only in terms of its layout (d). The overall attractor landscape is not altered qualitatively, a mechanism we refer to as the shift route to learning.

On the one hand, the bifurcation route generates qualitative change in an initially bistable behavioural repertoire by adding new stable patterns. Bifurcation is thus a dynamical mechanism for novelty. The sudden creation of a new attractive state in the landscape of the coordination dynamics is a reflection of the principle of selection via instability. On the other hand, the shift mechanism generates smooth adaptive change. The initial behavioural repertoire is already multi- (here tri-) stable and learning takes the form of gradual change: the learner's dynamic landscape is altered not in terms of the number of attractive states but only in terms of its layout. As a result, behaviour shifts gradually in the direction of the to-be-learned pattern without any instability or gain in stability. Selection of a new behavioural pattern occurs in this case through an effort to match new environmental requirements according to a principle of selection via matching.

How humans learn is contingent: depending on the individual's initial repertoire, adaptive changes are governed by a shift mechanism or a bifurcation mechanism. Results show that the bifurcation route leads to greater persistence of a learned behaviour in memory, whereas the shift route, though more flexible, is prone to forgetting. Far from being separate, the two routes depend on each other and may be said to constitute two successive phases of the learning process. The bifurcation mechanism is nevertheless primary. A possible reason is that a minimum level of multistability (attained through the bifurcation mechanism) is needed for learning to evolve gradually through the shift route.

Why is it that some people show up tri- or in general multistable? If our interpretation is correct, then learners who exhibit a tristable initial repertoire must have been bistable at an earlier time: tristability (as we have shown) springs from a basic bistability in the coordination dynamics. Bistability and bifurcation (dynamic instability) may be seen as the primordial cornerstones upon which learning is grounded, the basic ingredients for the sudden emergence of new patterns. Only later does the shift mechanism kick in giving rise to gradual behavioural change. Why the primacy of bistability and bifurcation? As a precursor to tristability, bistability sets the limits of what's possible and what is prohibited. Bistability is primitive: it establishes the space within which learning (and perhaps changes on other timescales as well) can occur. Once established, the multistable dynamics plays out in this space—the space of states defined by coordination variables that capture the interaction or coupling among the parts and processes of goal-directed complex systems.


Step 7: beyond multistability—bring on metastability

As we have seen, brain circuits can become unstable leading to the emergence of novel coordinative states. Multistable coordination dynamics confers a capacity on the brain to lock in to one of several available patterns. Locking in and switching capabilities can be adaptive and useful, or maladaptive and harmful.

Another kind of mechanism called metastability is becoming recognized as an important dynamical mechanism for understanding brain and behavioural coordination. Etymologically, ‘metastability’ comes from the latin ‘meta’ (beyond) and ‘stabilis’ (able to stand). In coordination dynamics, metastability is not just a word. It is the simultaneous realization of two competing tendencies: the tendency of the individual components to couple together and the tendency for the components to express their independent behaviour. In coordination dynamics, metastability corresponds to a regime near a saddle-node or tangent bifurcation in which stable and unstable coordination states no longer exist (e.g. in-phase coordination where the relative phase between interacting components lingers at zero), but attraction remains to where those fixed points used to be. This gives rise to a dynamical flow consisting of phase trapping and phase scattering. Early on metastability was identified in the extended HKB model of coordination dynamics at a behavioural level, but was soon seen as an important mechanism for brain coordination. Because many brain processes are governed by periodic, often oscillatory dynamics, the coordination variable coupling the oscillations together is the relative phase, ϕ. A fixed point of the coordination variable thus represents a steady-phase and frequency relationship between the oscillatory components or phase-locking.

To illustrate formally the connection between multistability and metastability, the flow of the coordination dynamics across a range of values of δω is presented in a–c for a fixed value of the coupling parameter, k = b/a = 1, where a = 1 and b = 1. Stable fixed points (attractors) are represented by filled circles and unstable fixed points (repellors) as unfilled circles. Note these fixed points refer to specific values of the coordination variable, φ. The flows shown in illustrate four parameter regimes under the influence of the symmetry breaking term δω in equation (3.2). In a, the system is multistable, here bistable. For the system to settle in, two stable fixed points (filled circles) constitute the alternatives. Of the two, which one is observed depends on the initial conditions and the size of the basin of attraction. In b, the intrinsically less stable anti-phase state disappears but the stronger attractor near in-phase is still present as well as its repellor partner (open circle). c shows the metastable regime. The flow no longer intersects the x-axis where the fixed points are located: all the fixed points have disappeared. For the sake of completeness, d shows the flow where the components are uncoupled, behaving independently according to their intrinsic dynamics.

What does coordination behaviour look like in the metastable regime? Although all the fixed points have vanished, a key aspect is that there are still some traces of coordination, ‘ghosts’ or ‘remnants’ of where the fixed points once were. Despite the complete absence of phase-locked attractors, the behaviour of the component parts in the metastable regime is not totally independent. Rather, coordination takes the form of dwellings (phase gathering) near the remnants of the fixed points and phase scattering, where the individual components act quasi-independently, expressing their autonomy. In the metastable regime, successive visits to the remnants of the fixed points are intrinsic to the time course of the network, and do not require any additional sources of input. The time the system dwells in each remnant depends on two factors: the degree of asymmetry among the components (longer dwelling for smaller asymmetry) and the strength of the coupling (longer dwelling for larger values of a or b). Although discovered in a simple system, such a basic mechanism provides a powerful means to instantiate the flow of thinking and perceiving and moving as ‘stationary transients’ of coordination in neurocognitive networks.

The flows shown in a–d are just singular examples of coordination patterns that arise in a much bigger space. The corresponding parameter space or phase diagram is shown in e illustrating: (i) similar behaviour—such as multistability—for a range of parameter values (hearkening back to our earlier discussion of degeneracy and functional equivalence) and (ii) qualitatively different behavioural patterns as parameters cross critical parameter values that lie along boundaries, e.g. separating multistability and monostability. The system affords many paths in many directions. If you are coordinating your body, then you make the path by walking. If you are coordinating your brain, then you make the path by thinking. The rich variety of coordinations possible—whether you are monostable, multistable, metastable or even not coordinated at all—depends on where the system (on all levels) lives in the parameter space of its coordination dynamics and how it moves in it. This message is beginning to be appreciated in neuroscience.

Does the brain make use of such a principle? The classical view of phase-locked synchronization prescribes that each recruited element loses its intrinsic behaviour and obeys the dictates of the assembly. In theories that propose large-scale integration through phase synchronization, for example, the expression of local activity can exist only when a given area is not enslaved into an assembly. In the metastable brain, the activity of individual elements obeys neither the intrinsic dynamics of the elements nor the dynamics dictated by the assembly. A delicate balance between the two poles of integration (coordination between individual elements in transiently synchronized ensembles) and segregation (expression of individual behaviour in diverging neural ensembles) is thus achieved. This design plays out in space and time, with ensembles of various sizes coming together and disbanding incessantly.


Why metastability?

At the beginning we asked ‘why multistability’? From e, multistability corresponds to a regime where the components are not too different and the coupling is strong relative to metastability which can be seen even for very weak coupling. It is tempting to see metastability as a necessary step towards mono- and multistability. There are several reasons why metastability may be proposed as a candidate principle of coordination for brains and cognitive systems: — metastability accommodates the coordination of heterogeneous elements (e.g. brain areas having disparate intrinsic dynamics; brain areas whose activity is associated with the movement of body parts or events in the environment),— although reminiscent of a multistable regime with attractors, a key difference with metastability is that transitions are not actively induced. No disengagement mechanism is required. Neither stochastic noise nor energy inputs in the form of parameter changes are needed in order to switch from one state to the other. Metastability allows even the lowliest of nervous systems to flexibly browse through a set of possibilities (tendencies of the system) thereby avoiding getting stuck in stationary states,— metastable brain theory favours no extremes, e.g. reflexive versus intrinsic, integrated versus segregated, local versus global. Rather, it reconciles them, and— metastability is an expression of the full complexity of the brain. Measures of complexity reach a maximum when the balance between segregative and integrative forces is achieved. Note, however, that such measures are based upon stationarity assumptions whereas metastability in coordination dynamics is literally a ‘stationary transient’.In short, metastability guarantees that the living brain (and complex, goal-directed systems in general) never finds itself frozen for any length of time in a particular coordination state: no energy barriers need to be crossed to visit self-organized metastable tendencies. For this reason, it seems likely that natural selection has latched on to this aspect of self-organization, favouring metastability as necessary for adaptive behaviour.


The origins of metastability: coupling and complementarity

Multistability is said to offer a powerful and coherent framework for addressing the issue of binding or coupling. In metastability, the strong hierarchical coupling between parts and processes is reduced leading to a looser, more flexible form of function. allows us to see how both views may be reconciled within the framework of coordination dynamics. What remains to be addressed is the origin of metastability. Consider in reverse, from panel (d) to (a), and ask a simple question. If the components are uncoupled, how do they get coupled? Where does the coupling come from?

The word ‘coupling’ is used in many scientific contexts: What do we mean by it? Although the sources of coupling may be manifold and ‘coupling’ often appears in explanations (usually of complicated interactions), the word itself is seldom defined. Here, we define coupling after Root-Bernstein & Dillon as ‘the non-random linking between two or more processes’.

Notice that the parts and processes that are coupled according to the governing dynamics of, for example, equation (3.2) are substitutable. The law is universal though its mechanistic manifestations are specific. In our example, the elements correspond to oscillators and the processes concern oscillations: this is convenient because oscillations, which occur on many levels, appear to be the natural language of the brain and cognition—and according to some, nature too.

To cut to the chase, Root-Bernstein proposes that complementarity creates the coupling necessary for non-equilibrium systems to form providing a mechanism for the appearance of novel emergent properties, as in self-organization. Remarkably, as in the foregoing discussion of metastability, complementarity—through the eyes of Root-Bernstein & Dillon—sees evolution as a network composed of alternating periods of integration (as molecules and molecular aggregates merge) and divergence (as molecules and aggregates undergo variations). Just as the Weiss criteria (variance of the whole is less than the sum of the variances expressed by the individual parts) have been used to describe the properties of synergies, so Root-Bernstein & Dillon use it to describe the formation of sub-assemblies or aggregates. If complementarity provides a generalized mechanism for coupling, then how does this play out here? Concretely, how does the ‘uncoupled dynamics’ of d transform into the metastable tendencies of c and beyond? Logically—after Aristotle's metaphysics and the philosophy of the complementary nature—one has to inquire what the complement of total independence is, as in independent, uncoupled parts. The parts cannot exist in a vacuum. The answer, surely, is integration and the integrated whole: segregation and integration, individuals and collective, parts and wholes are complementary pairs—considered the basis of reality. Notice that complementarity cannot realize integration and segregation as pure (idealized) states: metastable tendencies require component differences (δω ≠ 0; therefore, broken symmetry) and the weakest of coupling (c,e). Individualist tendencies for the diverse parts to express themselves coexist with coordinative tendencies to couple and cooperate as a whole.

And now what happens? If the parts are sufficiently different and the coupling is strong enough, then a transition occurs: equilibria emerge spontaneously. Metastability crosses the boundary into monostability (c to b). On the basis of evidence and argument, Root-Bernstein & Dillon propose that homeostasis emerges from complementarity. Coordination dynamics shows that it cannot be otherwise. Given a system of heterogeneously connected, heterogeneous elements, i.e. where symmetry is broken, coupled by virtue of complementarity, even multiple equilibria can arise if the coupling is strong enough (a). Through coupling and broken symmetry metastability forms leading on to multistability. If you follow the self-organizing route (§3d) metastability arises from multistability. If coupling is based on complementarity (which reaches all the way down to the complementary pairs of quantum mechanics), then metastability arises from complementarity and multistability arises from metastability.


Postscript

It is not unusual for scientists and artists to draw a dichotomy between brain and mind. For example, Henry Miller (1891–1988), the American writer and painter, remarks that ‘nothing happens in the brain except the gradual rust and detrition of cells’. ‘In the mind’, however, ‘worlds unclassified, undenominated, unassimilated, form, break, unite, dissolve and harmonize ceaselessly’ (emphasis mine). ‘In the mind-world’, Miller continues, ‘ideas are the indestructible elements which form the jewelled constellations of the interior life. We move within their orbits, freely if we follow their intricate patterns, enslaved or possessed if we try to subjugate them. Everything external is but a reflection projected by the mind-machine’ [p. 29]. The parallel between Miller's mind and the multi- and metastable coordination dynamics of the brain described here is obvious. Mind and brain are complementary: they share a common underlying dynamics.

In testimony to the US Congress in October 2010, Huda Akil, former President of the Society for Neuroscience, poses what she calls the ‘grand challenge of elucidating neural choreography’. No single focused level of analysis will suffice to understand the brain and its disorders (see also Akil et al.) ‘We need to identify the dancers, identify the nature of the dance and uncover how disease disrupts it’. Here, the dancers are (cognitively, behaviourally and neurally relevant) nonlinear oscillations, and the dance is the functional patterns of interaction between them: multi- and metastable coordination dynamics.


Metacognition in human decision-making: confidence and error monitoring

Nick Yeung, Christopher Summerfield — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2012. PMC3318764, CC BY 3.0.

People are capable of robust evaluations of their decisions: they are often aware of their mistakes even without explicit feedback, and report levels of confidence in their decisions that correlate with objective performance. These metacognitive abilities help people to avoid making the same mistakes twice, and to avoid overcommitting time or resources to decisions that are based on unreliable evidence. In this review, we consider progress in characterizing the neural and mechanistic basis of these related aspects of metacognition—confidence judgements and error monitoring—and identify crucial points of convergence between methods and theories in the two fields. This convergence suggests that common principles govern metacognitive judgements of confidence and accuracy; in particular, a shared reliance on post-decisional processing within the systems responsible for the initial decision. However, research in both fields has focused rather narrowly on simple, discrete decisions—reflecting the correspondingly restricted focus of current models of the decision process itself—raising doubts about the degree to which discovered principles will scale up to explain metacognitive evaluation of real-world decisions and actions that are fluid, temporally extended, and embedded in the broader context of evolving behavioural goals.

Keywords: decision-making, confidence, metacognition, error monitoring


Introduction


Metacognition in perceptual choice

Imagine yourself cycling along a narrow, winding country lane on a summer's day. Successfully negotiating each twist and turn in the road requires the interpretation of a variety of subtle sensory cues and their conversion into appropriate motor commands. For example, incoming visual signals that reveal the curvature of the road, or motion parallax signals arising from the trees beyond, allows you to gently adjust the handlebars towards the left or right to steer the bicycle smoothly round each bend.

Over past decades, psychologists and neuroscientists have devoted substantial effort to understand the neural and computational mechanisms by which actions are selected on the basis of a stream of incoming sensory information. Because this sort of sensorimotor control often requires an observer to commit to one discrete action from among several possible candidates, this literature has been informed by computational models that offer a formal account of how categorical decisions are made. These models, described in more detail below, have provided an excellent account of the decisions and decision latencies exhibited by observers selecting actions on the basis of ambiguous sensory information.

However, now imagine that as you are cycling, the sky darkens and it begins to rain—visibility is reduced, and the road becomes slippery and wet. The approach to each bend still requires a deft angling of handlebars, but now you are less certain about whether each chosen action is optimized to steer the bicycle in a fashion that appropriately meets the gradient of the curve and the camber of the road. Action selection proceeds as before, but you are unsure whether the actions chosen are the most appropriate ones. In fact, you might even experience an immediate sense that you have just made a poor choice. In short, you are less confident about your decisions.

Curiously, despite universal agreement that an accompanying sense of confidence is a subjectively salient property of almost all our decisions, there is currently little consensus about how we might incorporate decision confidence into formal models of choice behaviour or explore its biological substrates. Fundamental questions remain unanswered. For example, is the information that gives rise to the ‘second-order’ estimate of confidence in a choice identical to that determining the ‘first-order’ choice itself? Why are we generally more sure that we are correct than that we have made an error, even for difficult choices? Why do we sometimes appear to ‘change our mind’ after a motor programme has been initiated? Are these changes of mind necessarily accompanied by awareness that the initial choice was incorrect?

In what follows, we review the literature that has posed these and related questions about decision confidence in perceptual choice tasks. Subsequently, we highlight links between this work and a literature that has considered how people monitor whether they have made an error under conditions of uncertainty or conflict. Finally, we propose some potentially fruitful avenues for research that draw upon common themes in these two literatures, building on their shared strengths and addressing their shared limitations.


Formal models of perceptual choice

Even under good viewing conditions, visual information is corrupted by multiple sources of noise and uncertainty, arising both in the external world and in the dynamics of neural processing. One sensible way to increase the signal-to-noise ratio of visual information is to sample the external world repeatedly and integrate this information over time, making a decision only when the information is considered to be of sufficient quality. This idea forms the basis of a class of model in which binary choices are described via an accumulation-to-bound mechanism, with successive samples of information totted up until they reach a criterial level or ‘bound’, upon which a commitment to action is made.

Different versions of this model make divergent assumptions about exactly what quantity is integrated en route to a decision—i.e. about precisely how the ‘decision variable’ (DV) is composed. To simplify matters, in this review, we focus on one variant of this model—the ‘drift-diffusion’ model, or DDM—in which the DV corresponds to the relative likelihood of the two choices being correct, given the stimulus. In the DDM, the DV on sample vt is updated on each sample t with an increment composed of two quantities: δ, a linear drift term that encodes the rate of evidence accumulation, and cW, Gaussian noise with a mean of zero and a variance of c2:

Decisions are made when the DV exceeds a fixed deviation from zero, θ, such that during evidence accumulation:

This simple model has much to recommend it both as a normative and descriptive account of categorical choice. The DDM has been widely and very successfully applied to decision-making in a range of cognitive domains—from low-level perceptual decisions to retrieval of facts from semantic memory, to economic decision-making under uncertainty—and accounts neatly for several empirical characteristics of reaction times (RTs) observed for binary choices in these tasks. Firstly, the natural geometry of the accumulation-to-bound process predicts the observed rightward skew in RT distributions. Secondly, varying the bound offers an elegant account of the economy of speed and accuracy that characterizes mental chronometry tasks. Thirdly, by allowing drift rate and origin of accumulation to vary across trials, the model accounts for the relative RT of correct and error trials under conditions where speed or accuracy are emphasized. Moreover, the model implements a sequential probability ratio procedure that optimizes speed for a given error rate, and thus takes its place among a family of statistically optimal descriptions of the choice process.


Decision confidence

However, as illustrated above, we not only make decisions, but also concurrently evaluate the likelihood that those decisions will result in favourable or unfavourable outcomes. How, then, can we incorporate decision confidence into the formal framework offered by the DDM and other quantitative models of perceptual choice? In what follows, we review recent empirical and modelling work that has attempted to extend this formal framework to account for metacognitive judgements. Much of this debate has hinged on a simple question: can confidence be read out directly from the DV at the time of choice (decisional locus model), or do confidence judgements depend on new information arriving beyond the decision point (post-decisional locus models)?.

As an aside, we note that this question only arises if one is concerned with modelling the dynamics of the decision process, such as with the DDM or related evidence-accumulation models. Other decision-theoretic models, such as signal detection theory (SDT), have given detailed treatment of how to measure observers' metacognitive sensitivity, specifically, their ability to distinguish their own correct and incorrect judgements. However, because SDT is a static model of the decision process in which the temporal dynamics of evidence accumulation are ignored, primary (‘type I’) and metacognitive (‘type II’) judgements must necessarily be based on the same evidence (albeit potentially corrupted by different sources of noise), and thus these models are by definition decision locus models.


Decisional locus models

The very earliest investigations of decision confidence revealed that, perhaps unsurprisingly, we are more certain about our perceptual choices when sensory inputs are stronger, and when we are given longer to sample sensory information. It thus follows that confidence should reflect both the quality of the evidence (represented by the drift rate, δ) and the quantity of evidence at the choice point (represented by the absolute value of the decision bound, |θ|). However, it is also clear that neither of these quantities alone is sufficient to describe an observer's confidence in their choices. Any diffusion-to-bound model assuming that confidence is directly indexed by the state of evidence at the time of choice inevitably predicts that all choices will be made with precisely the same confidence (corresponding to the evidence level required to reach the bound). Similarly, any model proposing that confidence reflects evidence quality implicitly assumes that observers have direct access to this quantity—which, if they had, would obviate the need for a sequential sampling approach in the first place (see Pleskac & Busemeyer for an excellent recent review).

Various accounts dating back over 100 years have therefore proposed that confidence reflects some interaction between the quantity and quality of evidence—for example, that under the DDM, confidence scales with the product of δ and θ. This account has attractive properties—for example, it predicts that when the observer has the option of terminating evidence accumulation with a choice at any point, RTs are faster for high-confidence trials. Moreover, this view enjoys support from two prominent neurophysiological studies detailed in §2b.


Neural substrates of decision confidence

Two recent single-cell recording studies, one involving rats and the other monkeys, claim to have identified neurons encoding subjective decision confidence. Kiani et al. recorded from neurons in the lateral intraparietal cortex (LIP) of macaques discriminating the direction of motion in ambiguous moving-dot arrays with a saccade to one of two targets placed either side of the motion stimulus. This experimental approach has previously been used to demonstrate that LIP neurons whose receptive field overlaps with the chosen target display a characteristic acceleration of spiking activity while the monkey views the moving-dot stimulus, whereas those overlapping with the non-chosen target show a relative dampening of activity. This build-up scales with signal strength, and terminates when an action (saccadic eye movement) is selected, prompting the view that LIP firing rates encode the level of evidence available for a choice—in other words, their firing rates form a neural representation of the DV proposed by the DDM.

To investigate decision confidence, Kiani et al. added a new twist to this protocol. Typically, the monkey is rewarded for correct but not incorrect choices, but here, on a fraction of trials, the monkey was offered a ‘sure bet’ option such that a certain but lower-valued reward could be obtained via a saccade to a third response option. In ethology, it is commonly assumed that an animal choosing the safe option when evidence is scarce must have access to metacognitive information about the likelihood that it will make an error on the main task. The authors found that not only did their monkeys use this option judiciously—responding when the stimulus was weak or ambiguous—but also that LIP firing rates on low-confidence trials were substantially attenuated, falling equidistant between those for the chosen and unchosen targets. The authors interpret these data as showing that confidence is a simple product of quantity and quality of the DV, as proposed by early accounts of decision confidence, obviating the need for a separate metacognitive monitoring process.

Kepecs et al. employed an odour discrimination paradigm in conjunction with single-cell recordings in the rat orbitofrontal cortex (OFC; see also Kepecs & Mainen). They report an intriguing finding: that OFC firing rates discriminated between correct judgements and errors after the choice but before the outcome had been revealed, even when objective difficulty of the choice paradigm was controlled for. Because variance in these responses could not be explained by other factors, such as the reinforcement history over past trials, the authors suggest that these neurons encode confidence estimates associated with the current decision. They show that the activity of these neurons can be explained by a class of model in which two evidence tallies race to the decision bound (rather than a single quantity representing their difference, as in the DDM). Specifically, neuronal responses reflected the difference between the two totals at the time of the decision—making this a decisional locus model, even though the relevant neural activity was sustained through the post-response period—and this activity in turn predicted the likelihood that the choice was correct.

At first glance, these two studies offer convincing evidence that neurons in the parietal and orbitofrontal cortices encode the subjective confidence associated with a choice: a graded quantity that can be estimated directly from the evidence on which the original, first-order choice was based. In both cases, the authors are assiduous in attempting to rule out alternative explanations of their findings, such as attention or learned reward contingencies. However, to return momentarily to our discussion of models of categorical choice, two well-replicated behavioural phenomena cast doubt on any model in which subjective confidence directly reflects the evidence accumulated up to the choice point. First, it has consistently been shown that confidence in correct choices is stronger than confidence in incorrect choices, even when choice difficulty is controlled. As previously pointed out, this finding cannot be explained by decisional locus models in which confidence is a mere function of diffusion model parameters, because these parameters are invariant across correct and incorrect trials (but see Galvin et al. for relevant analysis using SDT). Second, and crucially, subjects occasionally change their mind between the first-order choice and the second-order estimation of decision confidence. At least on these trials, the decisions must be influenced by processing that occurs after the first-order choice point. In §2c, we consider models that propose such a mechanism.


Post-decisional locus models and changes of mind

Resulaj et al. report a behavioural experiment in which human subjects indicated the direction of a random dot motion stimulus by moving a handle to a leftwards or rightwards target some 20 cm away. This design allowed the researchers to isolate trials on which subjects began to move towards one target but then changed their mind and veered-off towards the other. Careful behavioural analyses demonstrated a number of interesting phenomena. Firstly, changes of mind were not symmetric: subjects switched more often from an incorrect to a correct choice. Secondly, change-of-mind trials tended to occur when, owing to stochasticity in the stimulus display, motion energy began by favouring the initial choice, but subsequently came to favour the alternative, switched-to option. Because the motion stimulus offset once movement began, subjects must have capitalized on the balance of information in the immediate pre-decision period when deciding to change their mind. Notably, although this motion information was available prior to the decision, the switch occurred only once movement initiation began, suggesting that evidence accumulation continued beyond the point at which the initial choice was made.

To account for these and other data, a number of researchers have proposed models in which, in contrast to the classical DDM, evidence accumulation continues even beyond the choice point, with this extra variability in the DV also contributing to estimates of subjective confidence when probed at a later time point. Resulaj et al. propose that their data can be explained by just this type of model, with changes of mind occurring when latent information in the processing pipeline drives the DV across a second, ‘change-of-mind’ bound. A related account, the two-stage dynamic signal detection (2DSD) model, likewise proposes that the diffusion process continues beyond initial choice, with decision confidence reflecting the absolute value of the DV at the post-decision point at which a second-order decision is required. Thus, in contrast to discrete changes of mind that are expressed as overt corrections of an initial response, the 2DSD model allows for continuously varying levels of confidence that provide an explicit judgement about an earlier response.

Behaviourally, these post-decision processing models are able to account for a broad range of findings concerning decision confidence. Firstly, they correctly predict that observers will change their mind more often from incorrect to correct responses than vice versa, because beyond the bound the DV on error trials will tend to regress towards the mean, whereas after correct responses it will continue to grow, driven by the true underlying drift rate. This observation also naturally explains another conundrum associated with decision confidence: that second-order confidence is generally higher for correct trials than incorrect trials. Indeed, reconsidering for a moment the data from Kiani et al., we note that these authors report that neural activity in the delay between stimulus offset and movement execution exerted a separate, independent influence over the decision to choose the ‘sure bet’ option. Thus, although the authors argue that a mechanistic description of decision confidence does not require us to invoke a distinct metacognitive process separate from evidence accumulation, the evidence predicting decision confidence might not be confined to the stimulation period alone. However, one potential caveat to this view is that the activity of LIP neurons is known to drop off sharply once the eye movement is made. Thus, it remains to be shown whether variation in the post-decisional LIP signal could contribute to a later confidence judgement, or whether a separate representation of the evolving DV is supporting the observed changes of mind. This caveat aside, these emerging findings suggest that post-decisional processing plays a crucial role in metacognitive judgements, which can lead to changes of mind or support ratings of confidence in an initial decision.


Error monitoring

People are often aware of their own mistakes; for example, in choice RT tasks when time pressure is applied to induce errors in simple judgements. Error monitoring is the metacognitive process by which we are able to detect and signal our errors as soon as a response has been made. This process plays a crucial role in adaptive human behaviour, allowing our actions to be shaped by their outcomes both in the short term, for example, by responding more cautiously to avoid further errors, and in the longer term, through gradual learning of appropriate stimulus–response contingencies.

Whereas the studies described above have typically asked subjects to report their confidence that they made the correct choice, studies examining error monitoring have tended to ask subjects the converse question—i.e. to report the likelihood that they made an error. Although these judgements seem like two sides of the same coin, methods and assumptions in the two literatures have often been quite different. For example, decision confidence has typically been studied using tasks that remain challenging even when extended processing times are permitted, such as challenging psychophysical discriminations. Under these circumstances, subjects are sometimes sure they responded correctly and sometimes unsure whether they are right or wrong, but rarely certain that that they made a mistake. In contrast, research on error monitoring has mostly been studied using simple but time-pressured tasks in which subjects are usually aware of their errors and very rarely unsure whether their decision was right or wrong. Framed in terms of the DDM, the distinction concerns whether errors and sensitivity to processing noise arise because of low drift rate, δ, in the case of perceptual ambiguity, or adoption of a low threshold, θ, to engender fast responding. There is nonetheless obvious similarity between metacognitive judgements of confidence and error likelihood, and it is therefore unsurprising that models of error monitoring turn out to complement those more recently developed in perceptual decision-making research.


Post-decision processing in error monitoring

Rabbitt and co-workers' pioneering work beginning in the 1960s established that error monitoring relies on post-decision processing. Their experiments showed that people can very reliably detect and correct their own errors without requiring explicit feedback, but that this ability is impaired when stimulus duration is reduced, suggesting its dependence on continued processing of the stimulus after an initial error (which is curtailed when stimuli are very briefly presented). Error monitoring is also impaired when subsequent stimuli appear soon after the initial response, and responses to those later stimuli are themselves postponed following errors, consistent with the notion that this monitoring involves the same mechanisms as the initial decision.

Summarizing these findings, Rabbitt likened evidence accumulation in decision-making to votes in a committee, in which incorrect decisions are sometimes made on the basis of incomplete information, but ‘as subsequent votes come in, a more accurate consensus will accumulate and the earlier mistake will become apparent’. Thus, errors are characterized by biphasic evidence accumulation, with initial accumulation in favour of the incorrect response followed by later drift towards the correct decision (as the trial-average drift rate regresses to the true mean). By contrast, continued evaluation following correct responses tends simply to reinforce the original decision. This model is an obvious precursor to more recent accounts of decision confidence and changes of mind.

All subsequent models of error detection have adopted Rabbitt's broad framework, with debate focusing instead on the precise mechanism by which post-decision processing leads to error detection. illustrates some key model variants. Within a standard DDM framework, errors could be detected as successive crossings of decision boundaries for the two competing responses or as ‘double crossings’ of a single decision bound—both close relatives of Resulaj et al.'s notion of a change-of-mind bound. Errors can also be detected in terms of the occurrence of uncertainty—or conflict—in the decision process after an initial response, or as inconsistency between the outcomes of parallel decision processes at different processing stages (e.g. perceptual categorization and response selection). While varying in their details and precise predictions, common to all proposals is the claim that metacognitive accuracy judgements depend on post-decision processing.

In effect, applying the framework provided by the DDM and its variants, one is obliged to assume that error detection reduces to error correction: that errors are detected whenever corrective activity reaches a criteria level—the change-of-mind bound. However, this conclusion is difficult to reconcile with evidence that error correction and detection are at least partly dissociable, a finding that was again presciently reported in Rabbitt's seminal work. Rabbitt's studies demonstrated that error corrections are a relatively automatic and unreflective consequence of post-decision processing. Thus, they can be extremely fast, occurring within 10–20 ms of the initial error, and may be produced even when subjects are instructed to avoid doing so. In contrast, explicit detection and signalling of errors is much slower, voluntary, more prone to interference by distracting tasks, and more sensitive to cognitive decline in normal ageing. Indeed, people sometimes remain unaware of errors that they nevertheless correct. Collectively, these differences suggest that explicit error detection cannot be a mere consequence of post-decision correction: further processing or evaluation must intervene between initial correction and later explicit awareness that an error has occurred. Consistent with this analysis, recent investigations have identified dissociable neural correlates of error correction and detection.


Neural substrates of error monitoring

Research interest in error monitoring increased substantially following the discovery of scalp EEG potentials that reliably occur time-locked to decision errors. Most studies have used the Eriksen flanker task, in which subjects perform a speeded categorization of a central target (e.g. H or S), while ignoring flanking distractors that are sometimes compatible (e.g. HHH) and sometimes incompatible (e.g. SHS) with that target. With modest speed pressure, error rates on incompatible trials can exceed 20 per cent. Following such errors, a negative event-related potential over frontocentral sites is observed within 100 ms of the incorrect response, followed by a later positive wave peaking 200–400 ms later over parietal cortex. Labelled the error-related negativity (ERN/Ne) and error positivity (Pe), respectively, these EEG components have been widely studied to provide insight into error monitoring in healthy and clinical populations.

Converging evidence has identified anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) as the source of the ERN. For example, in simultaneous EEG–fMRI recordings, single-trial ERN amplitude correlates reliably only with activity in a focused ACC source. The source of the Pe is less well characterized, but evidence that it is a variant of the well-studied P3 component would imply widely distributed neural generators in parietal and prefrontal cortex. The P3 has been suggested to reflect the distributed action of norepinephrine released by the locus coeruleus brainstem nucleus in response to motivationally salient events during decision-making.

The functional significance of the ERN and Pe is a matter of ongoing debate. Competing theories of the ERN propose a role in error detection, reinforcement learning and conflict monitoring; while theories of the Pe include conscious awareness of errors, affective responses and behavioural adjustments to avoid further errors. These debates notwithstanding, it is now clear that the ERN and Pe dissociably map onto processes related to error correction and error detection, respectively. Thus, ERN onset coincides with the onset of error-correcting activity as revealed through EMG recordings, typically around the time of error commission, and its amplitude varies with both the speed and probability of error correction. In contrast, Pe amplitude is insensitive to the strength of correcting activity when error detection rates are controlled. Conversely, although both the ERN and Pe are found to covary with subjective ratings of response accuracy, correlations involving the ERN disappear when the two components are carefully dissociated. In antisaccade tasks in which subjects correct all of their errors but detect only half of them, ERN amplitude is equivalent for aware and unaware errors, whereas the Pe is robustly observed only when subjects detect their errors. Taken together, these findings suggest that whereas the ERN directly indexes automatic post-decision processes leading to rapid error correction, the later Pe is selectively associated with explicit detection and signalling of errors. These results thus provide converging evidence for the view that error correction and detection reflect distinct processes.

A recent study has shed light on specifically how the Pe relates to error detection. Subjects performed a difficult brightness discrimination under speed pressure to induce a mixture of errors resulting from perceptual ambiguity and decision urgency. After each response, they made a binary correct/error judgement, with monetary incentives varied across blocks to encourage either liberal or conservative error signalling. Signal detection analysis indicated that subjects’ accuracy judgements could be well fit by assuming that these judgements reflected a continuum of confidence (from sure correct to sure incorrect), with subjects applying a criterion—a metacognitive θ—that varied according to the incentive regime. Critically, error signalling performance was closely related to between-condition and trial-by-trial variation in Pe amplitude (but not the ERN). That is, Pe amplitude appeared to provide a direct neural index of continuously varying decision confidence on which subjects based their metacognitive judgements, with categorical signalling of errors occurring when confidence that the response was wrong exceeded some criterial level.


Impact of error monitoring on behaviour

The research described above documents the mechanistic and neural basis of error monitoring. A parallel line of research has considered the impact of error monitoring on future behaviour. Much of this work has focused on the finding that subjects usually respond more slowly on trials immediately following errors. Although this effect at least partly reflects the distracting occurrence of a rare event, as errors typically are, a consensus view holds that post-error slowing reflects strategic adaptation to prevent further errors. EEG studies have subsequently shown that the degree of observed slowing scales with the magnitude of error-related ERN/Pe activity. Computational models implementing error-related control over distance-to-bound, |θ|, account for detailed properties of empirically observed post-error slowing. In one class of model, detection of response uncertainty (conflict) immediately following error commission leads to an increase in the bound—and, hence, more cautious responding—on subsequent trials. Recent extensions of this idea suggest that conflict detection may also be used to adjust the bound dynamically even as a decision is being made.

Error signals not only support subtle adjustments that optimize online decision-making, they also play a key role in longer term adjustments during learning. Holroyd & Coles, for example, suggest that the ERN reflects reinforcement learning of action values. They showed that the ERN migrates in time as new stimulus–response mappings are learned, from initially being triggered by environmental feedback to later being driven by internal representations of the learned mappings, a pattern that mimics the migration of dopaminergic reward prediction error signals from unconditioned rewards to predictive stimuli during conditioning. Meanwhile, fMRI activity in ACC and neighbouring cortex at the time of an incorrect response have been shown to predict response accuracy on later presentations of the relevant stimulus.

Most studies of post-error adjustments have focused on the ERN and ACC, reflecting wide interest in the role of ACC in reinforcement learning, rather than on the later Pe component. However, the ERN and Pe typically covary across conditions and, when the two components are dissociated, post-error adjustments are only observed following detected errors on which a Pe component is present, suggesting that the latter may be a more direct correlate of the learning mechanisms by which future behaviour is adapted following an error.


Integrative models of decision confidence and error monitoring

The discussion above highlights convergent evolution in work on decision confidence and error monitoring, suggesting that common principles govern metacognitive judgements regardless of whether errors arise because of intrinsic task difficulty (low drift rate, δ) or because of externally imposed decision urgency (low threshold, θ). In what follows, we consider the implications of this convergence for future research, both positive (in terms of mutually informative lessons) and negative (in terms of shared limitations).


Converging themes

Theories of decision confidence and error monitoring each emphasize the importance of post-decision processing, and likewise point to a key dissociation between, on the one hand, continued processing of stimulus information within the decision-making system (leading to changes of mind and error corrections) and, on the other, the formulation and expression of explicit judgements of confidence and accuracy. The literatures have developed these ideas in complementary directions, such that each literature offers valuable lessons for the other. First, whereas confidence is typically characterized as varying along a continuum, and formalized as such in accounts such as the 2DSD model, error detection is often characterized as an all-or-none process. Thus, according to many current theories of error monitoring, binary yes/no error judgements are an intrinsic feature of the monitoring system rather than a reflection of the arbitrary metacognitive decision that subjects are asked to make. As such, these theories cannot explain how subjects are able to express graded confidence in their accuracy judgements.

Conversely, the preceding review of work on error monitoring identifies important limitations in current theories of decision confidence. This review suggests that the current debate between decisional locus and post-decisional models of decision confidence will very likely be resolved in favour of the latter, but that even these post-decisional theories will need modification to accommodate evidence that metacognitive awareness (cf. error detection and the Pe) cannot be reduced simply to post-decision processing (cf. error correction and the ERN)—the two are at least partly dissociable. Perhaps more informative still will be exploration of the role of confidence judgements in guiding future actions: whereas research on decision confidence has largely focused on how confidence estimates are derived, a major focus of error-monitoring research has been on how this kind of metacognitive information might be used to modify behaviour both in the short- and long-term. Borrowing these insights, we might predict that parametric estimates of confidence could support finer-grained control of behaviour than can be achieved through binary categorization of responses as correct or incorrect—for example, by allowing parametric variation in post-error slowing or by providing a scalar prediction error signal to support reinforcement learning. Thus, confidence estimates could provide useful information in optimizing the rate of learning: one might predict that people will pay greater attention to environmental feedback following responses in which they have less confidence.


Shared limitations

As well as sharing complementary strengths, the theories also share common weaknesses. In particular, like the models of decision-making on which they are based, current theories of confidence and error monitoring have focused almost exclusively on decisions that are discrete and punctate in time: a decision is made when a boundary is reached; errors are detected when a second change-of-mind bound is crossed; and confidence is estimated at the time of a later metacognitive probe. Characterizing behaviour as a series of discrete decisions, each subject to independent metacognitive scrutiny, is a useful convenience when developing experimental tests and formal models. However, it remains unclear whether the findings will scale up to explain real-world decisions and actions that are fluid, temporally extended and embedded in the broader context of evolving behavioural goals.

Let us revisit for a moment our opening example of cycling along on a winding country lane. Obviously, we do make occasional discrete categorical decisions—for example, when choosing between two available paths at a fork in the road. However, most of our decisions and actions unfold gradually, shaped by our interactions with the environment and an ever-changing stream of incoming sensory information, as exemplified by the continuous, subtle adjustments of handlebars and brakes needed to maintain direction and balance when cycling. Current theories of metacognition require a clear division in time between cognitive decision-making and meta-cognitive evaluation, with the latter beginning when the former ends (‘post-decision processing’). However, for continuous and extended actions, there is no definable time-point at which a specific decision is finalized and metacognitive evaluation begins. Most current theories are therefore ill-suited to describing the temporally extended actions, comprising hundreds or thousands of micro-decisions, that characterize everyday behaviour.

Indeed, decisions that initially appear discrete and categorical may turn out, on closer inspection, to be graded and transitory. For example, in the Eriksen flanker task, overt responses occur tightly time-locked to the point at which lateralized activity in motor cortex exceeds a threshold value, just as saccadic eye movements appear to be triggered according to a threshold firing rate for LIP neurons, suggestive of a fixed decision point after which an action is initiated. However, fine-grained analyses reveal graded and continuous information flow at every stage, even downstream of motor cortex. Thus, within a single trial, motor cortex activity may lateralize first towards one response then towards the other; small EMG twitches in one finger may be followed by full movements of another; and overt actions themselves may vary in force in a graded manner, for example, with incorrect actions executed less forcefully than correct ones. Meanwhile, categorical or economic judgements about visual information are often preceded by exploratory eye movements, which may themselves constitute interim decisions en route to the eventual choice. In such systems, there is no single, final decision point that could mark the beginning of metacognitive evaluation. Detailed analyses of neural markers of metacognition point towards a similar conclusion: error-related EEG activity is not only observed following overt incorrect actions, but also following ‘partial’ errors in which the incorrect muscles twitch, but the incorrect action is not produced and, crucially, in a graded fashion as a function of the level of sub-threshold cortical activity favouring an incorrect response. Metacognition appears to be graded and continuous in just the same manner as the underlying decision process.

Human decision-making also has a continuous quality when viewed over longer timescales, with individual decisions chained into sequences that serve longer-term behavioural goals. Thus, actions that reflect definitive choices at a lower goal level (e.g. movements of the arm, shifts of posture) may constitute reversible, interim choices at a higher goal level (e.g. turning left at a fork in the road), and even a commitment to an individual right or left turn might be just a partial commitment to a yet higher level goal (e.g. reaching a specified destination). This form of hierarchical structure is built into many recent theories of the computational and neural basis of action selection, in which common principles of selection and control are held to operate at each level of hierarchical abstraction. Recent findings indicate that metacognitive processes are similarly sensitive to this hierarchical structure. For example, errors that are equally discrepant in terms of low-level actions are treated very differently according to their impact on global task performance. Little is currently known about the mechanisms by which metacognitive judgements might be embedded in ongoing higher level behaviour in this way.

Thus, a crucial limitation of current metacognitive theories is that they do not reflect the way that our confidence in our actions contributes to fluid, structured sensorimotor behaviour. Rather, they consider that errors are processed in an all-or-nothing fashion, for example, when a post-decision process crosses a metacognitive decision bound. In what follows, we consider another way of thinking about decision confidence that is not subject to these limitations.


Future directions

Addressing the challenges outlined above will require the development of new models that consider not just discrete, binary choices, but also the kinds of extended, goal-oriented actions that characterize everyday human behaviour. We conclude by considering one promising extension of current decision models, which addresses the issue of the reliability of evidence in a manner that opens intriguing new avenues for understanding how metacognitive evaluation might occur for continuous, extended actions.


Evidence reliability

Formal accounts of categorical decisions, such as the DDM, are often illustrated by analogy to court of law, in which the jury weighs up evidence favouring the innocence or guilt of the defendant. However, this analogy also highlights an inconsistency between current decision models and choices made in the real world: that in the latter, we usually consider the extent to which we trust the evidence relevant for a decision. For example, in a law court, evidence from a trustworthy source (for example, official telephone records) might weigh more heavily in a jury's deliberations than evidence from an unreliable source (for example, a witness with a vested interest). Correspondingly, careful signal detection analyses have revealed that human observers are exquisitely sensitivity to evidence reliability when sampling from multiple sources of information.

Yet, most currently popular models of perceptual decisions offer no way of expressing the trust or distrust associated with the evidence accumulated; all sources of evidence are combined in the common currency of the DV, which then gives the strength of evidence as a simple scalar value (the vertical location of the diffusing particle in the DDM, or the magnitude of the evidence variable in SDT). Once factored into the DV in this way, the reliability of evidence has no further impact on the decision-making process. This feature contrasts with some accounts of economic choices, in which sensitivity to risk (i.e. outcome variance) as well as value (i.e. outcome mean) has been documented at the behavioural and neurophysiological levels.

Mathematically, the reliability of perceptual evidence is orthogonal to its strength, because the mean and the variance represent different moments of a probability distribution. Bayesian models that exploit this point—representing evidence as a probability distribution with a given mean (evidence strength) and variance (evidence reliability)—have been used to calculate ideal estimates of expected value in economic choice tasks. Applied to perceptual decision tasks, the notion would be that the diffusing particle of the DDM is more accurately conceived of as a probability distribution that evolves across samples, with the central tendency of that distribution analogous to the vertical location of the particle. Crucially, the variance of this distribution provides additional information—specifically, a representation of evidence reliability in terms of the precision of the mean—that is not made explicit in the standard DDM (by precision, we mean the inverse of the standard deviation).

Recently, it has been shown that neural network models in which LIP neurons encode the full posterior probability distribution associated with a stimulus can capture behaviour and neural dynamics occurring during psychophysical discrimination tasks in primates. This result suggests that precision may be encoded in the variance of firing rates across a neural population, thus signalling evidence reliability in much the same way that mean firing rate of the population encodes evidence strength. Relatedly, Ratcliff & Starns have recently proposed a model of decision confidence in which the decision-relevant evidence on a single trial is not a scalar estimate, but a distribution of possible values, allowing parametric estimates of confidence in the choice to be calculated as the integral of this distribution falling within graded confidence bounds. Together, these findings open promising new avenues for research into the neural basis of categorical choice.


Confidence revisited

We propose that evidence strength and reliability are encoded in parallel during evidence accumulation, and that this framework provides an intriguing new way of thinking about decision confidence—as the precision of evidence accumulated during a single trial. This representation of confidence differs in two critical respects from the models described above: it is based on an intrinsic feature of the decision process—variance in the evidence encountered—and it is available continuously and instantaneously. In contrast, existing models suggest that metacognitive evaluations are derived indirectly by comparing representations of the DV from two (or more) discrete time points. Precision thus provides a more suitable basis for metacognitive evaluation in the kinds of temporally extended tasks discussed above, in which no discrete decision point divides cognitive decisions from metacognitive evaluation.

This hypothesis, though speculative at this point, has several attractive features. Firstly, it is consistent with the evidence described above on post-decision processing because instantaneous precision will tend to be highly correlated with later variability in the DV (the basis of most current models of metacognitive judgements): variable evidence will give rise to frequent errors, and these errors will be accompanied by low estimates of precision at the time of the initial response and a high probability of later changes of mind or error correction. Thus, the precision account agrees that existing theories fit the data well, but suggests that they may do so for the wrong reasons. Secondly, the model is able to describe situations in which evidence quality varies even within a single trial, something that standard models cannot achieve. In fact, by keeping track of the likely variability of information in the external world, Bayesian accounts can optimally distinguish true state changes in the generative information giving rise to the senses from noise. Precision estimates are thus particularly useful in situations where the causes of perceptual evidence may change unpredictably over time, and as such may provide a better account of the sort of fluid, ongoing sensorimotor integration that characterizes everyday activities such as riding a bicycle.

The hypothesis also leads to clear and testable predictions about the sensitivity of human decision-making to evidence reliability. Firstly, it predicts that variability of evidence within a trial should both reduce accuracy and lengthen RT, because during sequential sampling, the precision of the mean increases more slowly when the samples are drawn from a more variable distribution. This prediction has recently been confirmed in an experiment in which observers made discrimination judgements on the average feature (e.g. colour) of an array of multiple elements presented simultaneously on the screen. Critically, this multi-element averaging task allowed the experimenters to manipulate the mean and the variance of the relevant feature in an orthogonal fashion. The results showed that observers were slower to discriminate more variable arrays, a result that is predicted by the precision account but not by standard accumulation models such as the DDM. Moreover, observers in this study tended to downweight outlying or otherwise untrustworthy evidence, much like a statistician might exclude an outlier from a sample of data. Although this study did not assess subjects’ second-order confidence in their decision, the precision account makes the clear prediction that in the multi-element task, both subjective confidence and the rate of occurrence of changes of mind will depend on array variability to a greater extent than on its mean, a prediction ripe for future testing.

Finally, this conception of decision confidence makes direct contact with broader theories of the role of metacognitive evaluation in behavioural control. In particular, because precision is closely related to the concept of decision conflict—greater variance in evidence should result in greater conflict between competing response options—the theory can inherit ideas from research on decision conflict about how precision estimates might be used to guide both current performance (e.g. through dynamic modulation of decision bounds) and future behaviour (e.g. through modulation of learning rate in relation to environmental signals of success or failure). As such, the precision model not only provides a formally specified account of decision confidence, but also leads to immediate suggestions about the use of confidence judgements in the optimization of behaviour.


Conclusion

Formal models such as the DDM have proved extremely valuable in understanding human and animal decision-making, by situating experimental observations of behaviour and neural activity within a precisely specified and normatively motivated framework. Direct extensions of these models have proved equally useful in probing the metacognitive processes by which we evaluate and express our degree of confidence in our decisions. In particular, significant convergence in methods and theories of decision confidence and error monitoring suggest that common principles may govern different types of metacognitive judgements.

There is nonetheless important scope for current models to consider decision-making and metacognitive evaluation in situations that encompass not only simple, punctate choices, but also the kinds of extended, goal-directed decisions and actions that typify human behaviour outside the experimental laboratory. We have proposed one such extension: the hypothesis that people are sensitive not only to the strength of evidence they encounter as they make a decision, but also to the reliability of that evidence. This simple proposal has far-reaching implications: it immediately suggests a novel source of information—evidence precision—that could guide metacognitive evaluation. Future developments in theories of human decision-making promise to have similarly profound implications for our understanding of the way in which people evaluate their decisions in the service of adapting and optimizing those decisions in the face of an uncertain, complex and ever-changing environment.


The neural basis of metacognitive ability

Stephen M Fleming, Raymond J Dolan — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2012. PMC3318765, CC BY 3.0.

Ability in various cognitive domains is often assessed by measuring task performance, such as the accuracy of a perceptual categorization. A similar analysis can be applied to metacognitive reports about a task to quantify the degree to which an individual is aware of his or her success or failure. Here, we review the psychological and neural underpinnings of metacognitive accuracy, drawing on research in memory and decision-making. These data show that metacognitive accuracy is dissociable from task performance and varies across individuals. Convergent evidence indicates that the function of the rostral and dorsal aspect of the lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) is important for the accuracy of retrospective judgements of performance. In contrast, prospective judgements of performance may depend upon medial PFC. We close with a discussion of how metacognitive processes relate to concepts of cognitive control, and propose a neural synthesis in which dorsolateral and anterior prefrontal cortical subregions interact with interoceptive cortices (cingulate and insula) to promote accurate judgements of performance.

Keywords: metacognition, confidence, conflict, prefrontal cortex, functional magnetic resonance imaging, individual differences

I am not yet able, as the Delphic inscription has it, to know myself, so it seems to me ridiculous, when I do not yet know that, to investigate irrelevant things.Plato's Phaedrus, 229E


Introduction

The notion that accurate self-knowledge has value, and is something to strive for, has preoccupied thinkers since Socrates. But, as the quotation from Plato illustrates, self-knowledge is not always (or even often) evident, and at best tends to be a noisy and inaccurate impression of one's mental milieu. Empirical work in the psychological sciences has thrown up counterintuitive examples of self-knowledge being confabulated, dissociated from reality or otherwise inaccurate. To take one striking case, when decisions about facial attractiveness or supermarket goods are surreptitiously reversed, subjects are often unaware of these reversals, and go on to confabulate explanations of why they chose options they had in fact rejected. Furthermore, self-assessments of personality and cognitive biases tend to be poorer than similar assessments applied to others, leading to an ‘introspection illusion’. Such subjective inaccuracy perhaps accounts for the demise of an introspectionist method in the late nineteenth century: if verbal reports vary from setting to setting, and can be contradicted from trial to trial, then what hope is there for an objective science of the subjective?.

The very notion that an individual can turn his or her mental faculties inward was considered logically incoherent by Comte, who thought it paradoxical that the mind might divide into two to permit self-observation. We now understand the brain as a network of regions working in concert, and thus, it is perhaps unsurprising that one set of regions (such as the prefrontal cortex: PFC) might process, hierarchically, information arising from lower levels (such as primary sensory regions). Indeed, several recent models of local and large-scale brain function rely on hierarchy as a principal organizing factor. That self-knowledge, and its accuracy, is under neural control is supported by mounting evidence in the neuropsychological literature, some of which will be reviewed later in this article. For example, in cases of traumatic injury to the frontal lobes, individuals may have deficits in self-knowledge of altered cognition and personality, as measured by the discrepancy between reports from the patient and family members. Such studies have focused on alterations in self-related, or autonoetic, metacognition, but analogous discrepancies can be measured in assessments of task performance in healthy individuals.

By focusing on self-reports about memory performance—metacognitive reports—Flavell provided a systematic framework for the study of self-knowledge in healthy individuals. Here, the metacognitive report is treated as an object of study in its own right, and the accuracy of such reports (as dissociated from accuracy, or performance, on the task itself) provide an empirical scaffold upon which to build studies of self-knowledge. An influential model of metacognition was developed to account for behavioural dissociations between the ‘object’ level—cognition, or, more correctly, task performance—and the ‘meta’ level, conceptualized as both monitoring and controlling the object level. This approach shares similarities with an influential model of executive function. The two-level framework has been extended to study monitoring of perception, decision-making, sense of agency and learning. To the extent that the meta level imperfectly monitors the object level, self-reports about cognition will be inaccurate, perhaps manifesting as a lack of awareness of the object level.

Despite progress in the definition and measurement of metacognition, the psychological and neural underpinnings of metacognitive accuracy remain ill understood. In this paper, we review different approaches to eliciting metacognitive reports and quantifying their accuracy, and consider psychological and computational explanations for dissociations between metacognitive accuracy and task performance. We go on to consider recent studies that apply convergent neuroscience methodologies—functional and structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and neuropsychological approaches—to reveal cortical substrates mediating differences in metacognitive accuracy both between and within individuals. We end with a discussion of how metacognitive processes relate to neuroscientific notions of cognitive control, and propose a synthesis wherein dorsolateral and anterior prefrontal cortical subregions interact with interoceptive cortices (cingulate and insula) to promote metacognitive accuracy.


Measurement of metacognition

There are several flavours of metacognitive report, but all share the elicitation of subjective beliefs about cognition—how much do I know (viz. what can I report) about ongoing task performance? In this section, we review the behavioural methods available to the researcher interested in metacognition, focusing primarily on measures employed in the cognitive neuroscience studies that are discussed in subsequent sections.

A first distinction is that judgements can either be prospective, occurring prior to performance of a task, or retrospective, occurring after task completion. In metamemory research, prospective judgements include feelings of knowing (FOK) and judgements of learning (JOL). A JOL elicits a belief during learning about how successful recall will be for a particular item on subsequent testing. In contrast, an FOK is a judgement about a different aspect of memory, namely that of knowing the answer to a particular question despite being unable to explicitly recall it. FOKs are usually studied by first asking the participants to recall answers to general knowledge questions, and, for answers they cannot recall, to predict whether they might be able to recognize the answer from a list of alternatives. Related to FOKs are tip-of-the-tongue states, in which an item cannot be recalled despite a feeling that retrieval is possible.

Retrospective reports can be similarly elicited by asking the subject to give an additional report or commentary over and above their initial forced-choice response. For example, Peirce & Jastrow asked observers to rate their degree of confidence in a perceptual judgement using the following scale:

0 denoted absence of any preference for one answer over its opposite, so that it seemed nonsensical to answer at all. ‘1’ denoted a distinct leaning to one alternative. ‘2’ denoted some little confidence of being right. ‘3’ denoted as strong a confidence as one would have about such sensations.

Since this seminal work, asking for confidence-in-accuracy has become a standard tool for eliciting judgements of performance in a variety of settings. One potential problem with eliciting subjective confidence is that of reliability: why should the subject be motivated to reveal his or her true confidence, when there is little incentive to do so? In addition, the necessarily subjective instructions given when eliciting reports of confidence preclude the use of these measures in non-human animal species. To address these concerns, Kunimoto and colleagues introduced wagers contingent on the correctness of the decision as an intuitive measure of retrospective confidence. In the simplest form of post-decision wagering (PDW), a participant is asked to gamble on whether their response was correct. If the decision is correct, the wager amount is kept; if it is incorrect, the amount is lost. The size of the chosen gamble is assumed to reflect a subject's confidence in his or her decision. In the same spirit as PDW, the Lottery Rule aims to elicit true underlying decision confidence, and is similar to the Becker–DeGroot–Marschak procedure used to elicit item values in behavioural economics.

Once a metacognitive judgement is elicited, how might we assess its accuracy? Again, several, often complementary, methods are available. Metacognitive accuracy is defined by how closely metacognitive judgements track ongoing task performance. Crucially, therefore, all measures require that an independent measure of the object level—task performance—is acquired, in order to quantify the relationship between the meta and object levels. For example, after asking for an FOK judgement, we might assess whether the proportion of times a participant is indeed able to recognize the correct, but hitherto unrecalled, item from a list of alternatives. Then, by plotting the strength of the JOL or FOK against objective memory performance (actual recall success for JOLs, and recognition performance for FOKs), a measure of metacognitive accuracy can be derived from the associated correlation score. Similar confidence-accuracy correlations can be computed for retrospective confidence judgements. If the metacognitive report bears some relation to task performance, then these correlation coefficients will be significantly non-zero.

A related approach quantifies the accuracy of metacognitive assessments using the logic of signal detection theory (SDT), which assesses how faithfully an organism separates signal from noise. In standard applications of SDT (type 1), sensitivity is defined by how well an observer can discriminate an objective state of the world (e.g. the presence or absence of a stimulus; a). By applying similar logic to metacognitive reports, the objective state of the world becomes the subject's trial-by-trial task performance (correct or incorrect; a) and the subjective report is now a judgement of that performance. An advantage of the SDT approach is that it dissociates bias from sensitivity: in other words, measures of metacognitive accuracy are relatively unaffected by an observer's overall tendency to use higher or lower confidence ratings (b; although). Further, it naturally connects a process-level characterization of the relationship between the object (type 1) and meta level (type 2) to measures of behaviour, and this relationship can be taken into account to provide an unbiased measure of metacognitive accuracy. This generative aspect of SDT will be discussed further in a following section.

Before closing our discussion on measures of metacognition, we note that a separate line of research has assessed the extent to which humans and other species use, or represent, uncertainty about the consequences of their actions to optimize decision-making (see for reviews). To highlight one example, Barthelme & Mamassian showed that when human observers are allowed to choose between pairs of visual stimuli upon which to carry out a task, they systematically chose the less uncertain, thus improving their performance. Related work has demonstrated that subjects use knowledge of uncertainty to optimally bias decision-making in perceptual and motor tasks, and that species as diverse as dolphins, pigeons and monkeys can use an ‘opt-out’ response to improve their reward rate when decisions are uncertain. Recent single-neuron recording studies have begun to outline candidate mechanisms for a representation of uncertainty in the decision system. However, and crucially for the purposes of the present paper, use-of-uncertainty measures do not dissociate metacognition from task performance on a trial-by-trial basis, and thus cannot be used to study mechanisms underlying beliefs about performance. For example, on each trial of the ‘opt-out’ paradigm, the animal either chooses to complete the task, or opt-out. On trials where the animal opts-out (uses a ‘metacognitive’ response), we are unable to measure performance, as no task is completed. On trials where the animal does not opt-out, performance measures are all we have. Thus, measures of metacognitive accuracy cannot be computed based on pairwise correlations between the two response types.


Psychological determinants of metacognitive accuracy

In healthy individuals, metacognitive judgements are usually predictive of subsequent or past task performance. What, then, underlies this ability to know that we know? On a direct-access view, metamemorial judgements are based upon a survey of memory contents, and thus draw upon the same information as a subsequent recognition or recall phase. In contrast, inferential accounts suggest that JOL, FOK and confidence judgements draw upon various mnemonic cues that may only be partially related to the target (see for a review). Such cues include the fluency or ease with which information is processed, the accessibility or relatedness of cue information to the target and, for retrospective confidence judgements, the speed of a previous decision. Because the available cues may only be indirectly related to the target, inferential accounts naturally accommodate dissociations between memory performance and metacognitive accuracy; in contrast, direct-access accounts predict a tight relationship between subjective and objective indices of knowledge.

A complementary perspective on the antecedents of metacognitive reports is provided by type 2 SDT. Consider a perceptual decision task where post-decision wagers are elicited to tap knowledge of task performance. Optimal wagering behaviour requires computing the conditional probability of being correct given a previous choice [p(correct|choice)] to decide whether to wager high or low. There are various proposals as to how this might be achieved. In an echo of direct-access accounts of metamemory discussed above, most involve tracking the strength of the underlying evidence entering into the choice. Galvin and colleagues showed that the conditional probability of being correct or incorrect for a given decision signal is a simple linear transformation of type 1 probability distributions. Similarly, in a dynamic situation, Vickers proposed that decision confidence could be derived from the absolute distance between the winning and losing integrators in an evidence accumulation framework. Confidence, therefore, is equated with the difficulty of the decision in these approaches. Two corollaries arise from this ‘direct translation hypothesis’. First, given that confidence is equated with choice probability (as derived from information governing choice), direct-translation approaches cannot accommodate dissociations between the object and meta level. Second, if both performance and metacognitive judgements draw upon the same information, metacognitive accuracy or the ability to discriminate correct from incorrect decisions, always increases as task performance itself increases. Importantly, both these hypotheses have been empirically falsified: for the same level of task performance, judgement confidence may differ considerably between conditions, and, when performance is held constant using a staircase procedure, metacognitive accuracy varies across individuals, and can be dissociated from performance through pharmacological, neural and task-based manipulations.

Empirical dissociations between first-order and second-order components of decision-making have prompted a search for models that can accommodate such findings. Recent models have been couched in an ‘evidence accumulation’ framework, in which samples of data are accumulated over time in order to model the temporal evolution of a decision. Del Cul et al. proposed a dual-route evidence accumulation framework in which evidence for behaviour (a forced-choice report of stimulus identity) and evidence for subjective report (visibility) were accumulated separately. The fit of this model could account for the observed decoupling of subjective reports from performance in patients with damage to the PFC (see the study of Maniscalco & Lau for an alternative account). In a related approach, Pleskac & Busemeyer devised an evidence accumulation scheme that could account for a wide range of empirical regularities governing the relationship between choice and confidence ratings. The solution here was to allow accumulation to continue beyond the time at which the first-order decision is made. The same noisy accumulator is then accessed to form the confidence judgement at a later timepoint. Interestingly, this model makes strong predictions about post-decision neural activity in the parietal and frontal cortices previously associated with pre-decision evidence accumulation, and recent developments of PDW methods in non-human primates may allow this and related hypotheses to be tested.

Despite being dissociable, metacognitive accuracy does generally scale with task performance. Note that this regularity differs conceptually from the fact that trial-by-trial judgements of confidence tend to correlate with performance; such scaling is, after all, what measures of metacognitive accuracy attempt to capture. Instead, it is the fact that, between sessions, or individuals, metacognitive accuracy itself covaries with performance on the task (b). A tied relationship between performance and metacognition presents a particular problem for studies of the neural correlates of metacognitive ability: how are we to disentangle brain systems involved in metacognition from those involved in performing the task itself? In the following section, we keep this confound of performance in mind, and consider the extent to which it is addressed by studies of the neural basis of metacognitive accuracy.


Neural basis of metacognitive accuracy


Studies of metamemory

Initial evidence regarding the neural basis of metacognition was obtained from neuropsychological cases. Hirst and colleagues suggested that metamemory might be impaired in patients with Korsakoff's syndrome, a neurological disorder characterized by severe anterograde amnesia that occurs as a result of chronic alcohol abuse and nutritional deficiency. Structural brain changes in Korsakoff's include increases in cerebrospinal fluid and severe volume loss in the orbitofrontal cortices and thalamus. Shimamura & Squire found that Korsakoff's patients have a selective impairment in the accuracy of FOK judgements compared with an amnesic control group, despite being equated on recognition memory performance. These findings suggested that metamemory impairment is due to damage in brain regions other than medial temporal lobe and diencephalic midline structures associated with amnesia. In line with this hypothesis, subsequent studies found that non-amnesic patients with frontal lobe damage also exhibit poor metamemory accuracy (e.g.; see for a review).

While implicating frontal lobe structures in metacognitive accuracy, these early studies lacked anatomical specificity. Using lesion overlap measurements, Schnyer and colleagues found that damage to the right ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) was associated with decreased FOK accuracy but intact confidence judgements, suggesting a possible dissociation between brain systems supporting different classes of metamemorial judgements. Patients in Schnyer et al.'s study also showed deficits in memory performance, but impairment in FOK accuracy could not be explained by these changes in performance alone. In support of a selective role for medial PFC in FOK judgements, patients with lesion overlap in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) who were matched in recognition performance to a control group showed a selective FOK deficit, despite intact confidence judgements. The reverse dissociation was reported by Pannu et al., who found that deficits in retrospective confidence judgements were predominantly associated with lateral frontal lesions. As we discuss below, together this evidence suggests that prospective judgements are supported by medial PFC function, whereas retrospective judgements depend on lateral PFC.

Complementary functional brain imaging studies have shown that regions in the medial and lateral PFC are active during metamemorial judgements, with activity in PFC modulated by both prospective and retrospective confidence judgements. VMPFC (peak Montreal Neurological Institute coordinate: −3, 30, −18) showed greater activity during accurate FOK judgements, and increased connectivity with medial temporal lobe memory structures in the FOK condition compared with a low-level control task. Complementing this work, individual differences in metacognitive accuracy for prospective JOLs correlated with VMPFC activity (peak: −11, 42, −26) on accurate, but not inaccurate, prediction trials; these differences were not explained by individual differences in memory performance.


Retrospective confidence judgements in psychophysics

Other studies have begun to harness the methods of psychophysics to tightly clamp or adjust for differences in performance while simultaneously studying metacognition and its neural substrates.

As an example of this approach, Lau and Passingham matched performance between two visual masking conditions, but found differences in threshold for metacognitive commentaries about the stimulus (‘seen’ responses) that were associated with activity in left dorsolateral PFC (dlPFC; peak: −46, 48, 14). Confirming a causal role for PFC in subjective report threshold, patients with lesions to rostrolateral prefrontal cortex (rlPFC, BA10) have an increased threshold for producing metacognitive commentaries about a stimulus compared with controls, despite objective performance being matched between groups. The peak correlation between lesion and decrease in subjective report threshold was seen in left BA10 (peak: −32, 54, −6).

Taking an individual differences approach, Fleming et al. constrained perceptual decision performance to be near-threshold (71%) through use of a staircase procedure, while collecting retrospective confidence ratings. Considerable variation in metacognitive accuracy (using type 2 SDT analysis) was found despite task performance remaining constant across individuals. Through use of structural brain imaging, this variance in metacognitive accuracy was shown to positively correlate with grey matter volume in right rlPFC (BA10; peak: 24, 65, 18; a), and greater metacognitive accuracy was associated with increased white matter integrity (fractional anisotropy) in a region of the corpus callosum known to project to the rlPFC. Such findings are consistent with individual differences in localized brain structure affecting a region's functional properties. In a complementary study using functional MRI, subjects performed a visual working-memory test and provided retrospective confidence ratings. Metacognitive accuracy as determined by the gamma statistic correlated with the level of activity in right posterior-lateral BA10 (peak: 16, 56, 28), despite being uncorrelated with task performance (b).

While correlational analyses can reveal candidate brain regions mediating metacognitive accuracy, confirmation of their necessity ultimately requires intervention studies. By applying repetitive TMS to temporarily inactivate bilateral dlPFC, Rounis et al. selectively decreased metacognitive accuracy while leaving performance on a perceptual task unaffected. Further, by explicitly modelling the link between type 1 and type 2 responses, they were able to show that dlPFC TMS decreased metacognitive accuracy below that expected from a direct-translation account alone (c). Taken together, these studies provide convergent evidence that rostrolateral aspects of PFC (BA10/46) play a mediating role in the accuracy of retrospective commentaries.

A role for rlPFC in metacognition is consistent with its anatomical position at the top of the cognitive hierarchy, receiving information from other prefrontal cortical regions, cingulate and anterior temporal cortex. Further, compared with non-human primates, rlPFC has a sparser spatial organization that may support greater interconnectivity. The contribution of rlPFC to metacognitive commentary may be to represent task uncertainty in a format suitable for communication to others, consistent with activation here being associated with evaluating self-generated information, and attention to internal representations. Such a conclusion is supported by recent evidence from structural brain imaging that ‘reality monitoring’ and metacognitive accuracy share a common neural substrate in anterior PFC. In contrast, dlPFC may maintain information about a previous decision, consistent with its role in working memory. However, in comparison with, for example, parietal cortex, reliable cytoarchitectonic boundaries are not yet established for human rlPFC. Indeed, activations ascribed to either lateral rlPFC or dlPFC in this review cluster around a transition zone between BA10 and BA46; thus, it is unclear whether they arise from a single functional region, or multiple subregions subserving different functions. Single-subject analyses may aid in solving this puzzle.


Nature of individual differences

Harnessing individual differences can provide leverage on the neural correlates of metacognitive accuracy. Such studies implicitly assume intrapersonal stability of metacognitive capacity. However, in the metamemory literature, evidence for a stable metacognitive ability is surprisingly weak. Given the interdependence of metacognition and performance discussed above, one explanation for this null result might be methodological in nature, as a performance-confidence relationship is naturally harder to quantify than performance itself. A similar line of thought led Keleman et al. to speculate that ‘stable metacognitive performance might be detected using very large numbers of trials’. In support of this view, Fleming et al. showed good split-half reliability (r = 0.69) in a perceptual decision task with hundreds of trials, and metacognitive accuracy has been shown to be stable across two perceptual tasks (r = 0.71), despite performance itself being uncorrelated (r = 0.05). An important unanswered question is whether metacognitive accuracy is stable across domain (e.g. memory and decision-making), as might be predicted by their overlapping neural substrates.


Relationship between metacognition and cognitive control

An influential suggestion is that decision-making systems should be sensitive to the current level of conflict between possible responses to mobilize additional ‘cognitive control’ resources in an adaptive fashion. Activity in ACC and anterior insula is increased during heightened response conflict (see for reviews), whereas lateral PFC activity correlates with behavioural adjustments, such as increased caution, following high-conflict trials. Further, the ACC is suggested to recruit lateral PFC to increase levels of control when conflict occurs. This proposal for a cognitive control loop shares obvious similarities with concepts of monitoring and control in metacognition research; indeed, a previous review proposed metacognition might be commensurate with cognitive control. However, such a view would predict that any system with the capacity for monitoring and control has metacognitive representations, which is not usually held to be the case. Instead, philosophers have discussed and debated two ‘levels’ of metacognition: one involving declarative (conscious) meta-representation; the other low-level, based on non-verbal epistemic feelings of uncertainty. For present purposes, we consider monitoring processes as metacognitive to the extent they are consciously reportable, and thus available for deployment outside of a ‘closed-loop’ optimization of the task at hand. Such reports can be empirically dissociated from monitoring and control: for example, skilled typists show subtle post-error adjustments in the absence of awareness, and yet accept blame for errors that are surreptitiously inserted by the experimenters on the screen. Interestingly, subjective effects of heightened decision conflict may themselves be reportable in the absence of awareness of antecedents of this conflict, and thus it is not always simple to decide whether performance monitoring involves meta-representation.

What might govern the accessibility of performance-monitoring information to awareness? We suggest that rlPFC is particularly important for the representation of information pertaining to a previous decision in a globally accessible frame of reference. In a direct comparison of confidence judgements following mnemonic and perceptual decisions, both ACC and right dlPFC activity increased with decreasing confidence; however, only right dlPFC encoded confidence independent of changes in reaction time, leading the authors to suggest that while ACC responds to online decision conflict, dlPFC activity underlies the selection of metacognitive responses. Furthermore, a recent study found that activity in rlPFC both increases during metacognitive reports and correlates with reported confidence. Thus, the accuracy of metacognitive commentaries, as dissociated from adjustments in performance, might be governed by the fidelity with which rlPFC integrates and maintains information from cingulate and insula involved in online adjustments in task performance, consistent with reciprocal anatomical connections between these regions.

If only a subset of nodes in this network is present, one might find effective performance monitoring in the absence of metacognition. This pattern of results was observed in a patient with a large left prefrontal cortical lesion, who displayed intact performance adjustments in the Stroop task, without being able to report changes in the subjective sense of effort while performing the task. As the patient displayed intact conflict-related N2 event-related potential responses during the Stroop task, the authors suggested that (implicit) monitoring and control is maintained by an intact right ACC, while a subjective feeling of effort would normally be mediated by the damaged lateral PFC. Such a conclusion is supported by recent evidence that lateral PFC activity is higher in subjects with a strong tendency to avoid cognitively demanding decisions. Importantly for our hypothesis, if lateral PFC receives input from non-conscious monitoring loops, the reverse dissociation would not be predicted: we might be able to control objects we cannot report, but should not be able report upon objects we cannot (cognitively) control.

The respective roles of nodes in this network remain to be determined, but there is initial evidence for division of labour. TMS to dlPFC impairs metacognition following correct but not incorrect decisions, suggesting a role in representing confidence rather than monitoring for errors. In contrast, reporting of response errors has been linked to the error-related positivity with a possible source in insula cortex. Indeed, accurate metacognitive commentaries about performance require access to information about both beliefs and responses. For example, just after hitting a shot in tennis, you might have high confidence (low uncertainty) that the spot you chose to aim at is out of reach of your opponent (your belief), but low confidence in correctly executing the shot (your response). Thus, for commentaries to integrate information both about a belief and response, the ‘frame of reference’ in which information is encoded is crucial. If information is maintained in segregated sensorimotor loops, performance adjustments could be made based on deviations from an expected trajectory without this information being more generally available for, say, verbal report. It remains an open question as to the extent to which decision-making relies on ‘embodied’ or domain-general circuitry, but a role for the PFC in the abstract encoding of decision-related information, independent of response modality, has been found using fMRI conjunction analyses. It will be of interest to test whether this same activity is involved in metacognition.


Conclusions

Cognitive psychology has developed a rich theoretical framework and empirical tools for studying self-assessments of cognition. A crucial variable of interest is the accuracy of metacognitive reports with respect to their object-level targets: in other words, how well do we know our own minds? We now understand metacognition to be under segregated neural control, a conclusion that might have surprised Comte, and one that runs counter to an intuition that we have veridical access to the accuracy of our perceptions, memories and decisions. A detailed, and eventually mechanistic, account of metacognition at the neural level is a necessary first step to understanding the failures of metacognition that occur following brain damage and psychiatric disorder. In this paper, we summarized a variety of behavioural approaches for measuring the accuracy of metacognitive assessments, and reviewed the possible neural substrates of metacognitive accuracy in humans. We conclude that there are potentially separable brain systems for prospective and retrospective judgements of performance, and our synthesis of recent neuropsychological and brain imaging findings implicates the rostrolateral PFC as crucial in mediating retrospective judgements of cognition. In this model, the rostrolateral PFC receives input from interoceptive cortex involved in ‘closed-loop’ monitoring and control, generating a metacognitive representation of the state of the system that can be deployed or reported outside of the current task at hand.

We close with a number of open questions we hope will be addressed by future studies:

— To what extent does metacognitive accuracy (and its associated neural correlates) generalize across different object-level domains?

— To what extent does metacognition rely on abstract (response-independent) decision variables?

— Are the neural correlates of error-monitoring and confidence separable?

— Do dlPFC (∼BA46) and rlPFC (∼BA10) make differential contributions to metacognition?

— If task performance can be monitored and corrected in the absence of metacognitive report, what is the functional role of metacognitiveaccuracy?


What failure in collective decision-making tells us about metacognition

Bahador Bahrami, Karsten Olsen, Dan Bang, Andreas Roepstorff, Geraint Rees, Chris Frith — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2012. PMC3318766, CC BY 3.0.

Condorcet (1785) proposed that a majority vote drawn from individual, independent and fallible (but not totally uninformed) opinions provides near-perfect accuracy if the number of voters is adequately large. Research in social psychology has since then repeatedly demonstrated that collectives can and do fail more often than expected by Condorcet. Since human collective decisions often follow from exchange of opinions, these failures provide an exquisite opportunity to understand human communication of metacognitive confidence. This question can be addressed by recasting collective decision-making as an information-integration problem similar to multisensory (cross-modal) perception. Previous research in systems neuroscience shows that one brain can integrate information from multiple senses nearly optimally. Inverting the question, we ask: under what conditions can two brains integrate information about one sensory modality optimally? We review recent work that has taken this approach and report discoveries about the quantitative limits of collective perceptual decision-making, and the role of the mode of communication and feedback in collective decision-making. We propose that shared metacognitive confidence conveys the strength of an individual's opinion and its reliability inseparably. We further suggest that a functional role of shared metacognition is to provide substitute signals in situations where outcome is necessary for learning but unavailable or impossible to establish.


Introduction

In The extraordinary and popular delusions and madness of crowds, Charles Mackay chronicled a colourful and prolific history of humankind's collective follies. Mackay's decision to doubt and re-examine the popular belief that ‘two heads are better than one’ has since then guided numerous disciplines interested in human collective decision-making from political sciences to economics and social psychology. Mackay's negative revisionism was preceded by a wave of optimistic trust in mass decisions initiated by the Marquis de Condorcet, a mathematician and political philosopher of the French revolution. Condorcet's jury theorem elegantly proved that a simple ‘democratic’ majority vote drawn from the aggregated opinions of individual, independent and fallible (but not totally uninformed) lay-people provides near-perfect accuracy if the number of voters is adequately large.

At a local livestock fair in Plymouth, early in the twentieth century, Francis Galton found strong empirical support for Condorcet's theoretical proposition. At a weight-judging contest, participants estimated the weight of a chosen live ox after it had been slaughtered and dressed. Participants entered the competition by privately writing their estimate on a ticket and submitting it to the fair organizers. The winner was the one who submitted the most-accurate estimate. After the competition, Galton collected the approximately 800 submitted tickets and demonstrated in a paper that, indeed, the simple average of the estimates of the entire crowd was even more accurate than the winner. The most striking aspect of this finding was that the majority of participants had very little specialized knowledge of butchery; yet, their contribution to the average opinion outperformed the best expert opinion. Theoretically and empirically, masses ruled supreme. So, can we dismiss Mackay's worries? Definitely not!

A large body of work in political sciences and social psychology has examined collective decision-making and, indeed, numerous examples of collective failure have been discovered. Indeed, this research clearly shows that Condorcet's assumption about the independence of individual opinions—which was neatly satisfied in the weight-judging contest—is often not applicable to real-world situations of collective behaviour. However, by carefully identifying the determinants of collective failure, we can use Mackay's insight, that collective benefit is the exception rather than the rule, to better understand the nature of human social interaction. To rephrase, one could ask which features of interpersonal communication and/or interaction contribute to collective failures.

In this paper, we first review previous work that has addressed this question by recasting collective decision-making as an ‘information integration’ problem similar to multisensory (cross-modal) perception. In multisensory perception, the observer combines information from different sensory modalities (e.g. vision and touch) taking into account the reliability (or variance) of each modality such that the multisensory decision is more strongly influenced by the sensory modality with the higher reliability (i.e. lower variance). By analogy, collective decision-making also requires combining information but from different observers. We argue that establishing the reliability of this information constitutes an integral part of information integration at the collective level.

Using collective decision-making in the perceptual domain as a framework, we describe and compare two models of how we communicate and integrate our individual perceptions and their reliability. Both models posit that observers convey the reliability of their individual perceptions by communicating their confidence in their perceptual decisions, i.e. their metacognitive awareness of their perceptual decisions. However, the models make very different assumptions about the exact content of the communicated confidence and the computational strategy by which observers combine them to arrive at a collective decision. We will review the predictions of each model and assess them in the light of the existing literature. We will also present new empirical data revealing further features of collective perceptual decision-making by confidence sharing. We will place the findings from collective perceptual decision-making in the wider context of group decision-making and discuss a possible functional social role for metacognitive awareness. Finally, we will briefly compare and attempt to connect our current understanding of metacognition at the levels of brain mechanism, individual behaviour and social interaction.


Collective perceptual decision-making

Qodrat and Jalal are two cricket umpires. The bowler (top) has just made his run and bowled the ball; but the two umpires disagree about whether his foot crossed the line or not. Although Qodrat has announced a ‘no ball’, Jalal contends that there was no such error. Let us stop here and examine the situation. We can think of each umpire's visual perception of the events as represented in the brain by a normal distribution with a mean (μQ for Qodrat and μJ for Jalal) and a standard deviation (σQ and σJ). This normal distribution could correspond to, for example, the firing pattern of neurons in each umpire's early visual cortex. The umpire's decision about whether the bowler's foot landed ahead of (e.g. Qodrat, μQ > 0) or behind (e.g. Jalal, μJ < 0) the line is given by the signed mean of the distribution. The standard deviation of each distribution relates to the noisiness of the umpire's perception. As such, a reliable percept would be characterized by a large mean (e.g. Jalal) and a small standard deviation (e.g. Qodrat). But how do Qodrat and Jalal resolve their disagreement and come to a joint decision? The simple formulation of the situation given above is the basis of two recent models of collective perceptual decision-making.

Sorkin et al. proposed that, by communicating their confidence in their perceptual decision, the umpires are in fact communicating their, respective, μ and σ separately and distinctly to one another. As we will see further below, the distinctness of these two pieces of information is a critical feature of this model. To make an optimal collective decision (i.e. to minimize the chances of error given each umpires’ decision noise), the two umpires (i.e. the group) somehow evaluate the term and take its sign as their joint decision. Defining perceptual sensitivity (s) as inversely proportional to standard deviation (such that s = k/σ; where k represents a constant term; see equation (3.3) below for the exact definition of slope, the group's sensitivity, Sgroup, is then expected to be:

In a standard sensory signal-detection task performed by individuals and groups in separate experiments, Sorkin et al. showed that groups achieved a robust collective benefit over and above the sensitivities of the constituent individuals as measured when these individuals performed the task in isolation. Their model was able to predict the collective benefits accrued by the groups. Interestingly, their model could readily be extended to groups larger than two people. However, as group size expanded, group performance did not improve as fast as predicted by the model, indicating that, perhaps, different group dynamics may be at work as group size increases.

Sorkin et al.'s model is conceptually identical to the model used in multisensory perception research to describe how information from different sensory modalities, such as touch and vision, are combined within the brain of one observer. That dyads performed as well as equation (2.1) would lead to the uncomfortable conclusion that communication between brains is as reliable and high fidelity as communication within the same brain. Moreover, this formulation implies that groups would never do worse than individuals. Recalling the case of Condorcet, Mackay and Galton, once again, groups seemed to be doing much better (theoretically and empirically) than common sense would suggest.

Nearly a decade later, Bahrami et al. performed an experiment almost identical to that of Sorkin et al., but they made a different assumption about the content of the information communicated between individuals. Noting that a reliable decision is one based on a large mean and a small standard deviation, they suggested that Qodrat's communicated confidence in his decision could be defined as the ratio μQ/σQ. The magnitude of this signed ratio would correlate with the probability that Qodrat has made the right decision. The collective decision could then simply be defined as the sign of the sum of shared confidences (μQ/σQ) + (μJ/σJ), giving the group sensitivity by

Bahrami et al. dubbed this model the Weighted Confidence Sharing (WCS) model. Comparison with Sorkin et al.'s model shows that when sensitivities are similar (i.e. σJ = σQ), the two decision boundaries and become identical and the outcome is equivalent to that seen in multisensory perception. When the individual sensitivities are different (say, sQ > sJ), however, the two models diverge in their predictions. To demonstrate this, if we rewrite equation (2.2) as

we can see that the expected collective benefit (sgroup/sQ; i.e. group sensitivity relative to its more sensitive member) is a linear function of the similarity between group members’ sensitivities (sJ/sQ). This linear relationship means that if Jalal's sensitivity is no better than approximately 40% of Qodrat's (sJ/sQ < 21/2−1 ≈ 0.4), then—in sharp contrast to Sorkin et al.'s model—this model predicts that Qodrat and Jalal together should do worse than the more sensitive observer (Qodrat) alone (sgroup < sQ).

Bahrami et al. tested dyads in a simple perceptual decision-making task that involved visual contrast discrimination. In every trial, individuals first made a private decision about a briefly viewed stimulus. If their private decisions disagreed, they were asked to negotiate a joint decision. When dyad members had similar sensitivities, dyad decisions were more accurate than those of the better individual. However, if one observer was much less sensitive than the other, the dyad failed to outperform the better member; cf. experiment 2 in the study of Bahrami et al.. Importantly, group performance in these latter situations was markedly worse than expected from equation (2.1) but not statistically different from the predictions of equation (2.2). Mackay's intuition had once again proved useful: examination of collective failures suggested that perceptual decisions and their reliability are not spontaneously communicated separately but instead together in the form of a ratio. If what Qodrat communicates is the ratio (μQ/σQ), then Jalal (i.e. the recipient) will be unable to resolve (μQ) and (σQ) from one another. Consequently, the process of interpersonal communication involves information loss. But is there a way to avert or reduce this loss of information?

Previous research suggests that failures of communication are not solely owing to noise and random errors. A number of systematic egocentric biases that impair communication have been identified on both sides of a verbal exchange. When communicating their internal intentions verbally, people often overestimate the clarity of their communicated message, as if their internal states were readily evident, indeed transparent, to their addressee. Similarly, an egocentric bias afflicts the addressee: listeners often interpret the meaning of what they are told from their own (rather than the speaker's) perspective.

We hypothesized that if the collective failures observed by Bahrami et al. were a consequence of egocentric biases that plague face-to-face verbal communication, then providing a non-verbal, scalar system for participants to share information may remove or reduce these egocentric biases and in turn improve collective decision-making; especially when observers have vastly different sensitivities. To test this hypothesis, we first replicated the collective failure reported by Bahrami et al. (experiment 1: verbal condition). Then we devised a non-verbal confidence-rating/sharing schema to replace face-to-face verbal communication of decisions while keeping all other aspects of the experiment constant (experiment 1: non-verbal condition). If egocentric biases in face-to-face verbal communication were at least partially responsible for the collective failures in the verbal condition, then the non-verbal confidence rating/sharing schema employed in the non-verbal condition should improve collective performance under conditions of asymmetric sensitivity.


Experiment 1


Methods


Participants

Participants were recruited from undergraduate, graduate and faculty members of Aarhus University, Denmark. Verbal (V) condition: n = 30, mean age ± s.d. 23 ± 2.5; non-verbal (NV) condition: n = 30, mean age ± s.d. 23.9 ± 2.5. All participants were healthy male adults with normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity. Members of each dyad knew each other. No participant was recruited for more than one experiment. The local ethics committee approved all experiments, and written informed consent was obtained from all participants.


Display parameters and response mode

In all experiments, both dyad members sat in the same testing room. Each viewed his own display. Display screens were placed on separate tables at a right angle to each other. The two displays were connected to the same graphic card via a video amplifier splitter and controlled by the Cogent toolbox (http://www.vislab.ucl.ac.uk/cogent.php/) for Matlab (Mathworks Inc).

Each participant viewed an LCD display at a distance of approximately 57 cm (resolution = 800 × 600—Fujitsu Siemens AMILO SL 3220W, 22″) for which a look-up table linearized the output luminance. Background luminance was 62.5 Cd m−2 in both displays. The displays were connected to a personal computer through an output splitter that sent identical outputs to both of them. Within each session of the experiment, one participant responded with the keyboard and the other with the mouse. Both participants used their right hand to respond.

Each participant viewed one half of their screen: the left half of one display for the participant responding with the keyboard, and the right half of the other display for the participant responding with the mouse. A piece of thick black cardboard placed on each display was used to occlude the half not viewed by each participant. Two stimulus arrays were presented on both displays simultaneously, each on one-half of the display. Control over which one the participants saw was achieved by using the occluding cardboard. Stimulus eccentricity and retinal size were identical for both experiments. This configuration permitted us to display stimuli with different levels of noise to participants in the same dyad. Other stimulus characteristics (retinal size, luminance, contrast, duration) were identical for both participants. Moreover, in the NV condition, the use of a bipartite display allowed us to assess the participants’ confidence privately (i.e. each participants only saw his own confidence bar) at the individual decision stage (see §3a(v)).


Design and task

In all experiments, a two-Alternative Forced Choice (2AFC) design was employed. Two observation intervals were provided. A target stimulus always occurred either in the first or in the second interval. Participants were instructed to choose the interval most likely to have contained the target. In the NV condition, participants rated their confidence in their decision on a scale from 1 (indicating ‘very doubtful’) to 5 (indicating ‘absolutely sure’; see below for a description of the confidence rating procedure and display).


Stimuli

The stimulus set displayed in each interval consisted of six vertically oriented Gabor patches (standard deviation of the Gaussian envelope: 0.45°; spatial frequency: 1.5 cycles deg−1; contrast: 10%) organized around an imaginary circle (radius: 8°) at equal distances from each other. The target stimulus was generated by elevating the contrast of one of the six patches, which produced a contrast oddball. The target location and interval were randomized across the experimental session. The stimulus duration in each interval was 85 ms. Target contrast was obtained by adding one of the four possible values (1.5%, 3.5%, 7.0% or 15%) to the 10% contrast of the non-target items.

For one participant, in each trial and for each item in the stimulus array, freshly generated white noise was added to the grey value of each pixel in each Gabor patch. The additional white noise was drawn, on each update, from a random uniform distribution ranging from 0 to 30% of the monitor's maximum luminance. The participants did not know about the addition of noise. The choice of which participant would receive the noise was determined by a preliminary test before the experiment (see below).


Procedure

Each trial was initiated by the participant responding with the keyboard. A black central fixation cross (width: 0.75° visual angle) appeared on the screen for a variable period, drawn uniformly from the range 500–1000 ms. The two observation intervals were separated by a blank display lasting 1000 ms. The fixation cross turned into a question mark after the second interval to prompt the participants to respond. The question mark stayed on the screen until both participants had responded. Each participant initially responded without consulting the other.

In the V condition, participants communicated by talking to each other. The participant who used the keyboard responded by pressing ‘N’ and ‘M’ for the first and second interval, respectively; the participant who used the mouse responded with a left and right click for the first and second interval, respectively. Individual decisions were then displayed on the monitor, so both participants were informed about their own and their partner's choice of the target interval. Colour codes were used to denote keyboard (blue—illustrated in by black) and mouse (yellow—illustrated in by dark grey) responses. Vertical locations of the blue and yellow text were randomized to avoid spatial biasing. If the private decisions disagreed, a joint decision was requested. The request was made in blue if the keyboard participant was to announce the decision and in yellow if the mouse participant was to announce the decision. The keyboard participant announced the joint decision in odd trials; the mouse participant on even trials. Participants were free to verbally discuss their choice with each other as long as they wanted. They were also free to choose any strategy that they wished. The experimenter was present in the testing room throughout all experiments to make sure that the instructions were observed.

In the NV condition, participants did not talk to each other but instead used a visual schema (lower panel) to communicate their confidence in their private decisions. After the two observation intervals, a horizontal line appeared on the screen with a fixed midpoint. The left side of the line represented the first interval, the right side of the line represented the second interval. An additional vertical ‘confidence marker’ (colour-coded for keyboard and mouse responses—see above) was displayed in each observer's panel. By dragging the confidence marker to the left or right from centre, the participant reported his choice about whether the target was in the first or second interval, respectively. The confidence marker could be moved along the line by up to five steps on either side. Each step farther from the centre indicated higher confidence. We chose this method for obtaining the decision (left or right side of centre) and the confidence in the decision (distance from the centre) all in one step rather than having the participants report them serially. This ensured that the participants’ private task involved only one step in all conditions here and in experiment 2. The participant who used the keyboard navigated the marker on the confidence rating scale by pressing ‘N’ or ‘M’ to move the marker left or right, respectively. He would then confirm his decision by pressing ‘B’ when he thought that the marker correctly indicated his confidence. The participant who used the mouse moved the confidence marker by pressing left or right button to move the marker left or right, respectively. He would then press the middle button when he thought the marker correctly indicated his confidence. Participants did not see each other's confidence rating at this stage. After the private confidence ratings were made, confidence values were announced by displaying both participants’ confidence markers along the horizontal line. In the case of disagreement, a joint decision was requested. Here, the keyboard participant announced the joint decision in odd trials, and the mouse participant on even trials. For the joint decision, a white confidence marker was used with the same five levels as private decisions; the marker was not visible to the other participant until a joint decision had been made. Participants did not talk to each other. They were given earphones to eliminate any meaningful auditory communication. In addition, a screen was placed between them to prevent them from seeing each other if they turned around. The experimenter was present in the testing room throughout all experiments to make sure that the instructions were observed.

In all conditions, participants received feedback either immediately after they made their private decision, in cases where their private decisions agreed, or after the joint decision had been made in cases where their private decisions disagreed. The feedback either said ‘CORRECT’ or ‘WRONG’. Feedback was given for each participant (keyboard: blue—illustrated in by black; mouse: yellow—illustrated in by grey) and for the dyad (white). Feedback remained on the screen until the participant using the keyboard initiated the next trial. Vertical order of the blue and yellow was randomized and the dyad feedback always appeared at the centre.

In both conditions, participants started the experiment with a preliminary, non-interactive session (eight blocks of 16 trials) that was conducted in order to identify the participant who would receive noise in the subsequent main session (see §3a(vi)). Then, the main experimental session (eight blocks of 16 trials) was conducted.


Assignment of noise

We determined which participant would receive the noisy stimuli by first testing the participants in an isolated version of the task. In each trial, participants made a private decision about the target interval and then received private feedback (i.e. there was no sharing of private decisions and feedback). At the end of this session, the two participants’ sensitivity (i.e. the slope of the psychometric function; see §3a(vii)) was assessed, and the less-sensitive participant was chosen to receive the noisy stimuli in the experiment proper. The participants were not informed about this procedure and were told that the preliminary test served as practice.


Data analysis

Psychometric functions were constructed for each observer and for the dyad by plotting the proportion of trials in which the oddball was seen in the second interval against the contrast difference at the oddball location (the contrast in the second interval minus the contrast in the first; a).

The psychometric curves were fit to a cumulative Gaussian function whose parameters were bias, b, and variance, σ2. To estimate these parameters, a probit regression model was employed using the ‘glmfit’ function in Matlab (Mathworks Inc). A participant with bias b and variance σ2 would have a psychometric curve, denoted P(Δc), where Δc is the contrast difference between the second and first presentations, given by

where H(z) is the cumulative normal function,

As usual, the psychometric curve, P(Δc), corresponds to the probability of saying that the second interval had the higher contrast. Thus, a positive bias indicates an increased probability of saying that the second interval had higher contrast (and thus corresponds to a negative mean for the underlying Gaussian distribution).

Given the above definitions for P(Δc), we see that the variance is related to the maximum slope of the psychometric curve, denote s, via

A large slope indicates small variance and thus highly sensitive performance. Using this measure, we quantified individual participants’ as well as the dyad's sensitivity. We defined ‘collective benefit’ as the ratio of the dyad's slope (sdyad) to that of the more sensitive observer (i.e. the one with higher slope, smax). A collective benefit value above 1 would indicate that the dyad managed to gain an advantage over its better observer. Values below 1 would indicate that collaboration was counterproductive and that the dyad did worse than its more sensitive member.

The WCS model expressed in equation (2.2) identifies the dyad's potential for collective achievement under the assumption that the members can communicate their confidence to each other accurately. We compared the empirically obtained data with this potential upper bound to see whether and how different modes of communication helped or hindered collective decision-making. We defined an ‘optimality index’ as the ratio of the dyad's slope to that predicted by the WCS model (equation (2.2)).


Results

As demonstrated in b, all observers who received noise showed lower sensitivity (as measured by the slope of their psychometric function) compared with their partner who received noise-free stimuli. This result showed that our noise manipulation effectively rendered one participant's perceptual decisions much less reliable than those of the other. Under such conditions, the WCS model predicts that the dyad will do worse than the better observer.


Comparison of dyad with the better participant

In the V condition, dyad sensitivity was significantly worse than that of the better observer (one sample t-test comparing collective benefit with baseline: t14 = −2.34, p = 0.03; c). This result is consistent with the predictions of the WCS model, which predicted that collective decision-making will be counterproductive when dyad members have very different sensitivities. In the NV condition, on the other hand, dyad sensitivity was no worse than the more sensitive observer (one sample t-test comparing collective benefit with baseline: t14 = 1.42, p = 0.17; c) showing that groups had been at least as good as the better observer. Importantly, direct comparison of the two conditions showed that collective benefit was significantly greater in the NV condition (independent samples’ t-test: t28 = 2.61, p = 0.014).


Comparison of dyad with the Weighted Confidence Sharing model

The WCS model (equation (2.2)) slightly (but not significantly) overestimated dyad performance in the V condition (one sample t-test: t14 = 1.25, p = 0.23; d). In the NV condition, the WCS model showed a trend to underestimate the dyad performance (one sample t-test: t14 = 1.87, p = 0.08; d). Direct comparison of the two conditions showed that the optimality index was significantly higher in the NV condition (independent sample t-test: t28 = 2.24, p = 0.03).


Data summary

The impact of V and NV communication on collective decision-making was compared in an experimental situation, where a previous work had shown that dyads would perform no better than their constituting individuals. The results replicate the previous findings but go beyond them in several respects: Bahrami et al. had assigned noise to either one of the dyad members at random. This trial-by-trial random noise assignment made it impossible for the observers to form any stable idea of which dyad member was the less reliable one in any trial. Here we used a block design and assigned noise consistently to one member of the dyad. Thus, the results of the V condition (c,d) show an even more impressive collective failure: dyad sensitivity was significantly worse than the more sensitive dyad member. A conspicuous difference in performance did not protect the groups from suffering counterproductive collaboration.

The results of the NV condition showed that a non-verbal schema for reporting and sharing decision confidence (lower panel), to some extent, could remedy the defective collective decision-making process and make it more productive; even though all the low-level conditions, especially the asymmetric administration of noise, were retained. This result is consistent with the suggestion that the collective failure observed in the V condition is not due to random errors caused by asymmetric noise but, rather, that direct, verbal communication and its associated underlying cognitive biases cause the collective failure.

Having demonstrated the beneficial impact of non-verbal communication on defective collective decisions, we asked whether this benefit is general. Experiment 1 tested collective decisions under asymmetric administration of noise where we expected no collective benefit to start with. When dyad members have access to similarly reliable perceptual information, however, direct verbal communication can indeed confer a robust group benefit that is no less than expected from the optimal combination of individuals’ decisions. We asked whether the non-verbal communication of confidence could provide any additional benefit over and above direct verbal communication. Indeed, we do not know whether and how different modes of communication interact with one another towards collective decisions. In order to address this question, we used a 2 × 2 design where collective decision-making was tested under all four possible combinations of the two modes of communication.


Experiment 2


Methods


Participants

Participants were recruited from undergraduate, graduate and faculty members of Aarhus University, Denmark. Verbal&non-verbal (V&NV) conditions: n = 30, mean age ± s.d. 24.8 ± 3.5; verbal (V) condition: n = 30, mean age ± s.d. 28.30 ± 6.27; non-verbal (NV) condition: n = 30, mean age ± s.d. 22.2 ± 2; none (N) condition: n = 28, mean age ± s.d. 23.2 ± 2. All participants were healthy male adults with normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity. Members of each dyad knew each other. No participant was recruited for more than one experiment. The local ethics committee approved all experiments and written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Data from the V and N conditions have been reported elsewhere.


Task and design

We employed a 2 × 2 design to investigate the impact of verbal communication (two levels: with and without) and non-verbal confidence sharing (two levels: with and without) on collective decision-making. Participants communicated verbally in the V and V&NV conditions. In the NV and V&NV conditions, participants communicated using the confidence marker (as in the NV condition of experiment 1). In the none (N) condition, participants were not allowed to communicate anything but their decision (first or second interval). The task was identical to experiment 1 in all other aspects.


Display and stimuli

Participants received identical visual stimuli and no observer was given any additional noise. All stimulus characteristics were identical to the noise-free stimuli in experiment 1. In conditions that did not involve non-verbal communication (i.e. V and N conditions), the bipartite display was not used and both observers viewed a single stimulus set displayed at the centre of the entire screen. All other display and stimulus characteristics were identical to experiment 1.


Procedure

In all conditions, after one practice block of 16 trials, two main experimental sessions were conducted. Each main session consisted of eight blocks of 16 trials. Participants switched places (and thereby response device) at the end of session one. The participants set the pace of the experiment's progress. All other aspects of the procedure were identical to experiment 1.


Results


Comparison of dyad with the better participant

We first looked at the impact of the mode of communication on the collective benefit. Following our design, we employed a 2 (with and without verbal communication) × 2 (with and without non-verbal confidence sharing) between-subject ANOVA with collective benefit (sdyad/smax; see experiment 1) as the dependent variable. The main effect of verbal communication was highly significant (F1,59 = 8.4; p = 0.005). Post hoc comparison showed that collective benefit was significantly higher when verbal communication was allowed (i.e. conditions V and V&NV versus NV and N; independent sample t-test: t57 = 2.7, p = 0.008). Comparison with baseline (see horizontal lines in) showed that a robust collective benefit (i.e. group performance advantage over and above the better observer) was observed only where verbal communication is allowed, i.e. V&NV (a; one sample t-test: t14 = 2.47, p = 0.026) and V conditions (b; one sample t-test: t14 = 5.38, p < 0.0001). When communication was strictly non-verbal (NV condition), collective benefit marginally approached significance (c; one sample t-test: t14 = 2, p = 0.064). The main effect of non-verbal communication was not significant (F = 0.8). Finally, a significant interaction was found between verbal and non-verbal communication (F1,59 = 6.56; p = 0.013). Post hoc comparison showed that the interaction was driven by a significantly higher collective benefit in the V condition, where participants communicated only verbally; collective decision-making was significantly less successful when participants were required to use both verbal and non-verbal communication (i.e. V&NV versus V condition; independent sample t-test: t28 = 2.54, p = 0.016). Compared with no communication (N condition), the collective benefit accrued from non-verbal communication (NV) was not significant.


Comparison of dyad with the Weighted Confidence Sharing model

To compare the dyads’ collective performance with the upper bound set by the WCS model under different modes of communication, we applied a similar 2 × 2 repeated-measure ANOVA to the optimality index. Similar to the collective-benefit analysis, the main effect of verbal communication (F1,59 = 8.745; p = 0.004) and the interaction between verbal communication and non-verbal communication F1,59 = 5.4; p = 0.024) was significant.

Post hoc comparison showed that the interaction was driven by the fact that sharing confidence non-verbally (NV condition; c) allowed the dyads to approach the WCS model significantly better than without any communication (N condition; d; independent sample t-test: t27 = 2.41, p = 0.02). This result demonstrated that although non-verbal confidence sharing is not an ideal mode of communication for collective decision-making (recall that the difference in collective benefit between the N and NV conditions was not significant), communicating ‘something’ is still better than ‘nothing’ for collective decision-making.

Comparison with baseline showed that when verbal communication was possible (V and V&NV conditions), dyads fulfilled the WCS model's expectations. With non-verbal communication only (c; t14 = 2.19, p = 0.04) and without any communication whatsoever, the model prediction exceeded the empirical dyad performance significantly (d; t14 = 5.91; p < 10–4, paired t-test).


Data summary

Because dyad members received identical visual stimuli without any asymmetric noise, collective benefit was expected in all communicative conditions (except the N condition). Collective benefit was robustly obtained when participants communicated only verbally. Non-verbal communication alone (NV condition) also showed some benefit: dyad performance was closer to the optimal upper bound (predicted by the model) than no communication (N condition) and a trend was observed for collective benefit. Surprisingly, when dyad members communicated by both means, they obtained less benefit than when they communicated only verbally (a versus b). The benefits of verbal and non-verbal communication were, so to speak, sub-additive.


Discussion

‘How can we aggregate information possessed by individuals to make the best decisions?’ Condorcet, Galton and Mackay would have been pleased (or disappointed?) to know that a recent survey (http://bit.ly/hR3hcS) of current academic opinions has listed this question as one of the 10 most important issues facing social sciences in the twenty-first century. The data presented here directly address this question and the results provide recommendations for enhancing the accuracy of collective decisions under different circumstances.

Experiment 1 showed that the success of collective decision-making is severely compromised if the quality of evidence available to verbally communicating collaborators is very different. When participants could communicate verbally, asymmetric sensitivity of the team members led to counterproductive collaboration, even though block-design administration of noise to one member, but not the other, caused a striking and persistent difference in the outcome accuracy between the two collaborators. These results delineate a critical danger facing collective decisions: too wide a competence (i.e. in our case, perceptual sensitivity) gap among interacting agents leads to collaborative failure even if the gap is conspicuously obvious. If we needed any quantitative evidence for the ‘madness of the crowds’, this could be it. However, when participants could only share their confidence non-verbally, dyads did significantly better than those who had talked to each other directly, even though the competence gap was still firmly in place. The latter findings suggest that groups composed of members with very different competences could avoid major losses (and perhaps even accrue some collaborative benefit) if a suitable mode of communication was adopted.

This result is consistent with the ‘egocentric bias’ hypothesis from earlier work suggesting that verbally interacting human agents operate under the assumption that their collaborators’ decisions and opinions share the same level of reliability. As long as this assumption holds (i.e. sQ ≈ sJ), verbal communication provides an efficient strategy for aggregating information across individuals and making decisions that are as good as if the individuals had direct access to each other's mental representations (cf. comparison of equations (2.1) and (2.2)). However, verbal communication backfires when the egocentric assumption does not hold (e.g. sQ ≫ sJ). An important question for future research is to see what aspect of verbal communication is responsible for upholding the egocentric bias despite recurring collective failure. Social obligation to treat others as equal to oneself (despite their conspicuous inadequacy) or the urge to contribute (or make a difference) to the group—despite objectively proving to be less competent—are two candidate mechanisms.

In experiment 2, in a 2 × 2 design, we systematically investigated the impact of verbal communication and non-verbal confidence sharing on collective decision-making. The results showed that combining the two modes of communication was counterproductive. When group members had similar sensitivity and made decisions based on similarly reliable information, best (near optimal) performance was achieved with direct verbal communication. Imposing an additional non-verbal communication tool significantly reduced the group performance. Collective benefit was, so to speak, crowded out.

A plausible explanation for this observation may be found in the literature on introspection and metacognition. The confidence-rating schema required participants to actively introspect about their perceptual experience and then graphically indicate their internal, metacognitive estimate of the reliability of their decision (i.e. their confidence). This is no mean feat and indeed a costly cognitive task that requires allocation of top-down attention. In the condition where participants both communicated verbally and used the confidence-rating schema, it is conceivable that the cognitive load introduced by active introspection may have interfered with the verbal communication and the collective decision-making process. Unconstrained verbal communication is perhaps more automatic and humans may be thought of as ‘natural experts’ in it. Indeed, a recent study (see also Overgaard and Sandberg, this issue) has suggested that asking people directly about their perceptual experience, rather than having them rate their confidence, may give a more accurate measure of their metacognitive awareness. Future research could show if more practice with active confidence rating could lead to more automatic, effortless introspection, which in turn might contribute to enhanced collective decision-making beyond what is achievable by direct verbal communication.

When we consider experiments 1 and 2 together, an intriguing crossover effect is observed: in experiment 1 (with unequal external noise) collective benefit was higher when participants only share confidence non-verbally, whereas in experiment 2 (with equal external noise), verbal communication was clearly superior. The crossover is not consistent with any explanation relying on a single mechanism to determine the success of collective benefit. Egocentric bias inherent in verbal communication (experiment 1) and cognitive load of introspection (experiment 2) may be interacting with one another to give rise to this crossover. This suggests that the preferred mode of communication of confidence for collective decisions depends on the similarity of dyad members’ sensitivity. This idea is illustrated in. Each panel shows the relationship between similarity (smin/smax) and collective benefit (sdyad/smax). Data are from parts of experiments 1 and 2 in which communication was exclusively verbal or exclusively non-verbal. The instructive conclusions for how to maximize collective benefit are clear: when dyad members are highly similar (smin/smax > 0.6), direct verbal communication should be used (squares in a). But the substantial benefit from verbal, direct engagement strongly depends on the similarity of dyad members’ competence. When observers have very dissimilar sensitivities—smin/smax < 0.6—direct communication is disastrous (cross symbols in a). In such situations, non-verbal confidence sharing communication (triangles in b) is recommended: it could save the dyad by avoiding the counterproductive collaboration that is observed with direct verbal communication.

These results provide algorithmic guidelines for Qodrat and Jalal in their effort to maximize the accuracy of their perceptual judgement as a group of umpires. However, perhaps with the exception of refereeing in sports games, collective decisions are rarely about purely perceptual events amidst uncertainty and noise. In the next section, we will discuss other domains of social interaction where collective failures have been reported and compare them with these findings.


Collective failures in non-perceptual domains

Numerous studies in social psychology have documented instances where group performance is worse than the performance of the best member. In social loafing, individuals exert less effort in the presence of others leading to reduced overall group performance. Thus, social loafing refers to the difference in individual performance when individuals act in isolation versus when they act together as a group. An important feature of collective situations in which social loafing has been observed (e.g. the ‘tug of war’ game) is that group members share the responsibility for possible failures such that no specific member could be singled out and held directly responsible for the group's misfortune.

The collective failures described here and by Bahrami et al. are different from social loafing for two reasons. First, here dyad members were always tested in the presence of their partner. The social setup of the task was identical for dyads that consisted of similarly sensitive members (who achieved a collective benefit) and those with dissimilarly sensitive members (who incurred a collective loss). In none of the conditions discussed above did the participants perform the task ‘in isolation’. Even when participants did not communicate either verbally or non-verbally, they were still sitting in the same room and shared decisions and made joint decisions when in disagreement. Interestingly, a recent finding has suggested that individual sensitivity assessed in collaborative settings (i.e. private decision stage) was superior to individual sensitivity assessed in non-collaborating setting where two observers were independently tested simultaneously in the same room. This individual sensitivity advantage required the dyad to actively engage in the joint decision-making and was therefore different from social facilitation induced by the mere inactive presence of another person. Second, in all experiments described here, decision outcomes were clearly stated for the group as well as both participants leaving little room for sharing the responsibility for group failures. The participant who led the group to the wrong decision had, so to speak, nowhere to hide. This is an important feature of these experiments which shields the group performance against motivation loss.

Groupthink is another case of collective failure. When individuals are not given the opportunity to make their own decisions privately, they subsequently fail to develop and voice their disagreeing opinions. Interdependence of individual decisions leads to groupthink. This phenomenon cannot account for the results reported by Bahrami et al. because individual decisions were always first made privately and independently.

Interpersonal competition is also ruled out as the observers were not differentially rewarded for their decisions and there was no incentive for competition.

Finally, the hidden profile paradigm is another extensively studied case of collective failure with interesting similarities with and differences from the cases discussed so far. In 1985, Stasser & Titus discovered that group interactions tend to focus on information shared by everybody. This even happens when some of the interacting individuals have access to unshared information that is fundamentally relevant—and provides the best solution—to the joint decision problem and it is in the interest of all individuals to share that exclusive information. In other words, group interactions are biased away from hidden profiles. Groups composed of members with dissimilar knowledge profiles thus tend to under-exploit their unshared but available and relevant information.

The pattern of collective behaviour in hidden profile paradigm is consistent with the illusion of transparency and the egocentric biases in interpersonal communication. Indeed, the verbal condition in experiment 1—where one person is much better than the other (smax ≫ smin)—may involve a similar situation: the better person might be seen as having some implicit knowledge (e.g. less noisy stimulus) that the other does not have. However, it is difficult to explain the collective failures that were exposed here based on hidden profile paradigm per se. The marked difference in participants’ accuracy on a trial-by-trial basis was common knowledge because the feedback was given to both individuals at the same time. As such, after a few trials, the asymmetric reliability of the observers in experiment 1 was not exclusive knowledge at all. Moreover, the detrimental impact of asymmetric noise on collective performance was observed only when dyads communicated directly rather than when they shared confidence using the visual schema. If the hidden profile paradigm was responsible for the collective failures, one would expect not less but, rather, maybe even more collective failure when communication was minimized and only non-verbal confidence sharing was used. Nonetheless, it is possible that verbal communication masks the sensitivity gap, whereas non-verbal communication strips away the social interaction and magnifies the gap, making it easier to discard the less-sensitive participant's opinion. At present, the only firm conclusion on this issue would be that more research is needed to address these possibilities.


The impact of interaction on alignment of metacognition

What are the qualitative features of sharing and discussing metacognitive awareness when Qodrat and Jalal discuss their opinions? Recently, we have undertaken linguistic analysis of the conversations leading to the collective decisions in the verbal condition of experiment 2. The results (not reported here) showed that dyadic conversations often focus on participants’ confidence in their decisions. Most groups used more everyday expressions such as ‘I was not so sure’ and ‘I saw it clearly’. The conversations rarely (i.e. 1 out of 30 sessions studied) led to spontaneous use of explicit numerical scales to express and compare confidence. On a trial-by-trial basis, interacting observers tended to align with each other's confidence expressions. For example, if one started the conversation with ‘I did not see anything’, the other person would most likely respond with some expression using ‘see’. Over time, the content of conversations tended to diminish with practice such that by the end of the experiment, dyad members had converged to a small, repeatedly used set of expressions.

These qualitative and quantitative observations prompted us to wonder if a similar practice-dependent alignment of confidence could be observed in the conditions of experiment 2, where the confidence rating schema was employed. To test this hypothesis, we revisited the data from the NV and V&NV conditions of experiment 2. For each trial, we calculated the absolute difference in signed confidence rating (see §4a) between the two observers and defined alignment as the inverse of this difference. The results showed robust evidence for increased alignment in the NV condition where participants used only non-verbal confidence sharing (a, grey: one-way ANOVA with three levels for first, middle and last one-third of trials, F2,28 = 5.38, p < 0.012). These results are in line with the qualitative findings about linguistic alignment of confidence in the verbal condition of experiment 2 and show that as dyad members gain experience from their interactions, they tend to ‘describe’ their confidence more similarly using the confidence rating bar.

However, in the V&NV condition of experiment 2 where participants used both verbal and non-verbal communication, confidence alignment decreased (a, black: one-way ANOVA, F2,28 = 5.16, p < 0.013). In other words, confidence judgements diverged from one another over time. Although use of the confidence rating schema alone led to alignment of observers' metacognitive reports, combining verbal communication and non-verbal confidence ratings led to a divergence of confidence ratings.

Direct comparison of the NV and V&NV conditions using a mixed ANOVA (with two levels for conditions and three levels for trial bins) supported this conclusion with a significant interaction (F2,56 = 9.34, p < 0.0001). These results corroborate the idea suggested earlier that combining both modes of communication—as in the V&NV condition—leads to an interference in task performance both at the individual (as we see here) and at the collective level (as we saw earlier in the results of experiment 2).

Does alignment of metacognition have any relevance for collective decision-making? In the conditions of experiment 2 where participants rated their confidence, for each dyad, we calculated the collective benefit accrued within each one-third of the experiment (b). We then tested whether there was any correlation between alignment (a) and collective benefit (b) across the dyads. The results showed that a significant correlation (Pearson r = 0.6, p = 0.01, n = 15) emerged in the last third of the NV condition (c(i)). When participants shared only confidence rating but did not talk, metacognitive alignment was associated with collective benefit suggesting that with enough practice, dyad members may arrive at and use the alignment to make better group decisions. In line with our previous observations, in the V&NV condition (c(ii)) where participants both talked and used the confidence rating schema, no such relationship ever emerged. This finding once again underscores our conclusion that the combination of both modes of communication was not productive. Moreover, the fact that the overall collective benefit was not statistically different between the V&NV and the NV conditions (a,c) suggests that dyads in these two conditions achieved the same level of performance employing different strategies for communication and decision rules. More research is needed to understand the nature of these different strategies and decision rules.

We also conducted a similar alignment analysis on the data from the NV condition of experiment 1. Our results did not show any significant findings either for the alignment of confidence ratings or for a correlation between alignment and collective benefit. We believe that this is most likely owing to the fact that the number of trials in the interactive phase of experiment 1 (i.e. 128) was half that of experiment 2; remember that the effects that we see in did not emerge before the final third of the trials (171–256). Aside from statistical power issues, however, we are also reluctant to make a strong prediction about alignment of confidences in experiment 1 as the main manipulation in that experiment was to deliver different and uncorrelated levels of independently generated visual input noise to the two participants in each trial, which is expected to weaken any developing/existing correlation among any outputs from the two observers including confidence ratings.


The role of feedback and the contribution of shared metacognition to social learning

Could Qodrat and Jalal achieve any collective benefit from sharing their opinions and discussing their disagreements if they never found out who was actually right and who was wrong? This is an important question because none of the information integration models that we have discussed here assume any role for decision outcomes. Moreover, and perhaps more importantly, both models attempt to explain the dyad behaviour as a stable, stationary phenomenon with little variability over time. As useful as these assumptions may be for simplifying the problem, few would agree that human group behaviour is—in general—independent of outcomes and unaffected by social learning.

A recent study examined the development of collective benefit when feedback was withdrawn from the dyads. Without feedback, dyads did not initially achieve any collective benefit. However, with practice dyads started to exceed their more sensitive member such that by the end of the experiment, the collective benefit of interacting dyads with and without feedback was statistically indistinguishable. Thus, knowledge about outcomes only seemed to accelerate the process of social learning required for efficient confidence sharing.

Interestingly, feedback is not necessary for optimal multisensory integration of visual and haptic information. Following the standard practice in psychophysics, those results were obtained from several thousands of experimental trials for each observer to make sure that performance is measured long after any learning process is finished. It is, therefore, likely that feedback plays a similar accelerating role in achieving optimality in multisensory integration. To our knowledge, previous research in perceptual learning of multisensory integration has not addressed the role of outcome information on the speed of learning.

Once again, collective failure is instructive in helping us to phrase the right research question. The initial failure of the no-feedback groups to exceed their best member and their subsequent improvements to the same level as feedback groups pose serious problems for models of collective decision-making that assume no social learning. An important question for future research is to explain the dynamics of social learning needed to achieve effective collective behaviour over the course of repeated interactions in the absence of feedback.

Currently, a number of computational models have been proposed for social learning based on principles of associative reinforcement learning. The critical question here is: how could dyad members in the no-feedback experiment have accomplished reinforcement learning without any reinforcement (i.e. without knowing the outcome of their decisions)? It has been suggested that sharing metacognitive awareness may provide sufficient information to replace feedback and reinforce social learning. On this account, when participants are sincere in their opinions, the shared metacognitive awareness that informs the joint decision provides a noisy but still informative estimate of the true state of the world which can be used as a substitute for the missing feedback about decision outcomes. With a noisy substitute, the reinforcement learning process could still happen but would take longer to develop. With enough practice, learning with and without feedback would eventually stabilize at similar performance levels. This account has an interesting, if unexpected corollary: a functional role of shared metacognitive awareness may be to replace missing reinforcement signals when decision outcomes are not available (e.g. too complex to estimate or too far in the future to wait for). Given the abundance of situations in everyday life where immediate outcomes are difficult, sometimes even impossible, to establish, the hypothesis proposed by Bahrami et al. offers an ecologically relevant role for metacognition.


Neuronal, behavioural and social metacognition

Historically, decision science has focused on three aspects of every decision: accuracy, reaction time and confidence often assuming that all three originate from the same underlying process. The sequential sampling family of models was developed to account for speed-accuracy trade-offs observed in two-alternative choice tasks (for a review see Kepecs & Mainen). The idea in sequential sampling is that when an observer is presented with some sensory signal and asked to categorize it as A or B, s/he keeps sampling the signal and accumulating the evidence for each alternative. The race between the two accumulators goes on until evidence collected for one category hits a predefined boundary determining the chosen category for the signal. These three components, a sensory receptor, an accumulator and a boundary are the backbone of perhaps the most widely popular decision-making models in today's system neuroscience.

Sequential sampling models have been extended to account for decision confidence as the difference in accumulated evidence supporting each category at the decision time. Heath showed that such a ‘balance of evidence’ concept can account for a number of qualitative features of decision confidence. Recent works have found neuronal substrates in rodent and non-human primate brains for decision confidence that closely overlap with the known neural machinery involved in decision accuracy and speed. Moreover, the firing patterns of these confidence neurons closely match the predictions of the sequential sampling models. These latter findings thus provide evidence for the earlier intuition that decision accuracy, reaction time and confidence arise from the same latent neuronal process. As such, neuronal encoding of confidence seems to be the cost-free, automatic by-product of the decision process.

But this view is hardly consistent with what is known about metacognition at the level of behaviour. Introspection is cognitively demanding and therefore neither automatic nor cost-free. Moreover, if the confidence and choice processes were one and the same, then restriction of choice time should systematically reduce metacognitive accuracy in a manner parallel to standard speed-accuracy trade-offs. However, when speed is stressed in a choice reaction time task, choice accuracy decreases as expected but, paradoxically, metacognitive accuracy increases. This suggests that rating confidence may involve some post-decisional processing distinct from the race-to-boundary stage (also see Yeung & Summerfield). A tantalizing prediction arising from this notion is that, if one repeats our experiments (reported above) with an emphasis on speed (rather than accuracy) in the initial perceptual task, then sharing (supposedly) more accurate metacognitive awareness should enhance the collective benefit.

But the data we have reported here (experiments 1 and 2) caution against tightly connecting behavioural metacognition with shared, social metacognition. Our results showed that effective sharing of metacognitive awareness depends on some form of social heuristics (e.g. egocentric bias) and that the sharing process seems to be dissociable from and interact with the cognitive demands of introspection, i.e. behavioural metacognition. As such, our understanding of metacognition at the levels of neuronal representation, behaviour and social interaction seem to be disconnected at the moment calling for future research to (see if it is possible or meaningful to) bring them together.

Finally, the concepts of confidence in perceptual sciences and uncertainty in neuroeconomics both refer to the subjective probability of choice outcomes. Over the past decade, many studies in the field of neuroeconomics have decomposed the notion of uncertainty into ‘risk’ and ‘ambiguity’ and demonstrated the behavioural and neurobiological correlates of each. When the possible outcomes and their respective probabilities are known, the decision is said to be risky. Ambiguity, on the other hand, refers to situations where the outcomes alternatives and/or their respective probabilities are unknown. At first glance, confidence in a perceptual two-alternative forced-choice judgement in the lonely darkness of a psychophysics laboratory may seem to be closer to the concept of risk. However, a conspicuous distinction here seems to be that risk and ambiguity both refer to subjective probabilities (or their lack of) prior to choice, whereas confidence refers to subjective probabilities that arise during evidence accumulation and after the choice has been made. Moreover, whereas perceptual confidence depends critically on internal (neural) and external (environmental) sources of noise, previous works in neuroeconomics have not used noisy sensory information to manipulate risk or ambiguity and therefore the connection between these inter-related concepts is at present unclear but indeed a very interesting topic for future research that is just beginning to be investigated.


Closing remarks

Two heads are not always better than one. This paper focused on recent models and empirical findings that explored collective failures. These models are inspired by thinking of collective decision-making as an ‘information integration’ problem similar to that of multisensory perception. The intuition obtained from these theoretical and empirical findings is that shared metacognitive awareness (socially communicated confidence in one's own perceptual decisions that contributes to collective perceptual decisions) conveys the strength of the sensory experience and its reliability inseparably. An important functional role of such metacognitive awareness may be to substitute missing outcomes in situations where outcome is necessary for learning but unavailable or impossible to establish.


Artificial grammar learning meets formal language theory: an overview

W Tecumseh Fitch, Angela D Friederici — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2012. PMC3367694, CC BY 3.0.

Formal language theory (FLT), part of the broader mathematical theory of computation, provides a systematic terminology and set of conventions for describing rules and the structures they generate, along with a rich body of discoveries and theorems concerning generative rule systems. Despite its name, FLT is not limited to human language, but is equally applicable to computer programs, music, visual patterns, animal vocalizations, RNA structure and even dance. In the last decade, this theory has been profitably used to frame hypotheses and to design brain imaging and animal-learning experiments, mostly using the ‘artificial grammar-learning’ paradigm. We offer a brief, non-technical introduction to FLT and then a more detailed analysis of empirical research based on this theory. We suggest that progress has been hampered by a pervasive conflation of distinct issues, including hierarchy, dependency, complexity and recursion. We offer clarifications of several relevant hypotheses and the experimental designs necessary to test them. We finally review the recent brain imaging literature, using formal languages, identifying areas of convergence and outstanding debates. We conclude that FLT has much to offer scientists who are interested in rigorous empirical investigations of human cognition from a neuroscientific and comparative perspective.

Keywords: artificial grammar learning, formal language theory, comparative neuroscience, neurolinguistics


Introduction

Formal language theory (FLT) has its roots in mathematics but was established in its modern form by Noam Chomsky in an attempt to systematically investigate the computational basis of human language. Since these beginnings, the theory has been continually expanded to cover other scientific domains. The most prominent new application was in computer science, where the study of FLT is now a core part of the standard curriculum, providing the theoretical foundation for fundamental issues such as programming language structure and compiler design. Psychologists have used FLT to explore learning and pattern-processing abilities in humans and other species, while in neuroscience the theory has been used in neuroimaging experiments to better understand the neural computations of hierarchy and sequence. Finally, in biology, FLT has been used to analyse diverse topics such as the structure of RNA molecules and the sequential structure of chickadee song. FLT has thus grown far beyond its original roots in language, to become a key component of the theory of computation, applicable to virtually any rule-governed system, in any domain.

In this paper, we review recent progress in applying FLT to empirical research in animal cognition and neuroscience, as well as highlighting some pitfalls that can accompany attempts to merge theory and practice. We start with a non-technical overview of FLT, intended to give an intuitive understanding of the theory and its significance and to provide a gentle preparatory overview for the more rigorous paper by Jaeger & Rogers. We then provide a more detailed analysis of the difficulties involved in translating this body of theory into an empirical research programme. We start with the difficulties caused by the use of infinity as a tool for proofs in mathematics, which leaves such proofs technically irrelevant in the real world of finite brains and finite time. We provide a detailed analysis of one particular rule system, the so-called ‘AnBn grammar’, which has been employed in many recent studies, both in neuroscience and in animal cognition. We suggest that this grammar is appropriate for answering certain interesting questions, but has sometimes been over-extended to address issues for which it is poorly suited, for which we suggest alternative, more appropriate grammars. In the process, we highlight the need to clearly distinguish among a number of separate issues, which—although related—should not be conflated. These include notions such as hierarchical structure versus centre-embedding, context-freeness versus long-distance dependency and formal complexity versus recursion. FLT provides the theoretical concepts and terminology to clearly distinguish among all of these terms, and we argue that it should be used to do so more rigorously in the future. We then provide a detailed look at some of the recent brain imaging literature using FLT, highlighting the areas of nascent agreement along with outstanding open questions. We conclude by pointing out some areas within FLT that remain little explored, but might provide fertile ground for future research.


Formal language theory and the theory of computation

We have an intuitive sense that some cognitive computations are more difficult than others. For most people, it is harder to play chess or solve equations than to buy groceries or drive a car. For most of us, it is more difficult to parse sentences in a non-native language (regardless of our level of proficiency) than in our native language. However, a central finding of computer science is that our intuitions about complexity do not necessarily apply to computer programs. In fact, it has proved relatively easy to create machines that can play chess at a high level, but so far impossible to create adequate car-driving systems. Because of this, an important component of modern computer science is a framework for quantifying the ‘difficulty’ or ‘complexity’ of a computational problem or algorithm in terms that are explicit and unambiguous. Starting with the work of the brilliant mathematician Alan Turing, and combined with further insights owing to Gödel, Church, Post, Kleene, Chomsky and many others, FLT has grown today into one key pillar of the theory of computation (and thus compiler design and many other aspects of computer science). The other main pillars are the theory of computability (what problems can or cannot be solved) and the theory of problem complexity (how the difficulty of problems scales with their size).

The theory of computation provides the practical basis for software tools we use everyday, which thus provide useful illustrations of the core concepts of FLT. We favour such everyday examples from computers, rather than mathematical formalisms, because we expect that most of our readers will have some experience with the former but not necessarily with the latter. More detailed and mathematical treatments are easy to find, and a paper in this issue provides a particularly accessible formal introduction designed for experimentalists.


Regular expressions

We start our survey with a simple, well-defined computational system, termed a finite-state machine, which is equivalent to another simple construct called a ‘regular expression’. Search functions, such as the dir command in DOS, or the ls function in UNIX, provide everyday examples. Such functions use a syntax that allows us to search for the arbitrary target pattern in a large database of words and/or numbers. Given a set of file names:

> filenames = {a.wav, b.doc, c.bmp, MySong.doc, MySong.wav}

running the function:

> ls *.wav filenames

(or the equivalent with dir in DOS) on this set will return the subset

> {a.wav, MySong.wav}.

The search string ‘*.wav’ says, in effect, ‘give me all the strings that end with “.wav” ’. The * character tells the ls or dir command that the string(s) can start with any characters in the alphabet, we do not care which or how many. This search string is one simple example of a general framework called ‘regular expressions’, which provide a very powerful basis for computer-based search that underlies searching, replacing and other functions in many computer programs. This ability to use regular expressions to match patterns was first instantiated in the grep function in UNIX/Linux, and has proved so useful that the term ‘grep’ has entered hacker lingo as a verb meaning ‘to search by computer’.

Regular expressions are composed using a few simple but powerful rules and operators, familiar to many computer users. The operator *, as used earlier, means ‘any string of any length’ and by appending it to our search string (e.g. ‘string’), we can find our target pattern even if preceded by anything (*string), followed by anything (string*) or buried in anything (*string*). More specific operators also allow us to specify a single, unspecified character (?), a character from a particular set (e.g. numbers {0–9} versus letters {a–z}), or even a specific number of characters from a certain set. Any time you have some pattern or a set of patterns that can be captured by a regular expression, you can use grep to search an arbitrary database for that pattern. You can grep for your name or email address or telephone number in the archives of a discussion group, or grep for a particular gene sequence in the online human genome database. The search engine Google is an extended version of grep that takes the entire web as its database. Regular expressions are at the core of computer search in today's world.

Given this flexibility and power, we might think that regular expressions are capable of specifying any kind of pattern that we can imagine. Crucially, however, this turns out not to be true. For instance, imagine a simple symmetrical pattern where a particular number of items of type A is followed by the same number of a different type B. Examples of this set include {AB, AABB, AAABBB, AAAABBBB, etc.}, and extend indefinitely (so a string of 1346 ‘A's followed by 1346 ‘B's is still a member of the set). This pattern is notated AnBn in FLT. It is easily proved that this set cannot be specified by a regular expression (see the textbooks listed earlier for mathematical proofs). We conclude from this fact that there are patterns that we can conceive of, and that we could easily (if laboriously) recognize ourselves, but that cannot be captured by a regular expression. Why does this matter? Because, as demonstrated by the mathematician Stephen Kleene in 1956 in the theorem that bears his name, regular expressions and the corresponding rule sets termed ‘regular grammars’ are exactly equivalent to one of the most ubiquitous classes of computing devices, which are termed ‘finite-state automata’.


Finite-state automata

FLT relies on abstract models of computational systems termed ‘automata’ (and often, perhaps confusingly, also often called ‘machines’). Two canonical examples of such models are the finite-state automaton (FSA) and the Turing machine. Automata such as these are mathematical abstractions, not real devices designed to be manufactured. For example, the Turing machine includes as part of its mathematical definition a storage tape of infinite length, and thus we could never build a real Turing machine. Many automata, although well-defined in theory, are unbuildable in practice (a fact that has some implications that we will discuss later). Despite this, the abstract notion of a Turing machine is extremely important and powerful in mathematics and FLT: infinity is a powerful tool for mathematical abstraction, but not a real thing that we find in the world.

The simplest class of well-defined automata are called finite-state automata because they have a finite number of operating states or ‘positions’. The FSA starts at a predefined start state, and then jumps between its other states, depending only on its current input and current state. For each of these jumps, it can emit an output symbol as it hops along. Thus, an FSA can be fully defined by its set of states, its input alphabet (the input symbols that it recognizes), an optional output alphabet (which might or might not be different) and a function that tells it which is the next state to go to, given its current state and current input. Any given FSA is capable of ‘recognizing’ a certain set of patterns, and rejecting others. By ‘recognize’ we mean simply that, given this pattern as input, it can generate some particular prespecified output (e.g. ‘OK’). The set of patterns recognizable by an FSA may be infinite. Because of this, and its simplicity, the FSA is a good starting point for further discussions of automata and computational complexity. Critically, as already mentioned, Kleene's Theorem demonstrates the equivalence, or interchangeability, of FSAs and regular expressions.

One point, overlooked by many, is that FSAs can recognize (or generate) a simple, long-distance dependency of the start-and-end sort (e.g. ab*a or cd*c) as the automaton in c shows (p. 1103). However, other patterns are clearly beyond the capabilities of an FSA, because we already know that certain patterns, such as AnBn, cannot be captured by regular expressions: they are beyond the capabilities of our simplest class of automaton. Thus, something with more computational power is clearly needed.


Turing machines

Other automata take an FSA as their starting point, and achieve additional computational power by adding some additional form of memory. The most important and powerful such automaton is the Turing machine, which adds to an FSA (the ‘controller’) a storage tape of unbounded length, on which symbols can be written or erased. Thus, in addition to possessing a large (but finite) set of states that its controller can occupy at any one moment, the Turing machine has by virtue of this tape an additional unlimited form of memory for storing past operations, intermediate results and so on. A Turing machine can easily recognize the AnBn language described earlier: it simply stores the number of times A has been repeated (that is, writes successive integers every time its input jumps from A to A) and then compares that with the number of Bs (B to B jumps). Thus, Turing machines are more ‘powerful’ than their FSA component, in the sense that they can recognize patterns and solve problems unsolvable by any FSA. This is not surprising given their additional resources. What is altogether more remarkable is that the Turing machine is capable of computing ANY deterministic function whatsoever: if something is computable, a Turing machine can compute it. Thus, modern computer scientists accept the Turing machine as their very definition of ‘computability’, broadly accepting the ‘Church/Turing thesis’ that a function is computable if and only if it is computable by a Turing machine.

The Turing machine and FSA are well-defined automata that provide useful endpoints for a scale of computational power: the FSA provides the lower level (which is powerful and practically useful, but has its limits), while the Turing machine provides the upper limit (it is all-powerful in the sense that, if a function is computable at all, an automaton in this class can compute it). We will use the term ‘computational power’ in this paper in this specific sense, framed by the specific automata discussed in FLT. We do not mean to imply by this that this is the only way to insightfully characterize the power of algorithms, or that ultimately this is the best way to think about the different aspects of brain function. What this specific sense of computational power gives us is an explicit, formal axis along which any particular algorithm can be placed, which thus provides one useful dimension along which to characterize the rule-governed capacities of a machine, or a human or animal subject. Other potentially useful dimensions will be discussed briefly at the end of this paper.

Given these two endpoints, we might immediately ask two questions:

— Are there other intermediate classes of automata, with powers greater than an FSA but less than a Turing machine?

— Where do human computational powers (or those of other species) fall along this spectrum?


The Chomsky hierarchy

In an attempt to answer the second question, the young Noam Chomsky and his colleagues built upon the framework already discussed and provided a positive answer to the first question. Chomsky outlined a set of intermediate formal possibilities, between the extremes of Turing machines and finite-state automata, and arranged them in a theoretical hierarchy that now bears his name. Because both the nature and the importance of this hierarchy are sometimes misunderstood, we will try to make clear here both what the Chomsky hierarchy is, and why it is important. First, let us consider the relationship between a Turing machine and an FSA. Because every Turing machine contains within it an FSA, anything computable (e.g. any pattern that can be recognized) by an FSA is perforce computable by a Turing machine. Thus, the set of FSA-recognizable patterns is a proper subset of those computable by a Turing machine. This is obvious from the way in which these automata are defined.

The Chomsky hierarchy incorporates several intermediate levels of automata, which have in common with the Turing machine an additional memory system but discard the assumption that this memory can be freely accessed. For example, a ‘pushdown automaton’ (PDA) includes an FSA and a pushdown stack (which is a memory that can only return the most recent item placed upon it, like the stack of trays in a cafeteria). Because a stack is more limited than the infinite tape, it is intuitive (and can be shown mathematically) that the PDA is less powerful than a Turing machine, while being more powerful than an FSA. And as before, the set of patterns recognizable by the PDA is a proper subset of those captured by the Turing machine. In fact, a PDA can recognize the AnBn language discussed earlier, which is beyond an FSA. Thus, we now have a nested set of patterns, enclosed one within the other like Russian dolls. A second intermediate form of automaton is called a linear-bounded automaton and includes both the FSA and PDA within it. provides an illustration of this nested hierarchy.

The Chomsky hierarchy provides a broad framework for discussing the computational power of automata, universally accepted in this role in theoretical computer science, algorithmic theory, FLT and discrete mathematics. It is well-defined, explicit and unambiguous and discussed and defined in any textbook on these topics. The Chomsky hierarchy contains no hidden assumptions about Universal Grammar, the ‘poverty of the stimulus’ argument or other of Chomsky's various more controversial ideas about language. A computer scientist using the Chomsky hierarchy need not accept other aspects of Chomsky's thought, any more than a logician using Bertrand Russell's innovations in mathematical logic need accept Russell's pacifism or atheism. While this should be an obvious point, we have been surprised by how often the distinction gets blurred. Although there are other ways to arrange automata in hierarchies of ascending power, as well as finer subdivisions of existing hierarchies, we focus on the Chomsky hierarchy in this work owing to its interdisciplinary acceptance and understanding. Anyone who studies basic computer science or the theory of algorithms will be familiar with the framework, and this is more than can be said for any other framework we know of. We do not claim that this whole set of automata (including FSAs and Turing machines) is the best or the most insightful way of arranging the different types of neural computations that we ultimately want to understand as psychologists, biologists or neuroscientists. Indeed, as our understanding of neural computation in vertebrates progresses, it seems likely that different hierarchies will arise, and prove to be more useful. Until such progress is made, however, FLT seems to provide the best theoretical starting point, and indeed has no obvious competition.

One might object that some models of neural computation, especially connectionist networks, offer just such an alternative framework. This is not true. In fact, neural networks are automata, like any other well-defined computational system. Indeed, surprisingly simple recurrent neural networks can be shown to be Turing-equivalent in principle (although programming such networks to do some of the tasks they could perform in theory has been difficult or impossible in practice). Other classes of automata, such as augmented transition networks, also take their place within this scheme. The power of the Turing machine framework is that it includes any computational device: the definition is formally equivalent to a vast number of alternative implementations, in a wide variety of forms (indeed many different computational frameworks were initially offered as alternatives to Turing machines, but were later shown to be Turing-equivalent). Thus, the term ‘computation’ is used here, and in computer science in general, in a very broad and inclusive sense to capture any algorithm (information processing system). Neural networks and a vast array of other implementations are part of this classification, not alternatives to it.


Formal language theory

With these preliminaries behind us, and the basic aims and principles of computational theory clarified, we can now introduce the terminology and principles of FLT. On the one hand, fortunately, this terminology is simple and unambiguous, and thus quite familiar because it maps the core technical concepts onto everyday terms. On the other hand, this familiarity can be deceptive and misleading. As typical with technical terms, we must beware of unwittingly slipping from interpreting the words in their technical sense to their broader everyday sense.

First, the terminology: an alphabet A is a set containing a finite number of indivisible symbols. A string (often termed, more confusingly, a word or a sentence) is a finite sequence of symbols, and a string-over-A is a finite sequence of symbols from A. The set of all such strings-over-A is denoted A*, pronounced ‘A star’. Finally, a language over A is any subset of A*. Put verbally, a ‘language’ in this abstract sense is some set of ‘legal’ strings from our alphabet A. Put concretely, lets say an alphabet A1 consists of the digits 0–9. Then any integer number is a member of a language defined over this alphabet (a member of the language denoted by A1*), but the number 1.35 is not (because the ‘.’ is not in our alphabet). The string ‘cat’ is, for the same reason, not a member of this language. Similarly, if our alphabet consists of the letters of the Roman alphabet a–z, we could define some more specific languages where ‘cat’ is contained in the language but ‘katze’ is not.

These terms and their definitions seem quite intuitive and easily understood. The danger is that they are so easy to understand that it is easy to forget what they do and do not involve. Most prominently, there is no discussion of meaning within this framework. Although we can easily design a grammar, in the technical sense, that can accept ‘cat’ while rejecting ‘katze’, this system has no understanding that these strings mean ‘feline animal’, or indeed that they could mean anything at all. A grammar responds purely to sequence and has no way of embodying meaning or of ‘understanding’ the signals that are fed to it. These systems are purely syntactic and have no semantics. Thus, ‘language’ in FLT is missing a substantial component of natural language (the central component of meaning). A ‘language’ in this formal context is a set of strings (a ‘stringset’), and nothing more.

Continuing our exploration of FLT, the simplest way to define a finite language is to simply list all its members. This ‘brute force’ approach is a possibility as long as the language is finite, e.g. for the set containing the words of English (e.g. a dictionary omitting names, loan words or neologisms). It will not, however, be able to deal with the integers, or the sentences of English, because the number of integers or English sentences is unlimited, and the list could never be complete (any candidate finite set can always be ‘trumped’ by adding ‘Mary thinks that’ to a randomly chosen member of the set). If the language in question is infinite, it cannot be listed, and our only hope is to come up with some finite set of rules to generate the language, termed a grammar. A grammar is a finite set of rules that specifies some (typically infinite) language. Note that the sentences making up such a set will themselves be finite (in the same way that the set of integers is infinite but each integer is itself finite).

We are finally in a position to restate the Chomsky hierarchy in explicit formal terms. The Chomsky hierarchy incorporates a nested set of automata of increasing power, each of which can generate the strings of some formally defined class of languages. The automata (which have already been discussed) are shown with their corresponding formal language classes, in. Our old friend, the FSA, is at the centre, with its corresponding language family, the regular languages. Next come the context-free languages, defined by PDAs, which are subsets of context-sensitive languages defined by linear-bounded automata. Finally, in the outer and most powerful ring, we find the languages recognizable by Turing machines. The grammars defining these languages have been given many names, but they were called ‘type 0’ by Chomsky (who dubbed a certain subset of these grammars ‘transformational grammars’).

A subtle terminological difficulty arises from the nested aspect of the rule systems just described. Because FSAs are contained within the class of PDA, the term ‘pushdown automaton’ sensu lattu logically includes all FSAs as a subset or special case. However, these terms are often used informally to exclude their subsets, much as the term ‘reptile’ is used by biologists to delineate all those descendants of the ancestral reptile who are not birds or mammals (the correct term ‘non-avian non-mammalian amniotes’ being a bit of a mouthful). Because this type of usage is quite indispensable in the research programme outlined here, we will explicitly define it. Using basic set theory, we can define any of these automata sensu strictu in an exclusive manner. Thus, we could use the term ‘PDA sensu strictu’ to delineate all PDAs that are not simply FSAs (in logical terms, this is the set of type 2 grammars omitting the set of type 3 grammars). Of particular importance in the present context are the ‘supra-regular grammars sensu strictu’, which we define as the class of all automata (that is, all Turing machines) that are not simply FSAs (that is, type 0, omitting type 3 grammars or equivalently ‘all grammars above the finite-state level’). This is the sense in which the terms ‘supra-regular grammar’ or ‘supra-regular processing’ will be used for the rest of the paper.


Formal language theory and natural language

As already suggested, Chomsky's primary interest in formalizing automata and organizing in this way was to provide an initial framework for understanding human natural language (‘natural’ meaning languages such as Warlpiri, French or English, as opposed to artificial languages such as mathematics, PROLOG or C++). In particular, Chomsky pointed out that English cannot be captured by a regular or ‘finite-state’ grammar (FSG) because it includes structures (particularly, phrase structures with multiple long-distance dependencies and recursive sentence structures) that are beyond any FSA's capabilities. He further argued that various linguistic phenomena of movement and sentence transformation (e.g. from active to passive) are beyond the capability of context-free languages as well, and thus that natural languages must occupy some broader subset of the type 0 grammars (which he termed ‘transformational’). However, it quickly became clear that transformational grammars are in fact too powerful, requiring a cumbersome set of constraints to make grammars with this degree of power tractable. Subsequently, theoretical linguists working within this formal paradigm have gradually honed in on the level of computational power required for natural language. After some years of suspicion that context-free grammars were up to the task, it is now clear that certain phenomena of natural language require context-sensitive grammars, and most researchers in this field now agree that human languages require ‘mildly context-sensitive’ grammars (MSCGs): grammars whose power is just a bit beyond those captureable by a context-free grammar.

What does it mean to say that ‘natural languages require grammars at the mildly context-sensitive’ level? First, note that any of these abstract classes of automata, including the weaker class of FSAs, contain many automata far beyond that of any human being. For instance, the Manhattan phone book is a finite list, easily captureable in a simple FSA that has one state for each name/number pair, but this language is far beyond the capacity of any human. Thus, the statement that ‘human languages require grammars of at least the power of a finite state automaton’ does not imply that the human brain could instantiate any FSA. Similarly, just because some animal species can be shown to do various tasks at the finite-state level, we cannot assume that they can induce any FSG. Whatever class of computational systems natural language entails, it will always be some subset of the categories of automata described in FLT. Thus, in applying the theory to real organisms, we can use it as a general road map, but we never expect any of these very abstract classes of grammars or languages to be co-extensive with our own capabilities (or those of animals or children).

This approach might correctly be termed ‘syntactocentric’, but exploiting FLT in empirical work in no way denies the central importance of meaning in language. Rather, it reflects an analytical, ‘divide and conquer’ strategy that chooses one component of the vast complex of human language, focusing on form rather than content. Fortunately, this form-based approach has been immensely productive in computer science, underlying many of the technological advances we take for granted today, and thus does not seem too limited to be of interest. More importantly, the current understanding of the most complex signalling systems in other animals (for example, bird or whale ‘song’), along with other rule-governed systems of humans (e.g. music) suggests that they, like formal languages, are focused on structure and not complex meaning encoded into units of the signal. The empirical approach we advocate here relies on explicit formal theories as the basis for experimental design, eschewing questions of signal meaning for the time being. Thus, ‘language’ in the formal sense used for the remainder of this paper means simply a set of strings defined by some grammar. No notion of meaning is entailed or implied for the ‘grammars’ we consider: they simply accept or reject strings as belonging to some language.

There are explicit theories that concern the information in signals (although this is quite different from meaning, as emphasized by Shannon), along with semantic models treating meaning in its own right. There are also empirical paradigms that focus on the acquisition of meaning by children and animals. Finally, it is possible to combine artificial grammar learning with meaning in the laboratory to create ‘artificial language learning’ experiments. There is thus no conflict between a focus on form (syntax or ‘grammar’) and content (meaning or ‘language’)—these are complementary fields of study that must, ultimately, be synergistically combined.

Given this caveat about the purely syntactic nature of FLT, one might ask why anyone should be interested in the question of where human (or animal) capabilities lie in the classification system of FLT. Here are a few reasons, ranging from practical to theoretical. From a purely practical viewpoint, scientists attempting to create computer programs that deal with corpora of data are greatly aided by knowing where the signal-generating system they are studying lies in this system. For instance, the parsing and compiling of either regular or context-free languages are well-defined problems with practical working solutions, but this is not true for context-sensitive languages (sensu strictu). The difference between a finite-state and context-free representation is also important to keep in mind when compiling computer code or analysing natural language texts. Knowing whether such texts demand context-free (or higher) powers, or not, is thus very valuable for anyone interested in building fast, robust computing systems. Similarly, recent years have seen an explosion of interest in complex animal signals such as bird song and whale song, and a vast amount of data have been pouring in from both laboratories and the field that needs to be processed by computer. The tools applied to this task need to be capable, at the formal level, of dealing with the actual complexity of these signals, and if such signals could be shown to require supra-regular grammars, the current crop of finite-state tools typically used to analyse them would be demonstrably inadequate.

In addition to these practical issues, there is a deeper theoretical reason for interest in the formal power of signal-generating systems. The core difference between human natural language and signal-generating systems such as music or birdsong, which can also generate highly complex signals, is that linguistic signals are used to transmit equally complex thoughts from one mind to another. Although music certainly communicates (e.g. mood or emotion, energy and many other powerful and subtle ‘messages’), there is no direct correspondence between the units of music (notes, phrases, etc.) and the structure of thought. For all its power and greatness, music simply cannot communicate plebian facts such as ‘the lion is in the third cave from the right’ or ‘you need to soak that nut in water and ashes for two days before you eat it’, nor can you use a musical phrase to represent those thoughts to yourself. Indeed, if (as in a few isolated cases) we use musical means such as drums or whistles to communicate thoughts, it ceases to be music and becomes language (‘drum talk’ or ‘whistle languages’). Thus, an intimate correspondence between signal and meaning is the raison d'etre of language, and the key factor differentiating it from music, and, as far as we know, the diverse signalling systems of every other species on our planet.

There are many grounds for suggesting that thought itself has a tree-like, hierarchical structure. Research in memory, category formation, word learning, visual cognition, Theory of Mind and many other fields all point to this conclusion, and Herbert Simon has advanced strong theoretical arguments for why a system of thought must have such a structure. But if thoughts have a tree-like structure, and are unlimited in number, any signalling system capable of encoding thoughts (that is, any ‘language’ worthy of the name, possessing semantics and thus beyond the rigorous confines of FLT) must be able to capture this structure. This is a potentially deep reason that natural languages have, and arguably must have, hierarchical phrase structure (that is, must go beyond simply stringing items together in a simple finite-state system)—they would be inadequate vehicles for thought if they did not. Although, by introducing meaning, this argument clearly goes beyond FLT, it provides the broader context in which these questions become centrally important to anyone interested in natural language as a whole. This has been clear since the beginnings of the discipline: the so-called ‘weak generative capacity’ (the ability to match stringsets alone) is of quite limited interest. Ultimately, the ability to recover the phrase structure(s) underlying a string (roughly speaking, ‘strong generative capacity’) is much more interesting, and obviously critical for recovering structured thoughts from linear signal strings. If it could be shown that the signal-generating system of some particular species is limited to a simple serial FSG (e.g. the chickadee calls of Hailman & Ficken and Hailman et al.), we need wonder no further why that system is not used to express unlimited combinatoric meanings and complex thoughts. Thus, although FLT only gives us tools for exploring signalling systems as stringset, not as meaningful systems, discovering whether the signals generated and processed in animal communication systems are limited to simple finite-state systems or not will have important ramifications for understanding their capacity to convey meaning, and ultimately for understanding the biology and evolution of language.


The role of infinity in formal language theory

Before we turn to experimental work grounded in FLT, we will briefly discuss the controversial issue of ‘infinity’ in discussions of language. This is an old issue, nicely encapsulated in Wilhelm von Humboldt's suggestions that human language makes ‘infinite use of finite means’. Clearly, every individual human has a finite memory, a finite lifespan and a finite (though astronomical) number of neurons and synapses. This has always been accepted. Nonetheless, most linguists or computer scientists happily accept that any natural language such as English or Chinese is infinite (in the sense of ‘unbounded’), in precisely the same way that the set of the integers is infinite. One argument for this parallels the argument for numbers: if someone claims to have identified the largest possible integer, you can easily prove them wrong by simply adding one to their proposed number. In the same way, any proffered ‘longest sentence’ x can be trumped by simply generating ‘John thinks that x’. Although each of these sentences is of a fixed and a finite length (there are no infinite sentences), the set of sentences is infinite. From this mathematical perspective, we should no more doubt the infinity of English than we doubt the infinity of the integers.

However, there are more subtle arguments for and against the importance of infinity in natural language. For example, the list of sentences a child hears before fixing on a grammar of English is surely finite, as is the list of all sentences an individual will produce in his/her lifetime. In principle, such lists could be captured by a finite-state system, in the extreme case simply as a list of those sentences. In contrast, all of the proofs used in FLT to demonstrate supra-regularity use the argument of infinity to prove their case (typically this involves invoking the pumping lemma). From a strictly mathematical viewpoint, suspending the axiom that languages are infinite would invalidate most such proofs, and thus greatly weaken FLT.

However, no one supposes that the child simply memorizes all heard sentences: any language user can generate and understand novel sentences, beyond the finite input they received in childhood. Some system of more general or abstract rules is necessary to account for this ability. As Chomsky notes, ‘a grammar must reflect and explain the ability of a speaker to produce and understand new sentences which may be much longer than any he has previously heard’. The minimum that we might need to account for such generalization is a probabilistic model over a finite-state system (some form or another of a ‘Markov process’). But as Chomsky further observes in the same passage ‘the point is that there are processes of sentence formation that this elementary model for language is intrinsically incapable of handling’, and those include sentences with multiple embedding and nested- or crossed-dependency. Thus, ‘the assumption that languages are infinite is made for the purpose of simplifying the description’, and to allow mathematical proofs that apply to all and every sentence. But there is no theoretical difficulty at all in limiting stack depth or tape length in supra-regular grammars.

Another convincing counter-argument, owing to Levelt, goes as follows. Let us assume that human language use could be modelled by a FSA, augmented with transition probabilities (a form of Markov process). For this model to have any psychological validity, a child would need enough data to infer these probabilities from the input. So we can ask what order of Markov approximation would be needed for typical sentences. This reduces to the question ‘how many words can separate two words that are dependent upon one another in a sentence?’ In the grammatical English sentence ‘The woman you recently invited to come to New York and give a lecture in our department seems to be sick’, 15 words intervene between the inter-dependent words ‘woman’ and ‘seems’. An attentive English speaker will certainly notice if this pair were incorrectly inflected (e.g. ‘The woman … seem’ or ‘The women … seems’). Hence, we would need a k-limited Markov source with k = 15 to capture this dependency reliably. But Levelt shows that even with unrealistically lenient assumptions [vol. 3, p. 76], such a Markov grammar would require an enormous number of parameters, on the order of 415, or more than one billion. The busy child would need to set about 30 parameters per second, throughout all of childhood, to assimilate such a model. Thus, a finite-state model must be limited to be learnable (and thus unable to deal with long-distance dependencies) or it could be theoretically adequate but, owing to the huge number of parameters, practically useless as a model of the child. This argument can be made from many different perspectives, but will always come to the same conclusion: given realistic assumptions, no regular grammar can adequately model English or any other natural language. This is both a practical and a theoretical conclusion.

This combination of arguments has led most commentators to accept the supra-regular hypothesis for humans. Of course, any model of human cognition will make simplifications, and thus will be inadequate in certain ways. This is intrinsic to model-building. What we seek are models that make the right generalizations, and that fail in reasonable ways. For example, we can make a simple modification of the weakest supra-regular system, a push-down automaton, in which the stack memory is of a fixed, limited depth. Such a model has no problem with long-distance dependencies, but it will have problems with multiple levels of embedding. This is precisely what is observed in humans experimentally, in abundant psycholinguistic research. In other words, supra-regular models with finite stores (limited stack depth or tape length) fail in ways that seem much more realistic as models of human performance.

In conclusion, we should not conclude from the importance of infinity in formal mathematical proofs that infinity plays a central role when we turn to practical empirical issues. Infinity is a powerful tool for abstraction, and its judicious use in mathematics allows a kind of certainty that is wonderfully satisfying. For example, Fourier's Theorem proves that any complex signal can be built up by a series of sine and cosine waves. Unfortunately, the proof requires an infinitely periodic signal (which continues unvarying from the infinite past to the infinite future), as well as an infinite set of sine waves. Despite these unrealistic assumptions, the discrete Fourier transform, applied to real signals, turns out to be an incredibly powerful tool at the heart of every mobile telephone and spectrographic programme on the planet today. In the same way, we can readily assume that PDA's stack or our Turing machine's tape will be of limited depth, and try to match this to empirical observations of finite humans. Although in doing so we lose the ethereal certainty of theorems, we lose few if any of the practically relevant insights of FLT.


Empirical investigations using formal language theory

In the rest of this paper, we explore how FLT can be used, practically, by biologists, psychologists and neuroscientists, to design and execute experiments and analyse the resulting data. Often, such studies use artificial grammar learning (AGL) paradigms, see. Because most of the recent literature reviving the supra-regular hypothesis has focused on the finite-state/context-free distinction, we start with a detailed investigation of one particularly simple supra-regular grammar: the ‘counting grammar’ AnBn, which has been the focus of numerous recent studies.


AnBn: a model supra-regular grammar

The stringset defined by AnBn, in which the number of ‘A’ units is precisely matched by the number of ‘B’ units, has played a prominent role in the development of FLT. It is a textbook example of a simple language that cannot be captured by a regular grammar, as already discussed. Despite its ubiquity in the theoretical literature, to our knowledge, the first use of this grammar in experiments was that by Fitch & Hauser, who compared the acquisition of two different grammars in two different species: humans and cotton-top tamarins, a New World monkey species. One grammar was the simple regular grammar (AB)n, which entails any number of ‘AB’ units, and the other was AnBn. In both cases, the units were consonant–vowel speech syllables, with the A units spoken by a human female and the B units by a male. Fitch & Hauser found that, while college undergraduates were able to master both grammars, the monkeys only showed above-chance rejection of non-grammatical stimuli for the regular grammar. The monkey's success on the regular grammar showed that the techniques were adequate to elicit rule learning, with generalization, from this species. Fitch & Hauser concluded from this pair of results that monkeys ‘can spontaneously master’ the regular grammar, but are unable to cope with the supra-regular grammar, and thus that ‘tamarins are unable to process a simple phrase structure’ (where ‘phrase structure grammar’ was explicitly defined to mean a supra-regular grammar sensu strictu). This conclusion is clearly consistent with the supra-regular distinctiveness hypothesis discussed in Fitch et al..

Unfortunately, this conclusion was immediately misinterpreted as concerning ‘recursion’, in a commentary in the same issue by David Premack, which stated ‘In a paper on page 377 of this issue, Fitch & Hauser report that tamarin monkeys are not capable of recursion. Although the monkeys learned a non-recursive grammar, they failed to learn a grammar that is recursive. Humans readily learn both.’ [p. 318]. This was an unfortunate mischaracterization, because the Fitch & Hauser paper drew no conclusions about, and indeed made no mention of, recursion. Their inference was explicitly focused on the supra-regular boundary, which has no clear relationship to recursion or recursive rules (see below). It was quickly pointed out that there are many ways to recognize the AnBn language, only some of which might necessarily involve recursion. Unfortunately, the incorrect belief that AnBn provides a litmus test for recursion was further perpetuated by a second study testing for recognition of the AnBn grammar, this time in starlings. Gentner and co-workers found convincing evidence for recognition of AnBn and titled their paper ‘Recursive syntactic pattern learning by songbirds’ (although in the text of this paper, the authors apparently recognize that the actual property being tested is context-freeness). In a commentary on the starling paper, Gary Marcus stated that ‘The AnBn language is generally assumed to be recursive’. As a result of these multiple characterizations, there is now considerable confusion in the literature about what, exactly, mastery of AnBn (or other supra-regular grammars), by humans or any other species, is supposed to indicate. We now discuss the possibilities.


Mastery of AnBn indicates a supra-regular system

From the viewpoint of FLT, a system's ability to recognize the stringset generated by AnBn tells us one thing, and one thing only: that the system is supra-regular (beyond finite state), and therefore has some form of auxiliary working memory, such as a push-down stack, counter or tape, that is not available to an FSA. Although a weak automaton that can recognize AnBn is a PDA, with a stack depth limited to the maximum value of n, any more powerful automaton (such as a linear-bounded automaton or a Turing machine) can also recognize (or generate) this stringset. Thus, simple mastery of this grammar by some system is not sufficient to tell us where in the nested class of systems occupying the supra-regular portion of the Chomsky hierarchy it lies: only that it is supra-regular.

This ambiguity has important implications for the parsing of AnBn strings, as illustrated in the structural diagrams of. Each of three diagrams exemplifies a different computational mechanism able to recognize the AnBn language. The top-most, which is the most obvious and appears to capture what humans spontaneously do when confronted with this stringset, could be called ‘count and compare’. This involves simply tallying the number of ‘A's, storing that number, tallying the number of ‘B's that follow and tallying that number and then comparing the two. This could be implemented by an integer register that is incremented by one for each A, and decremented for each B (it should then be 0 for grammatical strings). Two registers could also be used, one holding each of the two counts, and comparing them (a). A PDA could recognize the same stringset by storing the number of ‘A's as a series of marks, pushed one by one onto a stack, and then ‘erased’ by removing them from the stack for each corresponding B. An MCSG compatible solution would be to write a 1 for each A on a tape. Once the B phrase starts, this system would rewind, and then cross off a one for each successive B. In either of the last two cases, an empty stack or a blank tape would be required for acceptance. Crucially, all of these alternative algorithms require supra-regular processing resources (whether register, stack or tape), and each suggests a different order of processing. What is relevant then is that there is some way of representing the exact number of ‘A's, and if this value is not bounded a priori to any fixed number, the system is perforce supra-regular. No conclusions about recursion are warranted.


Eliminating finite-state ‘cheats’ with generalization and mis-matched foils

What evidence is needed for us to conclude that a system ‘recognizes’ the AnBn language? As illustrates, there are many possible regular grammars that could accept strings of this language, and correctly reject many others, and we need to exclude these alternatives if we wish to infer that our system instantiates a supra-regular grammar. For example, the set of all strings made up of ‘A's and ‘B's (written {A,B}*) includes AnBn as a subset, as does the set of all strings that start with ‘A's and end with ‘B's (written A*B*). Similarly, the union of two regular grammars, A2B2 and A3B3, accepts all AnBn strings where n = 2 or 3. These and other regular grammars provide potential ‘cheats’ that would allow a regular system above-chance performance in experiments like these.

While it is difficult to exclude all possible regular grammars, we can eliminate most of the reasonably simple ones by employing foils (to exclude the overly general cases) and extensions (to exclude the overly specific grammars). Thus, after exposure to AnBn strings where n = 2 or 3, we can then test our candidate system with A4B4 (n = 4) strings. If the system has induced the supra-regular rule, it should accept these generalizations. In contrast, the ‘regular union’ grammar given earlier would reject such extensions. So this provides one crucial test, allowing us to empirically exclude overly specific regular grammars. Both humans and starlings trained on A2B2 accept such generalizations, suggesting that neither species implements overly specific templates to identify their stringsets.

A second possibility is an overly lenient grammar that accepts the target strings but many others besides. A particularly crucial superset of AnBn is the regular language A*B*. A system implementing this grammar would accept all AnBn strings and correctly reject ABAB or BAAB strings. The crucial test in this case is the ‘unmatched foil’ AnBm, where n ≠ m. Such strings will be accepted by A*B* or similar variant regular grammars, but clearly rejected by any system implementing AnBn. Although Fitch & Hauser did not test for this, several later studies showed that humans spontaneously reject such unmatched foils, strongly suggesting that they induce the supra-regular grammar as opposed to A*B*. Starlings also rejected such mismatches.

However, there is a third and more subtle possibility, noted by van Heijningen et al., that different subjects might implement different regular grammars, and that the composite result (if all individuals are lumped together) might appear to constitute significant evidence for supra-regularity, even if the behaviour of each individual subject is consistent with a simpler set of regular rules. Excluding this hypothesis involves either statistical analysis by individual and/or a maximum-likelihood approach, where each grammar is treated as a hypothesis, and the likelihood that this would generate the observed accept/reject data from one or more birds is calculated. Placing zebra finches in an operant set-up very similar to that of Gentner & co-workers, these authors argued that both their birds and Gentner's might be ‘succeeding’ on the task using a motley collection of regular grammars. While it is fair to say that this question remains open, these data opened the door for the most recent study.

Abe & Watanabe used a habituation–dishabituation to probe pattern perception in Bengalese finches (Lonchura striata domestica), and again provided evidence for learning of the AnBn grammar in this species. In this case, rather than operant training, a mere exposure paradigm was employed, and vocalizations produced to different grammars and their violations were used as a dependent variable. The authors found that listening birds chirped more to novel AnBn strings, including novel extensions to n = 4. Unfortunately, they do not appear to have tested their finches with ‘unmatched foils’ AnBm, where n ≠ m, and thus we cannot exclude the regular grammar A*B* based on these data. The reason, presumably, is that the authors were focused on a different question: item-wise dependency in relation to ‘centre-embedding’. For further critique of this study, see Beckers et al. and ten Cate & Okanoya.


Long-distance dependency versus ‘centre-embedding’

This brings us to a second widespread misconception about the AnBn grammar: that it necessarily involves centre-embedded dependency relationships between particular ‘a’ and ‘b’ items. There are two reasons that this assumption is incorrect. First, as clarified earlier, although recognizing AnBn requires a supra-regular system, we have no basis for assuming any particular supra-regular automaton must be used to do so. While one might suggest that a context-free grammar is the most parsimonious assumption, and therefore that nested matching would be most natural (b), a system that possessed a tape (like a linear bounded automaton or Turing machine) might just as well implement a cross-serial matching as in c. This seems particularly likely in the case of humans because we know that cross-serial dependencies are required in some languages such as Dutch or Swiss German (and we can thus infer that humans possess capabilities above context-free, see earlier text). So if the system did infer dependencies between items, there is no compelling reason to assume that these would be nested rather than crossed.

A more important reason is that most grammars capable of recognizing the AnBn language make no demands that particular A items should match particular B items. Indeed, one simple way to write this grammar involves a random selection of A and B terminals (a). A different version that would entail dependencies between specific A and B items seems, in principle, more complicated (b). Put in terms of the various mechanisms discussed earlier, there is no reason for an automaton recognizing AnBn to write individual ‘a's or ‘b's to its stack or tape memory: it suffices to simply put any mark (e.g. a 1) for any A, and then subsequently count or erase them for each B. It is thus not surprising that humans exposed to AnBn strings do not keep track of or notice any particular correspondences, even if the experimenter employed a grammar like b to generate them. Since neither of these two grammars is more correct, it is in no sense a failure if human subjects exposed to strings from b induce the grammar in a, because both are fully adequate grammars for recognizing AnBn. The assumption of a centre-embedding item-wise dependency appears to rest on confusion between phrasal dependency (which AnBn obviously has) with item-wise dependency (which it does not necessarily have).

Of course, it remains an interesting question what kinds of dependencies humans (or birds) exposed to AnBn strings attend to, or can learn, and a considerable literature has grown up exploring this topic, further discussed by several of the papers in this issue. Several commentators have concluded that the ‘count and compare’ option is not particularly relevant to human language, and so although this potential strategy would be supra-regular, it would be of less interest than the centre-embedded or serially linked options. Very briefly, two early studies with humans found that humans exposed to AnBn strings generated with item-wise dependencies (as in b) failed to notice these dependencies. It is worth noting that Perruchet & Rey employed neither generalization over n nor ‘mismatch’ foils, and thus the conclusions they can draw from their study about supra-regularity are weak. In contrast, while the Dutch subjects in de Vries et al. did successfully reject such unmatched strings, demonstrating their acquisition of a supra-regular rule, they did not recognize violations of centre-embedding dependencies. This led to the provisional conclusion that subjects in these studies had mastered the stringset using ‘counting’ or some similar strategy, rather than embedding. However, several later studies demonstrate that, given proper training, humans can learn either nested or crossed dependencies in an AnBn framework, and Bengalese finches may spontaneously master at least symmetrical centre-embedded dependencies. Thus, all three of the structures in can be acquired by human subjects, depending on the conditions.

In summary, humans exposed to AnBn stringset spontaneously appear to adopt the simplest strategy—matching the number of ‘A's with that of ‘B's—rather than inferring item-wise dependencies. However, with adequate training, humans can induce grammars over any of the three possible structures in. We stress that all of these are supra-regular, and that although several of the earlier-mentioned studies have been framed as critiques, they all confirm the basic capacity of humans to master this stringset. At issue, then, is not the supra-regular hypothesis, but the ‘item-wise centre-embedding’ hypothesis. Unfortunately, this is not a hypothesis that the AnBn grammar is well suited to test: other supra-regular grammars seem much more suited to address this question. In particular, the mirror grammar (written as wwR, where w represents any string and R indicates ‘reversed’) is another supra-regular grammar, recognizable by a context-free grammar, well suited to examine pattern-based centre-embedding. A mirror grammar over {A,B} generates strings such as ABBA, BAAB, BABBAB, etc., in which the right half mirrors the left half (and incidentally contains all of AnBn as a subset).


What is the AnBn grammar good for?

Assessing this ongoing debate, it seems reasonable to ask whether a further study of the well-studied AnBn language is useful. This of course depends on the questions one is attempting to ask. Those who have employed it with human/animal comparisons have, for the most part, been focused on the ‘supra-regular distinctiveness’ hypothesis, and for this, the AnBn grammar is and remains a valid tool. In contrast, most human-only studies have focused on the ‘centre-embedding hypothesis’ and drawn negative conclusions about the relevance of this type of grammar for natural language, at least if humans can recognize its strings via the ‘count and compare’ strategy. The argument in this case is that because natural language does not implement counting of words and comparing across phrases, this computational ability is of little interest in understanding language evolution.

There are two answers to this question. The first is that, if one is focused on the ability to infer grammars beyond the regular or finite-state level, ‘count-and-compare’ is just as squarely beyond this level as is the mirror grammar. Crucially, a substantial animal cognition literature demonstrates that many vertebrates can count, exactly, for small integers up to four or five: one reason that all of the animal studies discussed earlier used small phrase sizes, of four or below. But recognizing AnBn requires more than simple counting: the system must count and compare across phrases. The evidence from animals, thus far, suggests that this computation, unlike counting, is difficult or impossible for most tested non-human species. This failure seems very relevant to any detailed analysis of the computational capabilities of different species’ brains.

It is also important to remember that operations that seem intuitively ‘simple’ to us may not be at all simple to other organisms. A good example of this is the detection of bilateral symmetry, which seems so automatic and trivial to us as humans that it might seem to be a very basic and primitive operation. However, considerable research indicates that, at least in those species tested, a generalized notion of bilateral (or mirror) symmetry is not obvious to animals, and indeed may be beyond reach, even with training. In FLT, mirror symmetry detection is another computational operation requiring at least a context-free grammar. This capability can be probed with the same AnBn or mirror grammars that have been used to generate written or spoken stimuli (Stobbe et al. provide more evidence of a limitation to sub-regular visual computation, in pigeons and parrots).

If there is a fundamental computational restriction that prevents most species from accessing even bilateral symmetry or ‘count-and-compare’ strategies, this is surely relevant to these species' inability to acquire the syntax of natural language, which by all accounts require supra-regular capabilities of at least this level of computational power. We certainly encourage the testing of multiple species with many other supra-regular grammars, but as a particularly simple starting point, the AnBn grammar seems well suited for testing the ‘supra-regular distinctiveness’ hypothesis.

A variant of this positive answer is provided by multiple brain imaging studies in humans that suggest that the use of the AnBn grammar (even if implemented by ‘count-and-compare’) activates different neural processing routines from the (AB)n and similar regular grammars. We will discuss these findings, which remain contentious, later, but here it suffices to note that the specific regions engaged are strikingly similar to those activated in natural language syntax tasks, whose relevance to human language cannot be questioned.

This literature also illustrates a potential pitfall of the AnBn grammar. From the viewpoint of FLT, the question about whether a species (or a brain region) can cope with supra-regular stringsets needs to be separated from questions of centre-embedding (which is one of several possible strategies for processing AnBn) or recursion (which is not a question that can be answered with this type of experiment). While the AnBn grammar is simple and well suited for investigating the basic issue of supra-regularity, those interested in issues of dependency might benefit from branching out to other grammar types. For example, the ‘mirror grammar’ wwR is not just supra-regular, but its recognition requires long-distance dependencies between classes, and these dependencies are centre-embedded. In contrast, the ‘copy grammar’ ww has cross-serial dependencies, which require a supra-context-free computational capacity (and thus a linear ‘tape’ form of working memory, rather than a push-down stack that can cope with AnBn or the mirror grammar). We suggest that pitting the mirror and copy grammars against one another may be more rewarding than continuing to apply AnBn to questions it is not the best tool for.


Variations of testing paradigms: a plethora of choices

One difficulty in comparing results across multiple species, or even across studies with humans, lies in the variation in testing paradigms. Starting with humans, and restricting ourselves to the AnBn grammar, stimuli have been presented in the domains of written, spoken or synthesized syllables, have involved explicit training with feedback or virtually no instructions (‘mere exposure’) and have employed explicit yes/no answers (verbally, or via a computer interface). Other AGL studies have used more exotic stimuli, including musical or tactile inputs.

Regarding animal experiments, there is so much variability that few fair comparisons can be made across species. One key difference concerns training and reinforcement. Humans readily acquire multiple grammars, including AnBn, without training or reinforcement in ‘mere exposure’ paradigms using only positive examples. In contrast, most animal studies have involved tens of thousands of reinforced trials over months or years, although a few studies use spontaneous behaviour (e.g. looking behaviour) to investigate what types of ‘pattern conception’ are used spontaneously, without training. Each of these approaches has advantages and shortcomings: for exploring fundamental computational limits, training regimes are superior because a failure after extended training is more convincing. For exploring spontaneous learning or species proclivities, mere exposure and looking time provide more relevant information.

Another important difference between techniques is whether single grammars or dual grammars are presented. In traditional human AGL work, as in spontaneous techniques using animals, positive exemplars from a single grammar are first presented in the exposure phase, and then single-test stimuli are presented to be accepted or rejected. This allows researchers to investigate what is learned from exposure to positive exemplars. In contrast, most training research with feedback requires negative exemplars to be presented as well. So, in a two-alternative forced-choice paradigm, one of the choices must be incorrect and thus stem from some other grammar than the one of interest. Even if the ‘positive’ exemplars (the ones whose choice gives a reward) are from a particular grammar, subjects might be learning to avoid the second grammar. This complicates the design and interpretation of such experiments.

In general, there are too few studies in which different species are given the same stimuli in comparable tasks to permit fair comparisons. The failure of tamarins in a spontaneous task involving AnBn cannot be directly compared with the apparent success of starlings on the same grammar, given that the starlings received tens of thousands of trials of training with feedback to achieve this success. The best species comparisons available to date are those that use spontaneous or mere exposure techniques to compare humans and animals or which provide training to both species. Comparisons across animal species will require collaboration among laboratories, and clear decisions about the hypotheses to be tested and resultant experimental design.

One final issue of comparability is particularly salient in auditory AGL tasks using vocalizations. Fitch & Hauser used recorded human voices to test both monkeys and humans, and it might be that these stimuli are less salient to tamarins than conspecific vocalizations might be (though the monkeys’ success on the (AB)n task indicates that they do pay attention to patterns in human voices, which is unsurprising given captive animals’ close and dependent relationship to humans for feeding and care). Human voices have also been used successfully with rats. However, most animal studies have used conspecific vocalizations to build up the test strings, giving greater success (but unfortunately have not tested any other species, such as humans, with the same strings). We suggest that in the future, animal researchers test humans with identical strings to allow at least this species comparison. Another way around this problem is to use strings built up of abstract sounds (e.g. synthesized musical sounds), or abstract images to allow a fair, neutral comparison among different species.


Empirical investigations II: neuroscientific data

The second major wave of research capitalizing on the AGL/FLT combination is in neuroscience, and particularly human brain imaging research. An important research paradigm using the FLT framework is the AGL learning paradigm introduced more than 40 years ago by Reber. In these pioneering behavioural studies, Reber used AGL to demonstrate that humans can implicitly learn rule systems consisting of a set of non-linguistic rules governing the concatenation of meaningless letter strings. In this work, FSGs were used as a model rule system, simple enough to learn, but complex enough to be challenging. But the focus in this literature was on the learning and its implicit/explicit nature rather than on the grammar itself, and despite scores of publications this research paradigm apparently never ventured beyond regular grammars.

In contrast, a new and fast-growing field has used FLT to design many different grammars, including supra-regular grammars, to probe the neural mechanisms that underlie abstract pattern recognition abilities in humans, and compare them with those involved in natural language processing. Such studies involve brain imaging technologies such as electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). EEG measures brain electrical activity, while functional MRI (fMRI) images blood flow. Both techniques thus index cognitive function in the brain. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) uses a powerful magnetic field to perturb neural function, allowing experimental evaluation of the role of particular brain areas. Finally, diffusion-weighted MRI or diffusion-tensor imaging (DTI) can be used to image both grey matter anatomy and the white matter fibre tracts connecting different brain regions that constitute a network. A crucial aspect of the new brain imaging studies lies in the comparison of the brain activation for artificial and natural grammars to investigate whether particular types of artificial grammar recruit brain regions and networks used in processing natural language grammar.


Natural language data

One focus of particularly intensive, and controversial, research in recent neurolinguistics concerns Broca's area, or the left lateral prefrontal cortex more generally, and its role in processing linguistic syntax and sequential patterns. The term ‘Broca's area’ refers anatomically to the pars opercularis and pars triangularis in the left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) and cytoarchitectonically to Brodmann's areas BA 44 and 45. In Broca's original article, this area was seen as a speech production centre, but seminal research from Caramazza, Zurif and co-workers revealed that this same region plays an important role in syntax processing during comprehension as well. This has emerged as an extremely robust finding in the neuroscience of language, but consensus concerning its exact significance remains elusive.

The debate concerns the degree to which Broca's area is specialized for syntax processing or even linguistic processing more generally, or rather subserves some domain- and modality-general computations such as hierarchical planning, working memory or selection among competing alternatives. Advocates of different models often have different theoretical backgrounds, and adjudication is made difficult by the theory-specific characterization of each different model. One of the first models assigned the computational role of Broca's area to a particular form of syntactic working memory needed to process syntactically complex sentences, thereby specifically relevant for syntactic processing.

In a related, but more specifically linguistic, model, Grodzinsky suggested a syntax-specific role for Broca's area, based on the traditional generative notion of ‘syntactic movement’. ‘Movement’ refers to a particular syntactic computation that can be described as follows. Complex sentence structures often feature words that make reference to distant ‘empty’ slots in the same sentence, and a traditional approach to such long-distance dependencies is that they result from an abstract ‘movement’ of the word away from its original location. Oversimplifying for clarity, if we start with the sentence ‘John likes sandwiches’, we might construct the interrogative ‘What does John like?’ by changing ‘sandwiches’ to ‘What’ and then moving this word to the front of the sentence. Thus, the interrogative wh- word ‘what’ is linked to the empty slot at the end of the sentence, where the direct object of ‘like’ would normally go (this is thus termed ‘wh- movement’). Grodzinsky & Santi reviewed data from aphasic patients, suggesting that only sentences that possess this type of linkage are particularly difficult for Broca's aphasics, and thus that the role of Broca's area is best characterized by the computation of ‘movement’. Using fMRI, they provided additional evidence in support of this view.

A neuroanatomically more fine-grained model suggested by Friederici argues for a functional subdivision of Broca's area into an anterior part (BA 47/45) responsible for semantic relations, and a posterior part (BA 44) subserving processing of syntactic relations, in particular long-distance dependencies involving syntactic transformations. A recent overview of fMRI studies on syntactic complexity in different natural languages and different sentence structures including ‘movement’, ‘scrambling’ and ‘nesting’ revealed a clear involvement of Broca's area as syntactic complexity in these constructions increases. Across these different studies, ‘movement’-related activation is localized in the more anterior-ventral part of Broca's area (BA 45), whereas ‘scrambling’ clusters in the more posterior part of Broca's area (BA 44). ‘Nesting’, i.e. the processing of centre-embedded structures, was only investigated in a few fMRI studies. One study that evaluated the processing of centre-embedded sentences found activation in BA 44 increased with the number of embeddings. The three models discussed so far all focus on multiple long-distance dependencies, which—as we have seen—typically entail supra-regular processing resources (e.g. a register, stack or tape).

These three models posit an exclusive role for at least some portion of Broca's area in processing syntax. An alternative framework has been suggested by Hagoort, who offered a broader characterization of the role of the LIFG as subserving linguistic unification, applying across the domains of phonology, syntax and semantics. ‘Unification’ is a powerful computational operation in which pairs of structures can be combined repeatedly to form larger structures, if certain matching conditions are met. Linguistic unification typically starts by combining lexical items, which have certain necessary syntactic properties (e.g. some verbs may require both a subject and an object, and the verb phrase formed by unifying all these could later be used in a larger construction). Unification is a core operation in many modern grammatical formalisms (e.g. categorial grammar and tree-adjoining grammar) as well as in programming languages such as Prolog. Unification, in general, requires supra-regular computational resources.

Thus, all of these models have in common that they attempt to single out a certain component of syntactic complexity for which Broca's area plays an important processing role. In each case, sophisticated models have been proposed to ground the neuroscientific results in linguistic theory, but in each case the terms used are specific to a given theoretical framework (even though they can cope with the same syntactic phenomena). Progress in testing these different ideas requires an over-arching framework broad enough to encompass all of these possibilities, and precise enough to specify their differences from one another and from other hypotheses about the computational role of Broca's area. FLT, and the theory of computation more generally, seems well suited to this role. In particular, it is noteworthy that all of the earlier-mentioned characterizations of the role of LIFG share the necessity of supra-regular processing resources.


Artificial grammar-learning data

Neuroimaging studies on AGL have tried to elucidate the neural mechanisms of language learning and have provided insight into the nature of knowledge that is learnt in artificial grammars of a given type. Different studies have focused on different aspects of rule and grammar learning.

The first generation of AGL neuroimaging studies focused on the neural correlates of implicit leaning using Reber-type FSGs. They revealed that two aspects of learning, namely similarity-based learning and abstract rule learning, were correlated with two different brain systems. The former learning type was seen to involve the left hippocampus, whereas the latter was found to activate anterior prefrontal cortices bilaterally. Other AGL studies reported activation in the anterior part of the middle frontal gyrus and the parietal lobe bilaterally. Although the term ‘grammar’ was used, these studies focused on the learning of rule-based sequences rather than on language processing. And indeed, the brain activation patterns reported in these studies were somewhat different from the neural network for natural language processing, which usually recruits the left temporal cortex and left inferior frontal cortex. Also, event-related brain potential studies reported different patterns for the processing of linguistic and non-linguistic artificial grammars. Violations in non-linguistic sequences (i.e. Reber-type grammars) revealed a domain-general centro-parietally distributed positivity around 300 ms, called P300 and considered to be domain-general. In contrast, learners of a linguistic artificial grammar (i.e. mimicking the phrase structure of natural languages) demonstrated an early anterior negativity to violations in the string, similar to syntactic violations in natural languages.

The second generation of neuroimaging studies tried to relate AGL research more to natural language research, testing artificial grammars more similar to natural grammars, for example, a grammar named BROCANTO. BROCANTO is a simple FSG with a restricted number of syntactic rules and a restricted number of words in different syntactic word classes (e.g. nouns, verbs, etc.). Using this type of grammar, an fMRI study found that the initial phase of learning was correlated with high activation in the left hippocampus known to support item memory consolidation, but that the activation in the left hippocampus decreased and activation in the left Broca's area increased as learning progressed. This learning-related change in the brain activity was interpreted to reflect a transition from similarity-based learning supported by the hippocampus to a syntactic rule-based processing in Broca's area. A follow-up study used a variant of BROCANTO (introducing a complementizer that obligatorily required a word order change) to investigate local and long-distance dependencies in a sentence. While the processing of a dependency in a local phrase structure activated the left ventral premotor cortex (BA 6), the processing of a long-distance dependency in a hierarchical structure activated Broca's area (BA 44), indicating a difference in the functional neuroanatomy of these two dependency types. Other studies have used ‘jabberwocky’ sentences to investigate grammatical processing and found that the network centred on Broca's area was sensitive to grammatical hierarchy, irrespective of whether meaningful or meaningless words were used.

Another interesting fMRI study compared the learning of a natural and an unnatural language. Italian natives had to learn Japanese or a language with Japanese words but a syntax disobeying the principles of any natural grammar. For the language that followed the universal principles of natural grammars (Japanese), an increase in activation in the left Broca's area and the right prefrontal was found, but not for the language disobeying such rules. This study suggested that artificial grammars following the principles of natural grammars recruit Broca's area (BA 44/45), while artificial grammars disobeying these principles do not.

An early neuroscientific study explicitly adopting an FLT framework, published by Friederici et al., contrasted the supra-regular AnBn grammar with the regular (AB)n grammar in a between-subjects fMRI design. They found increased activation of the frontal operculum (an area immediately ventral to Broca's area) for syllable sequences of both grammars, suggesting a role in immediate sequencing. Additional activation of BA 44, in the heart of Broca's area, occurred only with the supra-regular AnBn grammar. They concluded by hypothesizing that BA 44 is particularly activated in tasks requiring ‘the computation of hierarchical dependencies’. In a further important finding, this study used DTI to examine the white-matter connections stemming from these two different areas, and uncovered two separable neural networks. While the frontal operculum had preferential connections to the anterior temporal lobe via the uncinate fasiculus, BA 44 connected via an independent dorsally located white matter fibre tract to the posterior and middle temporal lobe: the Broca-to-Wernicke connection via the superior longitudinal fasciculus and the arcuate fasiculus. For further discussion of these tracts see later text.

This paper prompted several further studies working with the same grammar in different ways. One critique suggested that, by using a simple AnBn grammar with no item-wise dependencies, these experiments were not getting at the linguistically interesting aspect of centre-embedding. As discussed earlier, this argument conflates two different issues that FLT neatly separates: recognition of a supra-regular string-set (which can be achieved in various ways, including the supra-regular ‘count and compare’ strategy), and the structures inferred during string parsing (which might involve simple phrasal chunks, or centre-embedded or cross-serial item dependencies). For researchers interested in demonstrating supra-regular computational systems, which of these particular strategies is chosen is irrelevant, because they all go beyond the capabilities of a finite-state system.

Nonetheless, when subjects master the AnBn language, it remains interesting to investigate which strategies are used under what circumstances. A considerable literature has now developed that explores this question in detail, often including a brain imaging component. The literature has asked whether, after exposure to AnBn strings with predictive dependencies (e.g. A1A2B2B1), subjects notice a violation of this dependency (e.g. rejecting strings where the AnBn rule is obeyed, but the dependency is violated, e.g. A1A2B1B2). After initial results suggesting that ‘mere exposure’ to centre-embedded dependencies in an AnBn grammar is not enough for subjects to recognize violations of those dependencies, it has become clear that human subjects can learn such centre-embedding, and extend it correctly, but that this takes additional training, exposure or prosodic structure in the training stage. Several laboratories have now produced convincing demonstrations that humans can learn both nested and crossed dependencies. Intriguingly, processing of such dependencies appears to engage the inferior frontal gyrus, and a TMS study showed that this area plays a causal role in such processing.

An fMRI study designed to force the processing of centre-embedded relations (e.g. A1A2B2B1 whereby A1 and B1 do not represent particular items, but a class of items) again showed activation of Broca's area (BA 44 in particular) together with motor cortical (SMA) and subcortical areas (basal ganglia) for the processing of AnBn grammar sequences compared with (AB)n sequences. Thus, fMRI studies indicate that both predictive and non-predictive stringset activate Broca's area (BA 44 in particular). Finally, although this literature has primarily focused on centre-embedding, it is also of interest to ask whether humans can learn cross-serial dependencies between items (e.g. with an exposure set involving A1A2B1B2 dependencies). As Uddén & Bahlmann review later in this issue, the answer to this question is positive.

Other recent fMRI studies using AGL further investigated Reber grammars, challenging the view that Broca's area is particularly involved in processing non-adjacent dependencies. These studies reported activation in BA 44/45 for a regular grammar learning and classification task, but also additional large activations in parietal, occipital and temporal brain regions. The finding that simple right-linear grammars activate Broca's area challenges the view that this area is specifically involved in the processing of non-adjacent, higher order hierarchical dependencies. Rather, on the basis of these latter fMRI studies, Petersson and co-workers suggested that Broca's area is ‘a generic on-line structured sequence processor active at different levels depending on the processing complexity’. It remains to be resolved how this generic hypothesis can account for the different activations observed in (AB)n and AnBn grammars, given that these two grammars have the same number of very similar rules.

Thus, the combined data from the fMRI studies in artificial grammar learning and from non-language domains suggest that Broca's area supports the processing of structured sequences, and of supra-regular sequences in particular.

Although the literature reviewed earlier illustrates the value of FLT in designing neurolinguistic experiments, we need to separate the question of whether a species (or a brain region) can cope with supra-regular stringset, from questions of centre-embedding (which is one of several possible strategies for processing AnBn) and recursion (which, for reasons already clarified, is not a question that can be answered with this type of grammar). While the AnBn grammar is simple and well suited for investigating the basic issue of supra-regularity, those interested in issues of dependency might benefit from exploring other artificial grammar types including, for example, the ‘mirror grammar’ wwR. This not just supra-regular, but its recognition requires long-distance dependencies between classes, and these dependencies are centre-embedded. But the other way to approach this issue is to examine particular sentence structures in natural language.


Brain activation overlaps in natural language and artificial grammar learning

With respect to the identification of the brain basis of supra-regular stringset processing and the possible underlying processing strategies, a direct comparison between AGL and natural language processing may be useful.

Such studies shed light on possible strategies underlying the processing of AnBn in artificial grammar by directly comparing it with the processing of centre-embedded structures in natural language. In natural language, the respective long-distance centre-embedded dependencies are not dependencies in a symmetrical structure (as in AnBn), but in an asymmetrical structure (i.e. the relation between subject noun phrase and the verb). In the case of natural language processing, a multi-layered hierarchical dependency structure must be computed to achieve understanding, whereas for the simple artificial AnBn structure this is not necessary. Thus, the observed overlap in the activation in Broca's area for AnBn in AGL and in natural grammar processing suggests that humans build up structural hierarchies (even if unnecessary) when dealing with artificial AnBn structures.

One additional issue needs to be considered when comparing AGL and natural language. In the AGL paradigm, novel rules must be learned, whereas linguistic studies examine pre-existing rules from native language processing. In most AGL studies, performance is only 70–80% correct, indicating that the learned rules are not well established. Performance by native speakers in natural language experiments is usually much higher. The performance in AGL experiments rather is more comparable to the performance level to language learners, be it in first language (L1) or second language (L2) acquisition. The brain activation pattern observed for L1 learners and L2 learners who are not yet proficient usually involves not only Broca's area, but large portions of the entire left prefrontal cortex even for the processing of local dependencies (i.e. violations in a prepositional phrase).

This broad activation pattern bears some similarity to the activation reported for some recent AGL experiments, where in addition to Broca's area, large portions of the prefrontal cortex (BA 6,8,9,46,47) including the frontal operculum and the anterior insula, and regions in the parietal, temporal and occipital cortices were activated (when contrasted against a low-level baseline). One important factor may be that in implicit AGL paradigms, participants are confronted with a novel judgement task immediately before entering the scanner, whether a grammaticality judgement or preference judgement. This may lead to attention-induced control processes and to an activation of large swathes of frontal cortex during classification, even for a simple Reber-type grammar. This argument accords with the view that prefrontal cortex, including Broca's area, is recruited for processes requiring a high degree of cognitive control. Such controlled processes come into play during L2 processing and during language acquisition. In contrast, they are not necessarily activated during highly trained, automatic processes used in processing native language in the adult brain, or for highly trained processes during AGL. A clear separation in the brain activation for adjacent versus long-distance hierarchical dependencies may thus only be observable in a fully established, mature system.


Diffusion-tensor imaging: a new perspective

As already mentioned, one study used an MRI technique that allows one to make images of white matter fibre tracts. In this study, probabilistic fibre tracking was used, placing starting ‘seed’ points located in the centre of the functional activation for the two grammars (frontal operculum and BA 44, for regular and supra-regular grammars, respectively). The analysis revealed two different fibre tracts: a ventral system connecting the frontal operculum to the anterior temporal cortex via a ventrally located fibre tract, and a dorsal system connecting BA 44 to the posterior temporal cortex via a dorsally located fibre connection, including the superior longitudinal fasciculus and the arcuate fasciculus. These data were taken to suggest two different neural networks, with the dorsal network supporting the processing of hierarchically structured sequences (for a similar functional view).

Despite a long history of associating the arcuate fasciulus with language, an ongoing dispute concerns the precise function of the dorsal pathway. A number of researchers proposed that the dorsal pathway supports sensory-to-motor mapping, and provided good evidence supporting this conclusion. This controversy may be resolved in the light of a recent finding that indicates that in the adult brain, two different dorsal pathways can be distinguished: one connecting the temporal cortex and the premotor cortex (possibly supporting sensory-to-motor mapping) and one connecting the temporal cortex and BA 44 (possibly involved syntactic processing).

With respect to the ventral pathway, we may also have to consider two functionally separable fibre tracts. There is large agreement that the ventral pathway connecting BA 45/47 to the middle temporal cortex via the extreme capsule fibre system supports semantic processes, but it is still open to what extent a ventrally located fibre tract connecting the frontal operculum to the temporal cortex supports the processing of regular structures. Unfortunately, fibre tract results can inform us only indirectly about their potential function as they provide only structural information. Connectivity studies do, however, invite a more serious consideration of neural circuits rather than isolated brain regions.


Evolution and development of brain connectivity

A useful perspective on the human connectivity data for regular and supra-regular grammars may be provided by adopting phylogenetic and ontogenetic viewpoints. Phylogenetically, recent DTI data show that non-human primates differ from humans in their connectivity pattern. Comparing macaques, chimpanzees and humans, Rilling et al. found that the dorsal fibre tract, from Broca's area or its homologue to temporal cortex, gains in strength from macaques to chimpanzees to humans. This difference seems to be of particular interest in the context of the behavioural finding that humans, but not tamarin monkeys, are able to acquire an AnBn grammar. This raises this possibility that a robust dorsal fibre tract connecting BA 44 to the temporal lobe is necessary for supra-regular processing, whether artificial or natural.

A complementary perspective is provided by studies of human populations that have problems with the processing of syntactically complex structures in natural language, such as patients with brain lesions, or children who still have not reached adult-like performance. Children who still have considerable problems in processing object-first sentences, i.e. sentences in which the object noun phrase is moved to the front of the sentence, have a significantly weaker dorsal fibre tract than adults, while their ventral fibre system is equally strong. This supports the hypothesis that the dorsal tract is functionally relevant for the processing of syntactic hierarchies. Moreover, it is interesting to note that this particular fibre tract (BA 44 to temporal cortex) is not yet myelinated (and thus not propagating information efficiently) at birth, whereas the ventral system and the dorsal tract from the premotor to the temporal cortex is already myelinated at birth.

If the functional interpretation of this latter fibre tract as part of the auditory-to-motor mapping system is correct, we would predict that very young infants should be able to recognize simple regularities in the auditory input. There is good evidence that this is indeed the case, for both AGL and natural language. So far, however, it is not clear to what extent this ability is solely based on the dorsal auditory-to-motor pathway or partly also relies on the ventral pathway present at birth.


The future

Although the marriage of AGL and FLT has already produced some new and important results, in both the animal and neural domains, this research programme remains in its preliminary stages. Current empirical research provides a detailed exploration of only two particular grammars: the complicated regular grammar introduced by Reber and since explored by scores of researchers, and the supra-regular AnBn grammar introduced by Fitch & Hauser and since explored by at least six different research groups. However, there are many other grammars, and empirical approaches, worthy of exploration, and we welcome this ongoing broadening of the field. Investigations of FSGs such as edge grammars and other subregular grammars may provide a more detailed dissection of computational primitives particularly relevant to animal researchers. For humans, as discussed already, detailed exploration of other simple context-free grammars such as the mirror grammar or copy grammar will probe the limits of our own pattern-discovery abilities. Innovative experimental designs will play an important role in this—for example, using serial-reaction time tasks and cross-modal auditory/visual AGL.

Two further directions immediately beckon. FLT has developed considerably in the last decades in two important directions, both of which offer rich opportunities for empirical research in the ‘Grammarama’ tradition. The first are tree grammars and tree automata, which have been an area of important recent progress in theory and are beginning to be used as practical models in psycholinguistics. The tree-adjoining automata of Aravind Joshi require grammars at the mildly context-sensitive level, and thus are computationally equivalent to other linguistic theories such as combinatory categorical grammar, or minimalist grammars, that converge at this level. Nonetheless, tree grammars can lead to a rather different view of the nature of computational primitives from those provided by the traditional string set approach, potentially closer to biological and cognitive reality.

The second major advance in FLT concerns probabilistic models of syntax. In such models, the apparatus of FLT (typically finite-state or context-free grammars) is augmented by calculating a probability for each production or sub-tree. Although symbolic models and probabilistic or statistical models are often contrasted by cognitive scientists, there is a growing realization that there is no conflict between these approaches (indeed, traditional rule-based approaches are just a special case of probabilistic models, but where the probabilities are either 0 or 1). Owing to the need for large amounts of data to calculate the required probabilities, such models initially found powerful application in the domain of corpus linguistics. Applying such models to experimental data will require large samples as well, and thus is appropriate for analysing the results of operant AGL experiments. As web-based experiments become more widespread, we can anticipate a flood of data from human participants, testing many different grammars with thousands of subjects, that would be well suited to fitting by statistical models.

In the longer term, we can anticipate that this research programme will be able to replace the highly stylized models of computation used in FLT with more biologically grounded computational primitives. While we strongly support moves in this direction, it is crucial that they be grounded in empirical data rather than in intuitions or assumptions about what computational operations are or are not ‘primitive’. For instance, it seems intuitive to humans that symmetry recognition should be a very simple and basic operation, and thus part of the conceptual toolkit of most visually-sophisticated organisms. Years of pigeon research demonstrates that this assumption is incorrect, and that generalized bilateral symmetry is in fact an extremely difficult concept for these animals to attain. A similar point can be made about the difficulty of cross-serial versus nested dependencies in human experiments: while most people's robust intuition is that the former should be much easier, what few experimental data is available paint a murkier story.

FLT both allows us to characterize such experiments in more general terms (e.g. that generalized symmetry requires a supra-regular grammar) and provides an explicit language for notating and reporting different string types or grammars (as in (AB)n or AnBn). FLT also, and more controversially, provides a set of ‘fixed points’ of computational complexity, such as push-down stacks versus the endless tape of Turing machines, that represent abstract representations of different types of working memory. While future research may show that such abstractions are too artificial to usefully characterize neural computational primitives, performing experiments using them will be the surest and fastest way to find out. Currently available alternative models of neural or ‘natural’ computation offer nothing like the scope and specificity, nor the broad acceptance across scientific disciplines, of the theory of computation as treated by FLT.

Thus, we conclude that the empirical research programme combining FLT with AGL will continue, and will continue to be exciting and controversial. Such research will be particularly valuable in uncovering relevant differences among species, and in helping us to characterize the neural mechanisms underlying these differences. This research programme can help itself to a well-developed pre-existing mathematical/computational framework and a rich body of formal understanding and important theorems. If such research eventually leads to a replacement of current formalisms by a computational theory more firmly grounded in biological and neuroscientific reality, it and thus paves the way for its own demise, it will be a welcome sign of scientific progress.


New thinking, innateness and inherited representation

Nicholas Shea — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2012. PMC3385690, CC BY 3.0.

The New Thinking contained in this volume rejects an Evolutionary Psychology that is committed to innate domain-specific psychological mechanisms: gene-based adaptations that are unlearnt, developmentally fixed and culturally universal. But the New Thinking does not simply deny the importance of innate psychological traits. The problem runs deeper: the concept of innateness is not suited to distinguishing between the New Thinking and Evolutionary Psychology. That points to a more serious problem with the concept of innateness as it is applied to human psychological phenotypes. This paper argues that the features of recent human evolution highlighted by the New Thinking imply that the concept of inherited representation, set out here, is a better tool for theorizing about human cognitive evolution.

Keywords: evolutionary psychology, innateness, inherited representation, genetic information, cognitive evolution, cultural inheritance


Introduction


New Thinking versus Evolutionary Psychology

It is standardly assumed that innate psychological mechanisms should be the central focus of an evolutionary account of human cognition. One version of this approach is the ‘Evolutionary Psychology’ (capitalized) of Tooby and Cosmides with its series of special-purpose modules, each evolved to solve a particular problem in the Pleistocene. Even outside high church Evolutionary Psychology, for example among those who point to more general-purpose evolved human faculties like the capacity for fine-grained visuomotor control, an evolutionary approach to human cognition is usually allied with a commitment to innate capacities.

A strong theme emerging from the papers in this volume puts pressure on the idea that there are innate psychological capacities at all. These are not blank slate empiricists or cultural determinists who deny the importance of evolution for explaining why we are as we are. If the New Thinking is on the right track, however, then innateness is not a useful concept for theorizing about recent human cognition.

Many papers in the volume emphasize domain-general adaptations: improved physical/causal understanding, increased visuomotor skill, and an extended childhood coupled with increased parental investment. At a recent conference on the new thinking, Eva Jablonka argued that the hand is a much better metaphor than the Swiss-army knife for the special features of recent human cognition. The hand is exquisitely complex and highly adapted, involving a suite of interdependent adaptive changes, but it is not adapted to any one particular task or outcome. It appears to have been selected instead for its facility as a generalist: to perform an open-ended range of tasks with great skill, where the concrete outcomes that contribute to fitness vary widely.

Two domain-general changes in hominin evolution are central here. The first is a marked increase in plasticity: in how quickly human individuals and social groups adapt to different ways of life in different ecological niches. These developmentally plastic innovations depend for their development on rich support from the environment: information about particular variable features of the developmental environment, including resources and information derived from the ecological niche, from parents and from the wider culture.

The second change is a much greater reliance on culturally transmitted information. Among the adaptively-significant information on which development depends, some concerns facts that individuals could not learn for themselves in their own lifetime. In these circumstances individuals do not test and confirm for themselves that the developmental path they are adopting is adaptive; they rely on the information in their culture being a reasonably reliable guide to adaptive outcomes. So human behavioural development is extremely plastic, and some of that plasticity involves sensitivity to culturally transmitted information. More strongly still, it is plausible that humans have adaptations for the cultural transmission of information, including through teaching and learning. So, if cognition has evolved to be like the hand, it is a hand that was partly shaped by a culture of other hands, and which in turn plays a role in shaping other hands, being itself partly adapted to passing on the kind of cultural resources on which it depended on for its own development.

An evolutionary approach is often coupled with the thought that adaptive traits are innate. An innate trait is prototypically an adaptation that has evolved by gene-based natural selection, and is thereby coded in the genes. Its development does not depend on learning, and it would develop even if experience were impoverished in certain ways. Correlatively, it is relatively developmentally fixed in the face of environmental variations, and perhaps canalized against such variations. Indeed, on some views an innate trait is genetically determined from birth. And it is universal in the species, either in the sense that all members have it apart from non-typical cases in which there is an explanation of their exceptional status or, if there is typical variation in how the trait is manifested, then some shared basis for that variation is universal.

Evolutionary Psychology aims to account for the distinctive features of human life by appealing to special-purpose psychological capacities that have exactly those features: they are prototypically the result of gene-based natural selection, do not depend upon learning for their acquisition (and so admit of a poverty of the stimulus argument), are relatively developmentally fixed and hence culturally universal. This is in sharp contrast to the central features of the New Thinking identified earlier. So it might be thought that Evolutionary Psychology believes in, whereas the New Thinking denies, the importance of innate psychological capacities; and thus that the New Thinking makes less appeal to evolutionary considerations than high church Evolutionary Psychology.

That is a misdiagnosis: the New Thinking is just as motivated by evolutionary considerations. It relies heavily on selectionist explanation, phylogenetic methods and cross-species comparisons. It sees many domain-specific adaptations in human cognitive and social life. Some arise from gene-based selection, others from culturally based inheritance processes. Some are universal and others vary in different ecological and cultural contexts. Learning is involved in the acquisition of many of these traits, even when individuals are not able to learn about the adaptive significance of the trait for themselves. The New Thinking does not sit well either with accepting or denying that the relevant capacities are innate. That is because the concept of innateness is fundamentally unsuited to elucidating the contrast between the New Thinking and Evolutionary Psychology.

This paper will argue that the concept of inherited representation does a much better job of drawing the distinction. Evolutionary Psychology is committed to gene-based selection as the main source of the adaptively relevant information that is responsible for the adaptiveness of human psychological capacities; hence such capacities are unlearnt. The New Thinking emphasizes the complementary roles of gene-based and of culturally-based selection processes of various kinds for generating the adaptively relevant information on which human psychological capacities are based; hence the importance of interactions with the physical and social environment, and of learning, in developing those capacities.


Deeper troubles with innateness

Inutility is bad enough, but the troubles with the innateness concept run deeper. As philosophers, we want to know what property the concept of innateness refers to. That is, we want a theoretical reconstruction of the claim that a trait X is innate—we want to know what it is about a trait that determines whether the innateness claim is true or false. This exercise is not merely of philosophical interest. It is continuous with the scientific project of trying better to understand the properties that are appealed to in a scientific theory. To do so, we can observe the pattern of inferences in which a theoretical concept such as innateness is deployed, and seek to understand what the property is that underpins those inferences: that makes them defeasible but reasonably reliable ways of reaching true conclusions from true premises. The deeper problem with the concept of innateness is that there is no good account of what the property of being innate could be, so as to underpin the ways that the concept is used in relation to human psychological capacities.

The concept of innateness is used to make inferences between various properties like those mentioned earlier: developmental fixity, lack of learning and genetic coding—‘i-properties’ (adapting the terminology of Mameli & Bateson). For instance: X is an adaptation → X is innate → X's development does not depend upon learning. That inference is highly unreliable because, as the New Thinking points out, many recent human adaptations depend crucially on learning. The problem is not just that the concept is sometimes used to make bad inferences. Rather, the problem is that there is no good proposal about how the concept could be used to make reliable inferences. What could the property of being innate amount to, such that the conclusions about human psychological capacities drawn using the concept should be reliable? If there were occasional exceptions, the concept would still be useful. If there were systematic exceptions, they could be guarded against in deploying the concept. But the concept is much more problematic if there is no property at all that would make inferences among the i-properties generally reliable in relation to human psychological traits.

The New Thinking puts pressure on the possibility of a satisfying theoretical reconstruction of the concept of innateness in two ways, one familiar, and the other less so. Its richly interactive picture of development undermines the tie, mediated by the innateness concept, between adaptation and developing without reliance on experience. There has been selection for a variety of clever behavioural phenotypes, such as the ability to process foodstuffs, or to make tools, or to cooperate with others in a hunt. Extended childhood and increased parental investment allow the development of many human phenotypes to be more richly interactive with the environment for a longer period. These changes in lifeways are themselves plausibly adaptations. Evolution does not care about the devious and richly interactive route by which some clever behavioural phenotype has developed. It sees the phenotype that is the end point of development, and selection acts on that. Plausibly, many are adaptations. That developmental process happens to depend very heavily on learning and culture. When development is so richly interactive, depending upon all kinds of material and informational support from the structured ecological environment, and from other people, it is just a mistake to link being an adaptation with developing relatively independently of experience.

Furthermore, the emphasis on plasticity severs any potential link between adaptation and developmental fixity. Typical human innovations develop in a way that is open to environmental information, so as to fit in with variations in the environment. Even if such outcomes are robust against some forms of environmental variation, it is misleading to think of phenotypes whose development depends upon variable features of the environment as being relatively fixed or canalized against environmental variation. In short, in recent human evolution at least, there is no tie between being a phenotypic adaptation and development's unfolding in a certain way (i.e. being fixed and/or independent of experience).

The interactive nature of development has long been the basis of critiques of the innateness concept. Standard counterexamples suggest that even universal adaptations need not be particularly well-insulated against environmental variation. For instance normal skin structure in humans depends on dietary vitamin C. Nevertheless, it was still argued that, for gene-based adaptations, development is so organized that genetic information plays a special role. Granted, environmental factors give essential causal support to the development of an adaptive trait, just as they did when it was selected, but the information that allows it to be adaptive derives from the genes, not from the environment. That is the proposal offered by Konrad Lorenz in response to critiques of the concept of innateness. His proposed theoretical reconstruction of the innateness concept is that innate traits are those whose development depends on genetic information. That line is challenged by the second feature of the New Thinking identified earlier: the fact that much adaptively-significant information is culturally transmitted.

Although some forms of cultural evolution remain controversial, there are a variety of ways that broadly cultural processes accumulate adaptively-relevant information that is relied on for the development of adaptive phenotypes. It has been argued that in humans gene–culture coevolution accelerated this process through positive feedback, both increasing the number of phenotypes that depend in part on gene-based adaptation, and magnifying the extent to which human cognitive development relies on culturally transmitted information. That undermines the possibility of even a rough dichotomy between individuals learning for themselves and relying on genetic information. Reliance on culturally transmitted adaptively-significant information forms an important third class: neither genetically transmitted and present at birth, nor just a matter of individuals learning for themselves about their environment—since cultural processes allow development to be sensitive to information beyond that available in the lifetime of an individual.

The other leading proposal for a theoretical reconstruction of the concept of innateness is that it just picks out the property of being unlearnt. That would make sense of the way the innateness concept is used in relation to human psychological capacities if traits that depend on learning tend not to have the i-properties, i.e. tend not to be species typical, nor developmentally canalized, nor adaptations. The difficulty for that construal is that no way of making the concept of learning more precise does the job, as will be argued later. To preview: if learning is understood narrowly then many species-variable, developmentally plastic traits will count as unlearnt, hence innate. On the other hand, if learning is understood widely to include all the cases where an individual extracts information from the environment during development of a psychological trait, then many universal developmentally canalized traits, both adaptations and non-adaptations, will count as learnt, hence not innate. Neither way of delimiting what is to count as a learning process will make inferences among the i-properties generally reliable in respect of human psychological capacities.

In short, even if the concept of innateness works well enough in other biological domains, it is problematic with respect to the phenotypic traits that have arisen in recent hominin evolution. Nevertheless, the New Thinking is a thoroughly evolutionary approach. What replaces claims about innateness? This paper argues that the innateness concept should be replaced by the concept of genetic representation, and its generalization to epigenetic and cultural inheritance systems: inherited representation. Inherited representation is not a direct substitute for innateness, but allows us to articulate the way in which selection and adaptation are central to the New Thinking. It is suited to explaining aspects of phenotypic development that the abandonment of the concept of innateness would leave unexplained. Section 3 makes that case, and §2 lays the foundations by setting out an account of the semantic information carried by inheritance systems as it applies in other biological domains.


Genetic representation


Information generated by natural selection on genes

The first step is to see how genetic representation explains what is going on with innateness claims in other cases, outside human cognition. Then §3 argues that the concept goes particularly badly awry when applied to the results of recent human evolution.

The concept of innateness is applied on the basis of, and used to make inferences to, the various i-properties mentioned earlier. We have seen that the robustness of the connection between these properties and being a genetically-based adaptation has been seriously questioned. Nevertheless, evolution produces exquisitely adaptive phenotypes, and one feature of how they develop would be entirely mysterious but for the theory of natural selection.

Consider the close match between the bills of the purple-throated carib hummingbird Eulampis jugularis and the shape of the flowers on which they feed. Males develop bills that match the short straight flowers of Heliconia caribeae, and the smaller females develop longer curved bills that fit perfectly into the long curved flowers of Heliconia bihai. The hummingbird somehow manages to develop a bill that will perfectly match a particular species of flower, but not as a result of causally interacting with the flower during development. The shape of the bill carries information about the shape of the flowers on which they feed. That information does not derive from interacting with the flower shape during development. So where did it come from? How does the developing hummingbird ‘know’ what shape of bill to produce, to match available nectar sources in its local ecology? There is evidence that the bills and flowers have coevolved, so the same question can be asked about the development of Heliconia flowers.

The same question is just as pressing for behavioural traits such as those we are considering here. How does the animal know how to behave without learning? More carefully, how does the developing individual acquire a disposition for species-typical adaptive behaviour when the information that enables the behaviour to match the environment has not been derived from the environment during development? Of course we know that natural selection explains how adaptations arise, but it is less remarked that it also provides an answer to this informational question about development. The developing individual does not need information because there has been natural selection for a developmental process that arrives at the appropriate phenotype reasonably reliably. At some point a genetic variant or variants arose that biased development in the direction of a particular phenotype, which affected fitness and was selected. Neither at the stage of selection, nor subsequently, did development need to pick up on information about the environment. How, then, did the informational connection between adaptive phenotype and environmental feature arise? By virtue of selection—increasing the frequency of the variant which adaptively matched the environment. The developmental outcome of hummingbird bill development now carries information about flower shape by virtue of a history of selection in a population, increasing the frequency of matching variants.


Genes carry semantic information

This account of how genetic information plays a role in individual development can be made more precise using the philosophical concept of genetic representation. We can distinguish between the kind of information studied by information theory, based on correlations between one thing and another, and semantic information, in which a sign or representation supports a distinction between correctness and incorrectness, or being satisfied versus not. Correlational information is absolutely ubiquitous. Semantic information is much rarer in nature, but very familiar in ordinary life. It is the kind of content carried by sentences and thoughts.

Heritability at the time of selection means that at the time of selection genetic variants carry correlational information about phenotypic variants. And very many factors that make a causal impact on development, including the genome, carry correlational information about phenotypic outcomes—had the factor been different, the outcome would have been different. Most of these factors just carry correlational, not semantic information. The claim that there is genetic representation is the claim that genetic material also carries information of the stronger, semantic variety. Roughly the idea is that genes do not just happen to carry correlational information, but they are supposed to—in the unobjectionable naturalistic sense of ‘supposed to’ underpinned by evolutionary functions and natural selection.

The case for genetic representation is founded on the fact that DNA does not just happen to be a means of transmitting phenotypes down the generations. There is good evidence that it has undergone selection for the way it performs that function. That is to say, in addition to the evolutionary functions acquired by individual genes, the whole apparatus of DNA coding, translation, transcription and replication has the meta-level function of transmitting phenotypes down the generations. When a new genetic variant arises that correlates with a phenotypic difference, natural selection can act. Those correlations can be very long range, with the phenotypic variants being the result of a long and interactive process of development. Still, the result is that the selected genetic variant and its associated phenotypic variant increase in frequency, hence carry correlational information about the circumstances of selection. The DNA system is designed to transmit that phenotype to future generations (by transmitting the genetic variant with which it correlates). Now consider the zygotic DNA in an individual in a subsequent generation. For the system of DNA expression to perform its meta-function it should react to the selected gene by producing, by the same long interactive process of development, the phenotype for which it was selected.

Those facts mean that the genetic system falls within a simple model for characterizing the contents carried by low-level representing systems. The elements are a ‘consumer’ system with the evolutionary function of responding to a variety of different representations by producing a variety of different outcomes, and some method by which representations are produced by which they correlate with external factors in such a way that the outputs of the consumer system are able to perform their evolutionary functions. A simple example is the honeybee nectar dance. ‘Consumer’ bees respond to the dance of an incoming worker by flying off a certain distance and direction in relation to the sun. That behaviour performs its evolutionary function on condition that there is nectar at that distance and in that direction. The behaviour of the consumer bees manages to fulfil that evolutionary function because incoming worker bees produce dances that correlate in a corresponding way with the location of nectar. The correlation produced by the incoming workers is an ‘exploitable relation’, which outgoing consumer bees make use of, in the sense that the correlation is a reasonably reliable indicator that a condition on the behaviour they will perform being useful is in place.

In the genetic case the genes in the zygote are the representations and the whole long extended interactive processes of development are the consumer, eventuating in the phenotypic features exhibited by the organism. (DNA is also active within individual cells during development, but for present purposes that is a distraction, because it is not part of the reason why zygotic DNA has the representational content it does.) Because DNA has the exotic meta-function mentioned earlier, its job is to react to individual genes by producing, possibly at the end of a long and complex developmental process, the phenotypes for which they were selected. Development makes use of the correlation between genes and the environments in which they were selected as being a reasonably reliable indicator that the current environment is conducive to the phenotypes that result. If the environment has changed in relevant ways since the time of selection, that condition will no longer be in place, so the content carried by the genetic representation will be false. For example, if the selected phenotype depended upon the environment being warm, and it has since become cold, then the condition that the selected gene is representing—a warm environment—is absent. The genetic material then continues to represent (falsely) that the environment is warm and DNA expression and development, in accordance with its meta-function, faithfully produces a warm-appropriate phenotype as result. That phenotype is no longer good for the organism. This failure is explained by the fact that the content represented by the zygotic DNA is now false.

This account of genetic representation has been developed in detail elsewhere. It is not simply a philosophers' gloss on well-known facts about natural selection. It has various explanatory benefits, for example when natural selection makes choices between relying on genetic or environmental information about some fitness-relevant factor. For our purposes the key payoff is that it offers an explanation of the question we started with: how the developmental process in an individual manages to achieve an adaptive match to its environment without deriving from the developmental environment all the adaptively-relevant information that is actually carried by the adaptive phenotype. For example, an individual E. jugularis female ends up with a bill that so carefully matches the shape of the H. bihai flowers that it will feed from because the zygote contains genetic material that instructs the development of a long curved bill, and indicates that the environment is likely to contain flowers conducive to that shaped bill. That is why the individual does not need to interact with the shape of the flowers, or derive information about their shape in any other way from its own experience.

If DNA were the only inheritance system, then a developing individual would have access to only two sources of adaptively-significant information: genetic material, and the correlations that it could detect in the course of its own development. In fact the sources are much wider. Transgenerational epigenetic effects allow an individual to make use of information detected by its parents in their lifetime, as do parental effects mediated by other means. Some epigenetic effects may be transmitted with high fidelity down many generations, in which case they can accumulate information by selection on epigenetic variants, as we saw with genes, as mentioned earlier. If some epigenetic system turns out to have been selected in part because of its ability to transmit phenotypes down many generations, then it too will have the earlier-mentioned meta-function. I call any mechanism with that meta-function an inheritance system. The selected phenotypes that are so-transmitted are inherited representations (genetic representations are one kind). Most importantly for our purposes, human evolution seems to have depended in part on one or more cultural inheritance systems. In that case, some of the information on which human phenotypic adaptations depend for their development derives neither from the genome, nor from the individual detecting correlational information available within its own individual experience, but from the developing individual reacting to information in its culture. Cultural processes of selection and transmission account for the way such cultural variants carry correlational information about adaptively-significant facts.


Genetic representation underpins some connections between i-properties

Genetic representation explains why the properties associated with the concept of innateness cluster together in some cases. In organisms with little or no culture there are two main sources of adaptively-relevant information. First, there is information that individuals can detect in their developmental environment in their lifetime. Second, there is the information conveyed by genetic representations (and, if they turn out to be empirically significant, by epigenetic representations that are carried along with the genome). A phenotype that develops in reliance on a genetic representation may adaptively match its environment in respects that the individual has not detected in its own lifetime. So there is a connection with poverty of the stimulus arguments. The trait can develop in the absence of certain kinds of information about the environmental feature it comes adaptively to match. For example, the female hummingbird E. jugularis develops its long curved bill even if deprived during its development of anything that provides information about the shape of H. bihai flowers.

That explains a link between genetic representation and one of the i-properties. There is also likely to be a certain amount of developmental fixity in a trait that develops in reliance on a genetic representation. To have been selected, the trait must have developed reasonably robustly across the kinds of environmental variations encountered when it was selected. To the extent that current environmental variations fall within that range, it is likely that the trait will arise in development despite such variations. If under continuing selection pressure, the trait may have even become developmentally canalized against such variations.

Adaptive polymorphisms have sometimes been thought to be an exception to this principle. If we adopt the right grain of analysis, it becomes clear that they are not. Evolution has selected for a developmental program that produces different outcomes in different environments, with some cue detected in development responsible for the fact that an individual ends up with the variant that adaptively matches its particular environment. That developmental disposition has a causal basis, which must itself develop. So it is that causal basis, rather than the various polymorphic outcomes of development, that is likely to be developmentally fixed, at least across the range of environments in which it evolved. The adaptive match of the eventual mature phenotype to its environment is partly due to genetic representation and partly due to adaptive reliance on environmental information. We will see later that such mixed models have particular importance in the human case.

Although a trait that develops in reliance on a genetic representation is likely to be fixed or canalized against the kinds of environmental variations present when it was selected, there is no reason to expect its development to be causally independent of the environment. Gene-based natural selection works on the basis of correlations between some genetic variant and some phenotypic outcome, correlations that are reasonably reliable at the time of selection. Those correlations can be very long range indeed. A genetic variant can bias the production of one phenotype over another by all sorts of devious means, and the pathway leading from zygotic DNA to phenotypic outcome can be intricate and interactive without limit. The informational contribution of a genetic representation is compatible with extremely rich causal contributions of the environment to the development of the trait.

Taking stock: recognizing the role of genetic representations in development explains why, in the absence of cultural inheritance systems, the following properties should co-occur better than chance: being a universal or species-typical adaptation, developing in a way that is invariant across some range of environmental variations, and there being an aspect of the adaptive information carried by the trait about its environment that is not the result of learning and about which a poverty of the stimulus argument could be made. These connections admit of exceptions, for a variety of reasons, but they co-occur often enough to make inferences between these properties go right better than by chance. So when a non-human trait is labelled ‘innate’ and taken to have these properties, the inferences it underpins will be reasonably reliable.


Inherited representation


Adaptation through cultural transmission

We cannot be so sanguine about innateness claims in the domain of human cognition. The rich interactivity of human behavioural development firmly severs any connection of gene-based adaptations with genetic determinism, or with their development being less causally dependent on the environment. That is the more familiar point about innateness that human evolution raises in a particularly pressing way. It is the New Thinking's conclusion that culturally transmitted information has been particularly important in recent human evolution that fatally undermines any utility of the innateness concept.

Sometimes when individuals get information from social sources they still learn for themselves. For example, with stimulus enhancement the individual learns for itself, through trial and error, how to perform some useful novel action on or with the stimulus. Nevertheless, with many of these social sources of information, a component of the adaptively-relevant information is being contributed by a cultural process. It consists of information the individual did not detect for itself. In some cases, it gives the individual access to a source of information that they could not detect for themselves.

Learning by ‘overimitation’ offers a clean example of this point. Both humans and other primates are capable of copying the means by which a demonstrated action is performed. Both can appreciate the difference between means to an intended goal and irrelevant actions. There is evidence that human children, unlike other apes, have a tendency to copy all the actions demonstrated in obtaining some desirable outcome, not just those that are causally necessary to obtaining the outcome. Chimpanzees, in contrast, cut out action steps that seem to them causally unnecessary.

This contrast is apparent in experiments using two versions of a mechanical box. In the transparent version the mechanism is visible so it is apparent when some actions performed by the demonstrator are causally irrelevant to achieving the goal of getting a reward out of the box. When the action sequence is demonstrated on an opaque box, it is not apparent that some of the action steps are unnecessary. Both chimpanzees and human children copy all the action steps performed on the opaque box in order to obtain the reward. With the transparent box, chimpanzees cut out the unnecessary action steps and go straight for the reward. Human children, in contrast, have a tendency still to copy all the demonstrated actions, even those that, by their own lights, are unnecessary to obtain the outcome. (That the children understand that some steps are unnecessary can be demonstrated in other experiments.)

There also seems to be a developmental trajectory. At the age of 12 and 18 months infants are focused on outcomes and tend not to copy specific demonstrated actions. Three-year-olds are capable of copying specific actions but less inclined to imitate unnecessary steps in the sequence. By the age of five years, children imitate obviously irrelevant actions in a wide range of conditions. Overimitation appears to be even more pronounced in adults.

The human tendency to overimitate can seem paradoxical—would it not lead to the spread of useless or even detrimental behavioural variants?—until we realize that making individuals' tendency to imitate less sensitive to individual learning can increase its fidelity as an information transmission system. The fidelity of cultural transmission can have a large impact on the power of cultural inheritance mechanisms. If humans have a tendency blindly to imitate the demonstrated intentional actions even when, by their own lights, various of the actions are causally otiose, then this would allow the transmission of behaviours the utility of which is not apparent to any individual. So the tendency to overimitate may itself have evolved—genetically, or perhaps even culturally—for the sake of transmitting behavioural phenotypes in a reasonably high-fidelity way down the generations.

For example, the connection between food preparation practices and nutritional outcomes may be so stochastic and variable that it is realistically impossible for a single individual to keep track of which practices have positive and negative impacts on fitness. But if lineages of individuals tend to adopt the same practices as their parents, then more beneficial variants will proliferate on average, because of their positive effects on the fitness of the individuals who have them. Similarly, the connection between action and outcome may be too long-term for an individual to detect it for themselves (cf. the link between smoking and cancer, which it took modern epidemiological statistics to detect).

Thus, given the right evolutionary conditions, the type of behavioural dispositions found in a population, which have been transmitted by overimitation, will carry information about past environments. Those that were beneficial to fitness in past environments will be found at higher frequency. To the extent that the current environment is relevantly similar to those past environments, the current pattern of behavioural dispositions carries adaptively-relevant information about features of the environment. That information has not been generated by individual learning, nor by any individual being able to detect the adaptively-relevant feature of the environment for themselves. Rather, it is selection over evolutionary time that has built up the information in the population. When a new individual adopts a behavioural disposition by overimitation from its parents, it is relying on adaptively-relevant information that has been generated by selection. But unlike genetic representation, the information carried in the overimitation-based cultural inheritance system (if there is one) is not present at birth.

That undermines a clean distinction between inherited information that is present at birth and acts as a constraint on the developmental trajectory (e.g. genetic representations), and adaptively-relevant information that individuals learn for themselves in their own lifetime. Culturally transmitted information is acquired by individuals in the course of their own lifetime, but individuals do not learn for themselves that it is adaptively-relevant; indeed, they may not be able to do so. On any reasonable view, the richly interactive process by which these traits develop counts as learning. So if innateness were simply equated with being unlearnt, as suggested earlier, these traits would not count as innate. That would overlook the fact that they share many properties with gene-based adaptations that are paradigmatically innate. Their development is likely to be relatively fixed in the face of the range of variation encountered in the developmental environments in which they were selected. Indeed, their development may be have become canalized against environmental variation by means of other culturally or genetically inherited processes (gene–culture coevolution in the second case). And since the adaptively-relevant information on which they are based was generated by selection, their development will be susceptible to a poverty of the stimulus argument: the relevant information about an adaptively significant feature of the environment may not be detected or detectable in the course of individual development. Cultural selection gives rise to traits that would count as non-innate on the ‘learning’ definition, but for which the standard inferences drawn about non-innate traits will go awry.

Other forms of cultural transmission depend to a greater extent on individuals being able to learn for themselves. For example, the most successful strategies in the social learning strategies tournament would try out observed behaviours for themselves and only add the behaviour to their repertoire if they themselves received a benefit for the behaviour. That was a more efficient strategy than trying out a behaviour at random, because behaviours at high frequency in the social environment were more likely to be beneficial than a strategy picked at random. That is to say, the frequency of behavioural variants in the social environment carries information about what is adaptively useful. How is that information generated? In part through individual learning: high frequency behaviours are those that other individuals have tried out and found to be rewarding. But part of the information is generated by selection, because behavioural dispositions are inherited from parents and the payoffs obtained by an individual affect the number of offspring they have.

That mix is characteristic of the usefulness of culturally transmitted information. Some is information that others have learnt for themselves, so the imitator is short-cutting the need to learn something that they could, if necessary, have learnt from their environment. Other aspects of culturally transmitted information are generated in the transmission process itself, as a result of selection. In the latter sense individuals are doing more than ‘standing on the shoulders’ of the learning done by earlier individuals; cultural transmission is giving rise to adaptively relevant information that is more than the sum of the individual learning of the individuals who make up the culture.


A central role for culturally transmitted information

The argument that cultural transmission plays a central role in generating adaptively-relevant information faces two obstacles. The first is a tension between individuals learning for themselves, and cultural transmission building up information through natural selection. As noted earlier, the ability of individuals to learn for themselves and adopt the behaviour that seems best to them, from their own limited experience, introduces noise into the system for cultural transmission of behavioural phenotypes. As Godfrey-Smith argues, the more transmission depends on the intelligence of the individuals, the less ‘Darwinian’ the process will be. It will be less well-characterized by the models of quantitative genetics, for example.

However, Godfrey-Smith argues that this at most undermines the applicability of Darwinian micro-evolutionary models to the process. At the macro level, phylogenies of cultural practices can be highly illuminating even if the transmission process is nothing like high-fidelity individual-to-individual copying. Also, at an intermediate level that Godfrey-Smith calls ‘meso-evolution’, a Darwinian approach can explain the origin of complex adaptive traits, even with intelligent transmission, since it explains the spread of adaptively beneficial phenotypes, whose high frequency in turn increases the chances of the next cumulative step of adaptive progress being discovered by an individual in the population. In short, the mix of individual learning and information produced by selection, identified above, is compatible with a broadly Darwinian approach to understanding how individuals manage to produce phenotypes that adaptively match their environment.

The second problem concerns the sharing of information. Developing individuals' use of culturally transmitted adaptively-relevant information found within their society is a form of information sharing. How can such information sharing practices be evolutionarily stable in the face of the fitness advantage that could be garnered by an individual in defecting—keeping a piece of useful information to themselves? Natural selection runs off fitness differences; so if keeping information to oneself has costs, both to oneself and others, then the selfish strategy will be selected if the costs to others are higher than to oneself. For example, there are obvious advantages to sharing information about good hygiene. If others adopt a hygienic practice that I have discovered, that will on average reduce the overall risk of disease in the population, and so will indirectly reduce my own disease risk. But suppose I can get some benefit to myself from the hygienic practice, and suppose also that it is practical to keep it to myself. Then, although I would do better in absolute fitness if I were to share the practice, I will do better in relative fitness if I keep it to myself. I gain a relative fitness advantage since the risk of disease, although higher for all, falls more on others than it does on me. Why then share useful information?

Part of the answer may lie in the inherent difficulty of keeping some of these forms of information secret. Behaviours are observable, and a behavioural pattern that must be performed repeatedly is likely to be observed by those in the same social group. A restriction to vertical transmission of behavioural phenotypes would also help. If parents are only inclined to demonstrate useful behaviours to offspring and close kin, then they derive a direct fitness benefit from sharing useful information. Interestingly, there is evidence that overimitation is more common in ‘natural pedagogical’ contexts. So far natural pedagogy has mostly been studied as a modifier of when children are disposed to learn. If it also restricts when adults are inclined to teach, then it could, in the evolutionary past, have constituted a system whereby lineages of behavioural phenotypes transmitted by overimitation roughly aligned with parent–offspring lineages, and hence with biological fitness.

A restriction to roughly vertical transmission will not cover anything like all of the cases. A more important part of the answer may lie in group selection (in the specific sense that between-group relative fitness benefits outweigh within-group relative fitness costs). If there is strong group selection then the fitness advantage of being in a group that shares information, vis-à-vis individuals in less informationally open social groups, may outweigh the relative fitness benefits to be garnered by selfishly keeping useful information to oneself. Although there is widespread scepticism about the importance of group selection in other species, it may well have been a particularly powerful influence in recent hominin evolution. There is archaeological, palaeontological and anthropological evidence that humans lived in tight-knit social groups, perhaps extended kin groups in the first instance, with important variations between groups in culture, behavioural practices and even way of life. Powerful group selection would make a tendency to transmit adaptively relevant information throughout the social group less puzzling.

In sum, the following factors have probably played a role in recent human evolution: (i) high-fidelity transmission processes that closely model genetic micro-evolution; (ii) more diffuse ways that cultural transmission can build up adaptively-relevant information through selection; and (iii) cultural transmission as a means for disseminating and preserving useful information that individuals have learnt for themselves, allowing subsequent individual learning to ‘stand on their shoulders’. The relative importance of these factors remains an open empirical question.


No clustering of i-properties for human psychological phenotypes

These considerations mean that human development is likely to be particularly reliant on an interesting category of adaptively-significant information: information whose utility individuals are not wholly responsible for detecting for themselves, but information which, unlike more familiar forms of inherited representation (genetic, epigenetic), is picked up by the individual during her own lifetime. That decisively severs any connection between natural selection being responsible for the adaptive match between phenotype and environment, and the adaptively-relevant information being present at birth (in the zygote) and unlearnt. When the developing individual absorbs a culturally transmitted practice, or is steered by some culturally transmitted factor towards an adaptive phenotype, those are clearly cases of getting information from the environment. The information carried by these kinds of inherited representations is not information about which a poverty of the stimulus argument would succeed. It comes from (social) stimuli. The rough clustering of the i-properties in other species was underpinned by the fact that, if an individual did not learn the adaptively-relevant information for themselves, the information embodied in the adaptive match between a developmental outcome and the environment is very likely to have been generated by natural selection on genes, and to have been transmitted to this individual genetically, in factors that are present in the zygote and act so as to bias the complex interactive pathways of development towards the adaptive phenotype. Even that rough clustering will break down if the New Thinking is right about the importance of cultural transmission.

What about the universality or species-typicality of adaptive traits, that is presupposed by the concept of innateness? Recall that, when faced with adaptive polymorphisms in other species, I argued that there is plausibly a shared developmental program, designed to be guided by environmental information so as to produce different outcomes in different environments, each more adaptive in the environment in which it is produced. That does not carry over to the human case either. Or at least if it does, it is only in the most tenuous way. The New Thinking suggests that the ‘developmental program’ underpinning a huge swathe of polymorphic adaptive phenotypes is humans' highly adapted capacity for plasticity itself. That is a very domain-general ability. Of course, it too carries adaptively-relevant information—that the environment is likely to be very variable, that these are good ways to engage in learning—but what is absent is a more specific developmental program designed by evolution for a particular problem or set of problems. In short, extreme plasticity in some cases drives the nature of the potentially universal adaptation to the very highest, most general level. In other cases cultural inheritance may form the basis of universal, developmentally robust or even environmentally canalized human phenotypes.

In sum, an implication of the direction taken by the New Thinking in this collection is that the generalization that makes the i-properties cluster together roughly for non-human adaptations, giving the concept of innateness some utility there, is absent in the case of recent human behavioural adaptations. There is no particular reason to expect those human behavioural phenotypes that are plausibly adaptations to have the following features: to be due to natural selection on genes; to be unlearnt, or to develop such that aspects of the adaptively-relevant information on which they depend are not found in the developmental environment (such that a poverty of the stimulus argument could be made); to have a developmental course that is particularly invariant or canalized against environmental variations; or to be based on a universal developmental program, save the most domain-general capacities for plasticity, learning and cultural inheritance itself.


The new thinking articulated in terms of inherited representation

This paper has argued that recognizing the semantic information carried by genetic transmission down the generations—genetic representation—allows us to see why properties connected to the concept of innateness do tend to cluster together when applied to many biological adaptations. The utility of the innateness concept in those contexts makes it tempting to import it into our account of human evolution. High church Evolutionary Psychology does indeed claim that human psychological capacities are innate in a closely parallel sense: a suite of domain-specific adaptations produced by natural selection on genes, that are unlearnt, developmentally fixed and cross-culturally universal. The New Thinking points to evidence that argues against those claims. But the difference between the two viewpoints cannot be usefully encapsulated using the concept of innateness. The concept of inherited representation furnishes a clearer distinction. Evolutionary Psychology holds that genetic representation is by far the most important type of inherited representation responsible for human cognitive phenotypes. The New Thinking instead sees culturally transmitted inherited representations as an important source of the adaptively-relevant information present in human psychological phenotypes.

The characteristics that the New Thinking identifies as distinctive of human cognitive evolution also put pressure on the coherence of the concept of innateness, as it is applied to human psychology. The problem is not just that some of the inferences about innate traits that would go through in other biological domains fail in the case of human psychology. It is that there is no good proposal for a theoretical reconstruction of the concept of innateness that would explain why any significant portion of the inferences about human psychological traits standardly made using the concept of innateness should be reliable. If that is correct, then one important mistake of Evolutionary Psychology, which the New Thinking has transcended, is to make use of the concept of innateness. In contrast the New Thinking manages to be deeply evolutionary, while not being dependent on the concept of innateness at all.

That might be thought to leave a lacuna. How can the New Thinking account for the kinds of phenomena that innateness claims have been thought to explain? In this paper I have focused on one explanandum in particular: the adaptive match between phenotype and environment achieved as the end result of development. When that match is not wholly explained by the individual accessing adaptively-relevant information in its own experience, having detected its adaptive relevance itself, we are left with a puzzle: where did the information come from?

Inherited representation provides an answer, pointing to the multiple routes by which information generated by natural selection can constrain individual development towards an adaptive phenotypic outcome, so that aspects of the adaptively-relevant information carried by the phenotype need not derive from individual experience. Genetic and epigenetic mechanisms can play that role, giving rise to adaptively-relevant information that is present at birth; but we also saw three cultural routes to adaptive phenotypes, in none of which is the adaptively-relevant information present at birth, but which involve learning (albeit that individuals do not detect the adaptive significance of all the information for themselves).

Although cultural processes, learning and interactive development are central, the New Thinking is also thoroughly evolutionary, relying strongly on natural selection in explaining human psychology, unlike blank slate empiricism and the standard social science model. Phylogenetic methods and cross-species comparisons are relied on heavily, as part of the careful accumulation and assessment of all available evidence about the hominin and primate past. The importance that the New Thinking attaches to historical evidence shows just how serious it is about evolutionary explanation. However, using the concept of innateness to theorize about human evolution sits ill with the New Thinking. This paper argues that the supposed explanatory benefits of innateness claims can be salvaged, without residue, by identifying the significance for human evolution of various forms of inherited representation: genetic, epigenetic and cultural.


A quantitative meta-analysis and review of motor learning in the human brain

Robert M Hardwick, Claudia Rottschy, R Chris Miall, Simon B Eickhoff — Neuroimage, 2013. PMC3555187, CC BY 3.0.

Neuroimaging studies have improved our understanding of which brain structures are involved in motor learning. Despite this, questions remain regarding the areas that contribute consistently across paradigms with different task demands. For instance, sensorimotor tasks focus on learning novel movement kinematics and dynamics, while serial response time task (SRTT) variants focus on sequence learning. These differing task demands are likely to elicit quantifiably different patterns of neural activity on top of a potentially consistent core network. The current study identified consistent activations across 70 motor learning experiments using activation likelihood estimation (ALE) meta-analysis. A global analysis of all tasks revealed a bilateral cortical–subcortical network consistently underlying motor learning across tasks. Converging activations were revealed in the dorsal premotor cortex, supplementary motor cortex, primary motor cortex, primary somatosensory cortex, superior parietal lobule, thalamus, putamen and cerebellum. These activations were broadly consistent across task specific analyses that separated sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants. Contrast analysis indicated that activity in the basal ganglia and cerebellum was significantly stronger for sensorimotor tasks, while activity in cortical structures and the thalamus was significantly stronger for SRTT variants. Additional conjunction analyses then indicated that the left dorsal premotor cortex was activated across all analyses considered, even when controlling for potential motor confounds. The highly consistent activation of the left dorsal premotor cortex suggests it is a critical node in the motor learning network.

Keywords: Activation likelihood estimation, Dorsal premotor cortex, Serial response time task, Sensorimotor learning, Sequence learning


Introduction

Functional neuroimaging studies have been instrumental in determining the neuronal networks that underlie different types of motor learning tasks reviewed in Doyon et al. (2003). There is, however, little consensus regarding which areas of the brain are consistently activated during the acquisition of motor skills. This may be a result of the diverse range of experimental paradigms that have been used to examine motor learning. For instance, neuroimaging studies have examined a variety of sensorimotor paradigms, including learning dexterous skills such as playing musical instruments (Buccino et al., 2004) or tying knots (Tracy et al., 2003), learning visuomotor paradigms such as adapting movements in response to perturbations (Inoue et al., 2000; Nezafat et al., 2001), and phase coordination paradigms where participants learn to perform novel bimanual movement patterns (Puttemans et al., 2005; Rémy et al., 2008). Performance improvements in these sensorimotor tasks occur as participants learn to perform novel kinematics (movement speed and limb geometry) and/or dynamics (muscle forces and joint coordination). In contrast to sensorimotor tasks, variants of the serial reaction time task (SRTT; Nissen and Bullemer, 1987) are notable as they rely on responding to visual stimuli only by pressing a corresponding button. SRTT variants therefore represent learning of sequential motor behavior, yet have relatively minimal demands on motor execution, as participants respond through primarily isometric contractions of the finger muscles. Thus, while sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants are both useful paradigms with which to examine the neural substrates that underlie motor learning, their actual task demands differ considerably; sensorimotor tasks have greater motor demands and emphasize the learning of novel movement kinematics and dynamics, while SRTT variants have relatively minimal motor demands and focus on learning sequential motor behavior. Identifying areas of diverging activation (i.e. those that are activated primarily by sensorimotor tasks or SRTT variants) will thus reveal activations relating to the specific demands of each task type. Conversely, areas that are consistently activated across both sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants are likely to represent the ‘core’ network of brain structures that are essential for motor learning. Areas identified as being critical to motor learning could then be targeted using neurostimulation techniques, which have been used to modulate the function of brain structures in order to augment skill acquisition (Galea et al., 2011; Reis et al., 2009).

Previous qualitative reviews have highlighted both similarities and differences between the areas that underlie motor learning for sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants. Robertson (2007) suggested both paradigms activate the striatum and cerebellum, but that sensorimotor paradigms are more dependent on cortical motor areas while SRTT variants place greater reliance on prefrontal areas. Hikosaka et al. (2002) describe a framework where two cortico-striatal-cerebellar loops underlie motor sequence learning. Performance improves rapidly during initial phases of learning, with changes being driven by an ‘associative’ loop. This loop comprises frontal, parietal and premotor cortical regions, the caudate, and associative cerebellar regions. The gradual increments in performance that occur later, however, are predominantly driven by a ‘motor’ loop. This loop consists of motor areas of the cortex, putamen, and cerebellum. The authors note, however, that this model may not hold for sensorimotor adaptation tasks such as learning to move against curl fields or learning visuomotor rotations. In contrast, Doyon and Benali (2005), Doyon et al. (2003, 2009) propose a single model that can encompass both types of task. Sensorimotor tasks such as motor adaptation primarily recruit a network of cortico-cerebellar structures, while sequence learning tasks instead involve greater contributions from a cortico-striatal system.

Despite the conflicting nature of these models, there is a degree of consensus regarding the specific roles that individual brain areas contribute to motor learning. The cerebellum is widely considered to maintain a ‘forward model’ of the motor apparatus, used to predict the sensory consequences of actions and detect errors in these predictions (Hikosaka et al., 2002; Krakauer and Mazzoni, 2011; Penhune and Steele, 2012; Shadmehr and Krakauer, 2008). Despite some controversy, it is widely suggested that the basal ganglia are implicated in probabilistic calculations and reward for optimal action selection (Hikosaka et al., 2002; Krakauer and Mazzoni, 2011; Penhune and Steele, 2012; Shadmehr and Krakauer, 2008). The primary motor cortex (M1) is consistently implicated in the use dependent acquisition and storage of muscle synergies required for faster and more precise movements (Krakauer and Mazzoni, 2011; Penhune and Steele, 2012; Shmuelof and Krakauer, 2011). The relatively consistent interpretations of the roles of the cerebellum, basal ganglia and motor cortex may stem from their highly preserved architecture in vertebrate species, which afford multiple converging sources of evidence as to their function (Shmuelof and Krakauer, 2011).

The roles of the parietal cortex and medial temporal lobe (MTL), however, are a matter of conjecture. Shadmehr and Krakauer (2008) suggest the parietal lobe combines the expected sensory consequences of movements (produced by the cerebellum; Miall and King, 2008; Miall et al., 2007) with actual sensory feedback to generate state estimations (see also Desmurget et al., 1999). Similarly, while Shadmehr and Krakauer (2008) indicate that the MTL is independent to the acquisition of motor skills, Robertson proposes that MTL engagement increases with temporal task demands, and that it is involved in learning ‘higher order’ components of sequences (see Robertson, 2007). It is, however, notable that Shadmehr and Krakauer (2008) primarily considered sensorimotor tasks, while Robertson (2007) was specifically reviewing SRTT variants. Task specific differences both between these experimental paradigms and within their specific demands may therefore explain the presence or absence of activity in the MTL and SPL.

Thus, previous reviews highlight consistent roles for the basal ganglia, cerebellum and M1, while bringing forth conflicting views on the roles of the parietal cortex and MTL. It should be considered that these reviews, though informative, are primarily qualitative in nature, usually drawing inference from the results of relatively few key studies. This leaves scope for quantitative techniques that examine evidence from a broader spectrum of studies to be utilized to assess which areas of the brain consistently contribute to motor learning.

Coordinate based meta-analyses can integrate the results of multiple neuroimaging studies across a field of research in a quantitative, unbiased fashion. Pooling data from multiple investigations provides opportunities to address several of the problems inherent to individual neuroimaging studies, such as their typically limited sample sizes (10–20 participants). Combining results from multiple investigations thus provides an opportunity to combat their relatively low statistical power. Individual neuroimaging studies are also sensitive to specific aspects of paradigm implementation and the particular contrasts examined. This can lead to diverging patterns of results between studies due to subtle differences in experimental design. Summarizing their results in a quantitative manner provides results that are less influenced by such study-specific ‘noise’. Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE) provides a well established technique for quantitative voxelwise random effects meta-analysis (Eickhoff et al., 2009, 2012; Laird et al., 2005; Turkeltaub et al., 2002, 2012). This approach determines areas of significant spatial convergence based on peak activation coordinates reported in previous neuroimaging investigations. A key advantage of this coordinate-based approach is its principled statistical testing procedure against a null distribution to provide quantitative results.

The current investigation therefore utilized ALE to summarize the existing functional neuroimaging literature on motor learning and identify brain areas consistently activated during motor learning tasks. We hypothesized that an integration across all experiments would primarily reveal activations in motor cortical and cerebellar brain structures. Controlling for motor execution and for hand use during the tasks would allow further specification of areas that are involved in the higher level aspects of motor learning (as opposed to those simply involved in motor control). Furthermore, we hypothesized that while both sensorimotor and SRTT variant tasks would elicit activity in brain areas relating to motor preparation and execution, sensorimotor tasks would elicit greater activations in areas utilized to sense or predict the current state of the body and control movements. Finally, we hypothesized that areas that were demonstrated to be consistently activated across both sensorimotor and SRTT variant tasks would represent the ‘core’ areas essential to the motor learning network.


Material and methods


Data used for the meta-analysis

Studies to be integrated in the current meta-analysis were obtained via PubMed literature searches (www.pubmed.org, search strings “motor learning” or “sequence learning”) on functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and positron emission tomography (PET) experiments. Citations within these papers and previous qualitative reviews were examined to identify additional functional imaging studies to include in the analysis. Only publications reporting whole-brain analyses in standard reference space (Talairach/Tournoux, MNI) were included (coordinates reported in Talairach space were transformed into MNI coordinates using the Lancaster transformation; Laird et al., 2010; Lancaster et al., 2007). Only results from group analyses of healthy adult participants were considered for further analysis; single subject reports and between-group comparisons were excluded. In cases where studies reported data from patient populations, only data from healthy controls was used. The sample was further restricted to examine only manual motor learning tasks, as the number of studies examining training with other effectors (e.g. the legs) was insufficient for meaningful analysis. As an examination of the eligible studies revealed that relatively few experiments presented data on training related decreases in activity associated with motor learning, the meta-analyses presented here examined only training related increases in activation. We do, however, present a summary of the data from analyses of training related decreases in activity in the supplementary materials, as it has been proposed that they may reflect important changes in the recruitment of brain areas that underlie motor learning (see Dayan and Cohen, 2011).

Each analysis was accompanied by two subanalyses that controlled for potentially confounding factors. In each case, the first subanalysis examined only experiments performed with the right hand. This controlled for activations relating to a potential mixture of lateralization effects. The right hand was chosen as the majority of studies examined tasks using the right hand, allowing maintenance of adequate sample sizes. The second of each of the subanalyses controlled for movement execution. This allowed activations relating to motor performance to be separated from those more specifically related to motor learning. This was achieved by excluding contrasts that compared motor learning with a rest condition, leaving only contrasts that involved a movement matched control condition.


Global analysis

70 experiments met the inclusion criteria. These experiments formed the basis for a global analysis; which was conducted as an integration of the entire current fMRI literature on motor-learning producing an objective, data driven overview. The global analysis included data from a total of 974 subjects and 954 activation foci. Details of the included experiments are presented in Supplementary Table 1.

The reporting of subject ages was not standardized across studies—some reported group age ranges, some reported mean group ages, and some reported both. We ascertained extreme values of 18–71 years from studies reporting age ranges. From the 39 studies that provided mean ages, we calculated a mean ± SD of 27.5 ± 10.5 years. This number should be viewed with caution, however, for several reasons. First, several studies did not report mean age of their participants. Second, there was usually a broad range of age-distribution within each study, at least judging from those that did report measures of dispersion. Finally, a few studies also focused on somewhat older participants, usually in their fifties (e.g., Daselaar et al., 2003; Naismith et al., 2010; Nakamura et al., 2001; Werheid et al., 2003). Consequently, we would argue that the observed convergence should represent motor-learning related effects in generally younger to middle-aged subjects, while specific claims related to a particular age-group or even on age-related effects are not warranted from this data.

A subanalysis examining only tasks performed with the right hand considered 39 experiments (456 subjects, 558 foci). A further subanalysis examining only contrasts that controlled for movement execution considered 47 experiments (695 subjects, 553 foci).


Paradigm specific analyses

To examine differences between paradigm types, the entire pool of experiments was then separated into two subgroups: 35 ‘sensorimotor tasks’ and 35 ‘SRTT variants’. This distinction was based on the relative motor demands of the task. Sensorimotor tasks involved learning to produce new patterns of movement kinematics and/or dynamics. In contrast, SRTT variant tasks involved learning to perform skilled sequences of button presses with minimal novel motor components. All SRTT variant studies involved simple finger press responses to visual stimuli. There were, however, four key differences in implementation and analysis between SRTT variants. Firstly, the length of the repeating sequence varied between studies. Sequences consisted of between 5 and 18 items (Mean ± SD = 8.0 ± 3.3 items). Secondly, participants were not always made aware of the presence of a repeating sequence. In explicit SRTT variants participants were informed that a repeating sequence of stimuli and hence reactions would be present. In implicit SRTT variants participants were not informed that a repeating sequence would be present. Thirdly, the hand used to perform the task was also varied. Across experiments, participants performed SRTT tasks with the left hand, the right hand, or bimanually. Finally, the contrast examined differed between studies. Some studies compared the repeating sequence condition to a random sequence condition (thus controlling for activations related to movement execution). Other studies compared the performance in the repeating sequence condition to a rest condition, or to an un-modeled baseline. It should therefore be noted while all contrasts examined included a sequence-learning component, some also included components that could be related to ‘global’ aspects of learning (i.e. the improvements due to repeated performance and/or greater familiarity with the task). This factor was accounted for in a sub-analysis that controlled for movement execution (i.e. included only tasks comparing learning a repeating sequence to a condition with a random sequence, thus controlling for global learning). Supplementary Table 1 presents a summary of the details for each study.


Sensorimotor tasks

The analysis of 35 sensorimotor tasks considered 473 subjects and 323 foci. Further subanalyses examined 20 sensorimotor tasks performed with the right hand (243 subjects, 165 foci) and 23 sensorimotor tasks that controlled for movement execution (348 subjects, 217 foci).


SRTT variants

The analysis of 35 SRTT variants considered 501 subjects and 631 foci. Complementary subanalyses considered 19 SRTT variants performed with the right hand (213 subjects, 393 foci) and 24 SRTT variants that controlled for movement execution (347 subjects, 336 foci).


Contrast analyses: sensorimotor tasks vs SRTT variants

An additional contrast analysis was also performed on the data from the two subgroups of tasks. This analysis was used to determine whether specific clusters of activity were more frequently associated with either sensorimotor tasks or SRTT variants. A further contrast analysis compared activations during explicit and implicit SRTT variants. This analysis aimed to determine whether explicit awareness of the presence of a repeating sequence led to stronger activation during SRTT variant tasks.


Conjunction analysis

Using masks from the global analysis in order to achieve greater specificity, the results from the analyses of sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants were then submitted to conjunction analysis. This allowed determination of which structures were consistently activated across both types of task. Conjunctions of subanalyses were also created to provide further controls against potential confounds.


Combined conjunction analysis: the ‘motor learning core’

In a final step, a combined conjunction analysis was conducted to determine which areas were activated regardless of task type and potential motor confounds. Areas surviving this conjunction are therefore likely to represent core areas for motor learning.


Analysis procedure

Coordinate based meta-analyses were conducted using the revised version of the activation likelihood estimation (ALE) algorithm (Eickhoff et al., 2009; Turkeltaub et al., 2002). The ALE algorithm identifies converging areas of activity across different experiments, empirically determining whether this clustering is greater than expected by chance. ALE captures the spatial uncertainty associated with reported coordinates, treating them as the centers for 3D Gaussian probability distributions (Turkeltaub et al., 2002) with widths based on empirical between-subject and between-template comparisons (Eickhoff et al., 2009). The revised algorithm accounts for the increased spatial reliability of studies with larger sample sizes by modeling their activations using smaller Gaussian distributions (Eickhoff et al., 2009). The algorithm also accounts for comparisons between groups of unequal sizes by computing a null distribution under the assumption of label-exchangeability (Eickhoff et al., 2012).

All activation foci for a given experiment were combined for each voxel to produce a modeled activation map (MA map; Turkeltaub et al., 2012). ALE scores describing the convergence of coordinates for each location were then calculated via the union of individual MA maps. To distinguish areas where the convergence between studies was greater than would be expected by chance (i.e. to separate true convergence from noise) ALE scores were compared to a nonlinear histogram integration based on the frequency of distinct MA values (see Eickhoff et al., 2012). As functional activations occur predominantly in grey matter areas, ALE scores were computed only for voxels with a ≥ 10% probability of containing grey matter (Evans et al., 1994). Results were thresholded at p < 0.05 (cluster-level FWE, corrected for multiple comparisons, cluster-forming threshold at voxel level p < 0.001).

All contrast analyses were computed using the most recent version of the (random effects) ALE subtraction analysis (Eickhoff et al., 2012). Voxel-wise differences between ALE maps were first calculated for the two pools of experiments. The experiments contributing to either analysis were then pooled and randomly divided into two groups of equal size to the sets of contrasted experiments (Eickhoff and Grefkes, 2011; Eickhoff et al., 2012). Voxelwise ALE scores for these two randomly assembled groups were subtracted from each other and recorded, and this process was repeated 10,000 times to yield an empirical null distribution of ALE score differences between the two conditions. The map of differences based on this procedure was then thresholded at a posterior probability for true differences of P > 0.95 and inclusively masked by the respective main effect of the minuend (cf. Chase et al., 2011; Rottschy et al., 2012).


Labeling

All results were anatomically labeled according to their most probable macroanatomical and cytoarchetectonic locations using the SPM Anatomy Toolbox (Eickhoff et al., 2005, 2006, 2007). Additional functional labels were obtained from a functional meta-analysis of cortical motor areas (Mayka et al., 2006). Peak maxima of the reported coordinates are presented in MNI space.


Results


Global analysis of all tasks

The global analysis examined all available studies in order to produce a data driven and objectively defined synthesis of the current neuroimaging literature on motor learning, and identify the network of brain areas that are commonly activated across all types of motor learning tasks. This global analysis examined all 70 experiments considered in the meta-analysis. Areas demonstrating significant convergence between experiments were the left dorsal premotor cortex (dPMC), bilateral supplementary motor cortex (SMC: comprising both the SMA-proper and pre-SMA), bilateral primary motor cortex (M1), left primary somatosensory cortex (S1), left superior parietal lobule (SPL), left thalamus, bilateral putamen, and multiple clusters in the cerebellum. These results are presented in A. Coordinates of local maxima for all activations as well as details on their histological allocation using probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps are presented in.

Two subanalyses controlled for effects of hand use and movement execution. A subanalysis examining all 39 experiments in which participants performed tasks using only their right hand identified consistent activity in the bilateral dPMC and SMA as well as left M1, right S1, bilateral SPL, left thalamus, and left putamen (see B). A subanalysis that considered all 47 experiments that controlled for movement execution revealed activations in the bilateral dPMC, SMC, left SPL, and left thalamus (See C). Coordinates of local maxima for these activations are presented in.


Paradigm specific analyses

Potential differences between paradigm subtypes were then considered, in particular, due to the differing task demands of sensorimotor tasks (which have greater motor demands and focus on learning novel movement kinematics and dynamics and kinematics) and SRTT variants (which have minimal novel motor demands and focus on learning sequential motor behavior).


Sensorimotor tasks

The analysis of 35 sensorimotor tasks revealed consistent activation in left dPMC and bilateral M1 as well as the bilateral putamen, and multiple areas of the cerebellum. These results are presented in A. A subanalysis of 20 right handed sensorimotor tasks revealed lateralized activity in the left dPMC, left M1 and bilateral putamen (see B). A further subanalysis of 23 sensorimotor tasks that controlled for movement execution revealed only activity in the left dPMC (see C). Peak activation foci for the sensorimotor analysis and subanalyses are presented in.


SRTT variants

Analysis of the 35 SRTT variants revealed significant convergence between cortical foci in bilateral dPMC and SMC as well as left M1, left SPL, left thalamus and right cerebellum (see A). A subanalysis restricted to the 19 SRTT variants performed using the right hand demonstrated significant activations in bilateral dPMC, right ventral PMC, bilateral SMC, left M1, left SPL, left thalamus and right cerebellum (see B). A second subanalysis considering only the 24 SRTT variant experiments that controlled for movement execution found activations in the bilateral dPMC, left thalamus, and right cerebellum (see C). Peak coordinates for the clusters identified in the SRTT variant analysis and subanalyses are presented in.


Contrast analysis: sensorimotor tasks vs SRTT variants

As the next step, a contrast analysis was performed between the two pools of results from the task specific analyses, i.e., sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants. This contrast analysis aimed to determine where in the brain activation was more strongly associated with sensorimotor tasks or SRTT variants. Greater convergence for SRTT variants than for sensorimotor tasks was found in multiple cortical areas, namely the bilateral dPMC, SMA and SPL (see A). Subcortically, stronger convergence for the SRTT tasks was found within the left thalamus, and a small cluster in the right cerebellum (B–C). In contrast, multiple bilateral and superior medial areas of the cerebellum were found to demonstrate stronger convergence for sensorimotor as compared to SRTT tasks (D–F). Activation within the basal ganglia was also significantly more strongly associated with sensorimotor tasks (G).


Contrast analysis: implicit SRTT variants vs explicit SRTT variants

A further contrast analysis compared activations during explicit and implicit SRTT variants. This analysis revealed that activations in the bilateral dPMC and SMA, as well as in left SPL and thalamus were stronger when participants had explicit awareness of the presence of a repeating sequence, whereas only the head of the left caudate was more consistently recruited in implicit tasks.


Conjunction analyses

A next step was to determine which areas were consistently activated across both subgroups of paradigms. Using the global analysis as a mask to provide greater specificity, a conjunction analysis was conducted across the task specific analyses of sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants (the conjunction was thus based upon the A, A and A). Clusters that survived this conjunction (and were hence consistently associated with motor learning across sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants) were found in left dPMC, left M1, SMA proper and lobule VI of the right cerebellum. These activations are presented in A.

Conjunctions of data from the subanalyses were also conducted. Using the results of the global analysis of all right handed tasks as a mask, a conjunction was computed over the right handed subanalyses for sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants (i.e. B, B and B). This conjunction analysis of right handed tasks revealed consistent converging activation in the left dPMC and left M1. The results of this conjunction are presented in B. Peak coordinates for this conjunction analysis are reported in. A conjunction of the movement controlled subanalyses was also conducted. This analysis, masked using the results of the movement controlled global analysis, was performed as a conjunction across the results from the motion-controlled analyses of sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants (i.e. C, C and C). This revealed activation only in the left dPMC (see C).


Combined conjunction analysis: the ‘motor learning core’

This final step aimed to identify brain areas that represented the core structures for motor learning. This analysis was generated by creating a conjunction of results from the previous conjunction analyses (i.e. conjunction A, B and C). The conjunction of their results revealed consistent activation of the left dPMC (peak coordinates in MNI space: − 26, 4, 60, activation presented in D).

To assess the reliability of this activation, we conducted a highly conservative supplementary analysis examining only tasks that both used the right hand and controlled for movement execution (12 experiments). Like the combined conjunction analysis described above, this revealed activation of left dPMC when performing a conjunction across SRTT and sensorimotor tasks (see Supplementary Fig. 1). The results of the combined conjunction analysis, coupled with the highly conservative supplementary analysis, demonstrate the robust and consistent nature of the cluster of activity found in the left dPMC.


Discussion

The study presented here assessed the network of brain areas that were consistently activated across 70 motor learning experiments. A global analysis revealed converging activations in dPMC, SMC, M1, S1, SPL, thalamus, putamen and the cerebellum. Further paradigm specific analyses indicated that these patterns of activity were similar across both sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants. A contrast analysis, however, indicated that sensorimotor tasks led to more consistent activations in the left basal ganglia and bilateral cerebellum, while SRTT variants elicited more consistent activations in the bilateral dPMC, SMC, left SPL and left thalamus. A conjunction analysis nevertheless revealed a shared sub-network composed of the left dPMC, left M1, SMC and lobule VI of the right cerebellum was consistently recruited by both subgroups of task. Thus, while the contrast analysis indicated differences in activation likelihood, the overall pattern of results from the global and paradigm specific analyses demonstrate that a broadly similar network of structures underlies motor learning and performance across sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants. Here we review the current evidence for the most likely roles of each of the structures identified in the meta-analysis. We also compare how the pattern of activation identified by the meta-analysis fits with previous models of motor learning.


Dorsal premotor cortex

While the meta-analysis revealed consistent converging activity in the dPMC, the laterality of its activation was highly task dependent. Sensorimotor tasks revealed convergence only in the left dPMC, while SRTT variants elicited converging bilateral dPMC activity. Subanalyses considering only experiments performed with the right hand revealed the same pattern of left unilateral activation for sensorimotor tasks and bilateral dPMC activation for SRTT variants. This indicates that the pattern of activation revealed was not simply a result of differences in hand use—instead, the diverging patterns of activity are likely due to the differing demands of the sensorimotor task and SRTT variant subgroups. Schubotz and von Cramon (2003) have previously noted that hemispheric differences in PMC activity for SRTT variants may be accounted for by different aspects of learning. They suggest that the left PMC is activated during sequence acquisition, while the right PMC is involved during advanced stages of learning and in storage of sequences. Furthermore, the right PMC has been found to be active when participants learn purely perceptual components of the SRTT (Schubotz and von Cramon, 2002a,b). This is of particular relevance as the right dPMC was activated in subanalyses that controlled for movement execution. The consistent activation of the right dPMC during SRTT variants could therefore be attributed to participants learning advanced or perceptual (rather than movement execution related) aspects of sequence learning tasks.

The cluster of activity in the left dPMC was highly consistent, surviving the conjunction of analyses and the highly conservative supplementary analysis. The consistency of this activation indicates that the left dPMC is a structure of key importance for motor learning. In primates, the dPMC has both reciprocal connections with M1 and direct descending spinal projections, yet has a limited ability to directly contribute to movement execution (Boudrias et al., 2010; Dum and Strick, 2005). These data thus indicate that the dPMC contributes to motor learning at a level above movement performance. Previous literature also indicates that the dPMC may contribute to motor learning by selecting appropriate responses according to visual cues (Kalaska and Crammond, 1995; Picton et al., 2007). In particular, the left dPMC appears to play a dominant role in movement selection (cf. Bestmann et al., 2008); patients with lesions of the left dPMC show impaired response selection with either hand (Halsband et al., 1993; Rushworth et al., 1998), and TMS studies in healthy participants show that disrupting the left dPMC in healthy participants leads to increased reaction times when responding with either hand (O'Shea et al., 2007; Rushworth et al., 2003). TMS of the left dPMC has also been demonstrated to disrupt the online updating of movements (Lee and van Donkelaar, 2006). These multiple sources of converging evidence indicate that the dPMC plays a key role in the selection and updating of appropriate responses with either hand according to visual cues. These sources of evidence indicate that the left dPMC is an important structure for the visuomotor control of movement.

There is moreover evidence that the dPMC exhibits a continuum of visuomotor function. Rostral premotor areas contain a greater proportion of neurons with sensory properties while caudal premotor areas are more frequently associated with motor properties (see Fujii et al., 2000; Schubotz and von Cramon, 2003). This distinction is of particular relevance when considered in relation to a recent meta-analysis of working memory (see Rottschy et al., 2012). Their results indicate that the left dPMC was specifically involved in encoding visuospatial information during working memory tasks. The locations of the left dPMC activation found by Rottschy et al. (2012) and the left dPMC cluster found in the combined conjunction in the present meta-analysis are presented in. While the clusters overlap, it is notable that the working memory related cluster was in a more rostral location. In comparison, the activation from the present meta-analysis of motor learning was in a relatively caudal position. These patterns of activity are therefore consistent with the left dPMC exhibiting a rostrocaudal continuum of activity from sensory to motor functions (Fujii et al., 2000; Schubotz and von Cramon, 2003).

In summary, our results provide evidence to support a functional lateralization of the dPMC. The right dPMC was only reliably activated during SRTT variants, which may be attributed to the role the right dPMC plays in the learning and storage of perceptual sequences. In contrast, the left dPMC was consistently activated across all analyses examined. Subanalyses indicated this pattern of activation occurred independently of movement execution and hand use. Comparisons with a previous meta-analysis of working memory indicated a rostrocaudal continuum of left dPMC activity from sensory to motor functions. Accordingly, activity of the left dPMC may relate to a dominant role in movement selection via visuomotor integration. This important role in visuomotor processing indicates that the left dPMC is a key structure in the network of brain areas that underlie motor learning.


Supplementary motor cortex

The main analysis of all motor learning tasks revealed activity in both the SMA proper and the pre-SMA. This activity is consistent with the role of the SMC and adjacent cingulated regions in the self initiation of voluntary movements (Deecke and Kornhuber, 1978; Hoffstaedter et al., 2012). Task specific analyses indicated sensorimotor tasks activated only the SMA-proper, while SRTT variants activated both the SMA-proper and pre-SMA. The primate pre-SMA contains cells that respond to specific sequences of movements (Clower and Alexander, 1998; Shima and Tanji, 2000; Tanji and Shima, 1994), appearing to be important for linking conditional rules to actions. This role in sequence learning may explain why the pre-SMA was only consistently engaged during SRTT variants (which focus on learning sequences). Rostrally positioned (pre-SMA) areas are frequently involved in non-motor cognitive processes (Leek and Johnston, 2009; Tanaka et al., 2005). Activation of the pre-SMA during SRTT variants could therefore be attributed to their (more cognitive) task demands when compared to sensorimotor paradigms. Conversely, a recent study indicates that stimulation of the SMA-proper and not the pre-SMA can enhance motor learning in a sensorimotor task with a repeating sequential component (Vollerman et al., in press). It should, however, be noted that while both this task and SRTT variants include a sequential component, the requirements of the pinch task could be considered to have a greater weighting towards motor-execution related than cognitive aspects of motor learning. More caudally positioned (SMA-proper) regions of the SMC are linked with motor functions such as volitional action execution (Jakobs et al., 2009; Nachev et al., 2008). This is consistent with the activation of the SMA-proper across both SRTT variants and sensorimotor tasks. It is also notable that the SMC and dPMC, which together comprise the classical Brodmann area 6, both demonstrate a rostrocaudal shift of SMC activity from cognitive to motor function.


Primary motor cortex

Similarly to the dPMC, M1 activations were revealed in both the global and task specific analyses, but the laterality of the activation depended greatly upon the subgroup of tasks examined. Bilateral M1 activations were present in the analysis of sensorimotor tasks, while SRTT variants revealed only left lateralized M1 activity. A subanalysis examining only tasks performed with the right hand revealed activity in the left M1 alone for both the SRTT variant and sensorimotor task subgroups. This is consistent with M1 activity reflecting use of the contralateral hand. Finally, no converging activations were found in M1 when an analysis was conducted only on tasks that controlled for movement execution. These results demonstrate that M1's involvement in motor learning occurs predominantly at the level of movement execution. This evidence appears to indicate that M1 plays a generally subservient role in motor learning. In spite of this, it should be noted that M1 has also been argued to be involved in the retention of learned movements via their repeated performance (Classen et al., 1998; Galea and Celnik, 2009; Galea et al., 2011; Hadipour-Niktarash et al., 2007; Orban de Xivry et al., 2011; Reis et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2011). In particular, several models of motor learning consider muscle synergies to be instrumental in reducing movement variability in later learning to allow improved levels of skilled performance (Krakauer and Mazzoni, 2011; Penhune and Steele, 2012; Shmuelof and Krakauer, 2011). Hence, M1 may play a role in motor learning through use dependent mechanisms above the pure executive function indicated by our analyses.


Primary somatosensory cortex

The global analysis revealed consistent loci of activity in S1. Task specific analyses indicated that this was driven by activity from sensorimotor learning tasks. While this may simply reflect that greater levels of sensory feedback are present during tasks with greater movement based demands, there is also evidence to suggest an active role for S1 during motor learning. Accurate sensory feedback comprises an important component of the forward modeling process thought to underlie motor learning through the correction of sensory prediction errors (for a recent review see Hardwick et al., in press). In animal models, somatosensory lesions have been demonstrated to impair the acquisition of new motor skills (Pavildes et al., 1993). In humans, TMS studies have demonstrated that disrupting the normal function of S1 can interfere with motor learning when accurate sensory feedback is an important factor in performance (Vidoni et al., 2010), and can even enhance performance when proprioceptive and visual feedback are in conflict (Balslev et al., 2004). These data thus seem to indicate that S1 may contribute to motor learning by processing sensory feedback information relevant to mechanisms of learning through error detection and correction.


Superior parietal lobule

Consistent activity of the left SPL (area 7A) was revealed in the global analysis of all tasks examined, and in the task specific analysis of SRTT variants. Subanalyses examining experiments performed with the right hand alone revealed similar patterns of activation: Bilateral area 7A activity was found when all right handed tasks were considered, but this activity was specific to the left hemisphere for SRTT variant tasks. In the subanalysis that controlled for movement execution, the left SPL was consistently activated in only the global analysis. The SPL is widely implicated in representation of the hands (Battaglia-Mayer et al., 2007; Connolly et al., 2003; Glover et al., 2005; Mountcastle et al., 1975; Rizzolatti et al., 1998). This focus on hand representation and the intimate interactions with the (dorsal) visual system may account for the consistent activity of the SPL in SRTT variants, which emphasize somatomotor hand control in response to visual stimuli. We found no consistent SPL activity in for sensorimotor tasks, which may reflect differences in parietal activation across the range of sensorimotor paradigms that have been examined. However, Hikosaka et al. (2002) have proposed that their model of a motor loop including the parietal cortex may not apply to certain sensorimotor tasks such as adaptation.

Only areas of the dPMC and SPL were found to be activated in subanalyses that controlled for movement execution. The primate dPMC receives afferent inputs from the SPL (Matelli et al., 1998), and these regions work in close cooperation to allow visuomotor control (Wise et al., 1997). Transforming sensory input to motor output thus appears to involve a route from the SPL to M1 via the dPMC (Johnson et al., 1993, 1996, cf. Cieslik et al., 2010, 2011). Data from the present meta-analysis therefore supports the suggestion that the SPL integrates visual and somatosensory inputs, routing multimodal sensorimotor outputs to the dPMC, which in turn represents the key hub for motor learning and provides preparatory motor input into M1.


Thalamus and putamen

While the global analysis revealed significant convergence in both the thalamus and putamen, task specific analyses suggested an apparent double dissociation. Analysis of sensorimotor tasks demonstrated significant converging activity in the putamen alone, while analysis of SRTT variants revealed significant converging activity only in the thalamus. Further investigation, however, indicated that both regions are activated by both task types. If a true double dissociation existed, it would be expected that the clusters identified in the global analysis of all tasks would be due to SRTT variants alone in the case of the thalamus, and related to sensorimotor tasks alone in the case of the putamen. Examination of these clusters revealed that this was not the case. In particular, the respective “preferred” type of task accounted for the majority of the activation probability (SRTT variants accounted for 71% of activity in the thalamus, while sensorimotor tasks accounted for 56/61% of activity in the left/right putamen). Thus both task types accounted for the majority of activation in the respective area, but also contributed approximately 30–45% of the activity of the other cluster. Further evidence indicating that both task types contributed to activity in both the thalamus and putamen was provided when data from the task specific analyses was considered at a reduced significance threshold (cluster-level uncorrected p < 0.05, while keeping the cluster-forming threshold at p < 0.001 at voxel level). Results indicated activity in both the Thalamus and the Putamen for both SRTT variants and sensorimotor tasks. Together, these sources of evidence indicate that both subgroups of tasks activate the thalamus as well as the putamen. Thus, while our results provide evidence for preferential activation, they do not represent a clear double-dissociation. Our results implicate a cortico-subcortical ‘motor circuit’ (Mazzoni and Bracewell, 2010; Postuma and Dagher, 2006), and are thus broadly consistent with models proposing that cortico-subcortical loops underlie motor learning (Doyon et al., 2003, 2009; Hikosaka et al., 2002).


Cerebellum

The global analysis of all tasks revealed clusters of bilateral activity occurring in the lateral Cerebellum (lobules V–VI), and a further cluster in the right cerebellar vermis (lobules I–IV). Task specific analyses, however, demonstrated that only activity in the right lateral cerebellum was consistent across both sensorimotor and SRTT variants. In contrast, activity in the left lateral cerebellum and vermis were present only in sensorimotor tasks. The cerebellum was more active during sensorimotor tasks, consistent with its role in the “state estimation” process whereby predicted sensory consequences of actions are compared with actual sensory feedback (for a review see Hardwick et al., in press). State estimation allows the detection of prediction errors, which are essential for the adaptation and improved control of fast and accurate movements using feedforward control (Manto et al., 1994; Miall and King, 2008; Miall et al., 2007; Tseng et al., 2007). Previous research indicates the cerebellum plays a key role in the correction of prediction errors (Galea et al., 2011; Tseng et al., 2007), though only when large errors are introduced in a stepwise manner (Criscimagna-Hemminger et al., 2010). It is notable that the need for state estimation during sensorimotor tasks would be relatively high, as they involve learning novel patterns of movement. In contrast, the need for state estimation during SRTT variants would be relatively low due to the minimal motor component of the task (i.e. participants respond via primarily isometric button presses). Thus, we attribute the patterns of cerebellar activity revealed during sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants to their differing demands on the process of state estimation.


Comparison with previous models of motor learning

Several previously established models propose that cortico-subcortical loops underlie motor learning tasks. Doyon et al. (2003, 2009) propose that a network of cortico-cerebellar structures primarily underlies learning in sensorimotor tasks, while a cortico-striatal system primarily underlies sequence learning tasks. Results of the present meta-analysis are in general agreement with this proposal. While both sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variant task paradigms relied on similar networks, the performed contrast analysis indicated that the cerebellum was more strongly associated with sensorimotor tasks, while the thalamus was more strongly associated with SRTT variants. Putamen recruitment was, however, contradictory to this model, being more closely linked with sensorimotor tasks.

Hikosaka et al. (2002) propose a somewhat contrasting framework with dual cortico-striatal-cerebellar loops for the associative and motor aspects of learning. While Hikosaka et al. (2002) limit this proposal to the acquisition and refinement of sequences, the present meta-analysis is in broad agreement with a logical extension of this model. In this context, it should be considered that SRTT variants are more likely to rely on the associative loop (as they involve strengthening stimulus–response associations) while sensorimotor tasks are likely to rely more on the motor loop (as they involve refinement of motor performance). The similar patterns of cortical and cerebellar activity elicited during sensorimotor tasks and SRTT variants fit well with this premise. While the main analysis indicates the presence of a potential dichotomy in thalamus and putamen activity, further analyses indicated that both task types activate both structures (see “Thalamus and putamen” subsection of discussion and for details).

Activations revealed in the present meta-analysis are therefore consistent with the proposal that cortico-cerebellar loops underlie motor learning (Doyon et al., 2003, 2009). The manner in which the identified areas work together is, however, still open to interpretation. Future investigations that model connectivity between the regions identified in the present meta-analysis will elucidate this issue.

Conflicting opinions exist regarding the involvement of the MTL in motor learning (Robertson, 2007; Shadmehr and Krakauer, 2008). The results of the present meta-analysis indicate that the MTL is not part of the core network of brain areas that underlie motor learning for either sensorimotor tasks or SRTT variants. This finding could be considered as evidence that motor learning occurs independently of the MTL (Shadmehr and Krakauer, 2008). For an alternative viewpoint, it is of interest to consider that Robertson (2007) proposes MTL engagement increases as the temporal and higher order demands of sequence learning tasks increase. It could, therefore be suggested that the series of SRTT variants included in the present meta-analysis did not have sufficient temporal or higher-order demands for the MTL to be consistently engaged across a majority of tasks.


Methodological considerations

While the tasks included in the present meta-analysis were divided into two subgroups (sensorimotor tasks, SRTT variants) of roughly equivalent size, the sensorimotor tasks presented a less homogenous group than the SRTT variants. The former could be considered an amalgamation of a number of smaller groups of paradigms (i.e. dexterous tasks, visuomotor tasks and phase coordination tasks). Unfortunately, the relatively low number of studies within each of these smaller groups would not have provided enough data to produce reliable results.

Coordinate based meta-analyses of neuroimaging data pool results from studies that use similar contrasts. While a large majority of papers retrieved in the initial literature search presented data reporting activity related signal increases that occurred with motor training, only 1 in 3 studies reported training related decreases in activity. This represents an unfortunate imbalance in the literature, as examining training related decreases in activity in response to motor learning is of interest for several reasons. Firstly, motor training has been demonstrated to reduce the overall excitability threshold of the motor cortex (Pascual-Leone et al., 1995), indicating that training may lead to more efficient recruitment of motor structures. Secondly, it has been demonstrated that different areas of the brain are recruited during different stages of motor learning (Shadmehr and Holcomb, 1997). In this manner, decreasing activity revealed during fMRI studies may reflect changes due to increased efficiency, reduced errors, reduced co-contractions, and longer term changes underlying consolidation of learning. This underreporting of training related decreases in the literature may have occurred because experimenters simply did not consider investigating training related decreases. Alternatively, it could be due to underreporting of analyses that considered training related decreases which found null results, or results that were difficult to interpret.

A final consideration is that coordinate based meta-analyses are largely insensitive to the time course of activations, which may play an important role in motor learning. For instance, evidence from sensorimotor learning tasks suggest that the cerebellum is activated during initial phases of learning when error is high, but shows reduced activity during later phases of learning when error is low (see Nezafat et al., 2001). While coordinate based meta-analyses combine data from multiple studies to allow for robust inference on convergent findings, they are more likely to miss such temporal dynamics, as many studies do not report separate analyses related to time-dependent changes. Consequently, data will be pooled across different parts of the time-dependent changes during motor-learning. Thus, the results of the present study do not allow us to test the proposal that brain structures will contribute differentially to motor learning over time (see Danielle et al., 2011; Dayan and Cohen, 2011; Grafton et al., 1995, 2002; Hikosaka et al., 2002).


Conclusions

The ALE meta-analysis presented here for the first time allowed the quantitative integration of the current neuroimaging literature on motor learning. It revealed consistent activity across paradigms in the dPMC, SMC, M1, S1, SPL, thalamus, putamen and cerebellum. This pattern of activations is broadly consistent with previously proposed models of the key structures involved in motor learning (Krakauer and Mazzoni, 2011; Penhune and Steele, 2012; Shadmehr and Krakauer, 2008; Shmuelof and Krakauer, 2011), and the proposal cortico-subcortical loops may drive motor learning (Doyon et al., 2003, 2009; Hikosaka et al., 2002).

Contrast analyses indicated that activity in the basal ganglia and cerebellum were more frequently (though not exclusively) associated with sensorimotor tasks, consistent with their proposed roles in selective reinforcement of motor programs and the detection of sensorimotor prediction errors. In comparison, activity of the dPMC, SMC, SPL and thalamus was more consistently associated with SRTT variants, consistent with their proposed roles in visuomotor integration and response selection. Despite these differences, a conjunction analysis of our global and task specific analyses revealed that the left dPMC, SMC, left M1 and right cerebellar areas were consistently activated across both SRTT variants and sensorimotor tasks. These results indicate that a consistent network of neural structures contributes to motor learning and performance across a range of paradigms despite their varying kinematic and dynamic demands. A result of particular interest was the finding that the left dPMC was consistently activated across both task types, regardless of motor execution confounds. This result thus reveals a key role for the left dPMC in sensorimotor integration and response selection during motor learning tasks. The results of the present meta-analysis thus indicate that the left dPMC is a key structure in the network of brain areas that underlie motor learning.


Goals and Habits in the Brain

Ray J. Dolan, Peter Dayan — Neuron, 2013. PMC3807793, CC BY 3.0.

An enduring and richly elaborated dichotomy in cognitive neuroscience is that of reflective versus reflexive decision making and choice. Other literatures refer to the two ends of what is likely to be a spectrum with terms such as goal-directed versus habitual, model-based versus model-free or prospective versus retrospective. One of the most rigorous traditions of experimental work in the field started with studies in rodents and graduated via human versions and enrichments of those experiments to a current state in which new paradigms are probing and challenging the very heart of the distinction. We review four generations of work in this tradition and provide pointers to the forefront of the field’s fifth generation.


Main Text


Introduction

An important and pervasive idea in the psychology of decision making and choice is that there is more than one class of possible strategy for acting. A key division is between forms of reflective control, which depend on the more or less explicit consideration of possible prospective future courses of actions and consequent outcomes, and forms of reflexive control a term we use in the restricted sense to describe how retrospective experience with good and bad outcomes sculpts present choice.

This apparent dichotomy is so intuitively obvious that it has been realized in many, slightly different, and only partly compatible, ways (Dickinson, 1985; Kahneman, 2011; Stanovich and West, 2002). Here, we single out one particular strand that has arguably been the most fecund in cognitive and theoretical neuroscience, providing a set of behaviorally rigorous criteria for separating out the two classes of control. In turn, this has led to a set of important studies into the partly distinct neural realizations of these classes and thence to an understanding of their computational and statistical characteristics. The latter provides a normative rationale for their coexistence as offering efficient solutions to the demands of complex and changing environments and has also underpinned the design and interpretation of a collection of targeted empirical studies.

We review the evolution of this strand by considering five generations of studies. We use the term “generation” as a frame of reference for our discussion and apply a liberal semantic license in our use of the term, using it to describe a sequential evolution of ideas, as opposed to an orderly sequence in epochs of time. The zeroth generation represents some of the earliest intellectual battles in psychology between advocates of cognitive maps and stimulus-response theories (Thorndike, 1911; Tolman, 1948). The fallout from this debate was a first generation of behaviorally rigorous studies of goal-directed and habitual instrumental control, which in turn provided the foundation for investigation of their neural realizations (Balleine and Dickinson, 1998; Balleine, 2005; Dickinson and Balleine, 2002; Killcross and Coutureau, 2003). In the second generation, these paradigms were carefully adapted for human neuroimaging studies, validating and amplifying the results from rodents (Tanaka et al., 2008; Liljeholm et al., 2011; Tricomi et al., 2009; Valentin et al., 2007). In the third and fourth generations, an analysis of the two forms of control in terms of model-based and model-free reinforcement learning (Doya, 1999; Doya et al., 2002; Sutton and Barto, 1998; Daw et al., 2005) was used to realize new tasks and to provide powerful methods for interpreting the ensuing results. The third generation crystallized the differences in a computationally transparent manner; the fourth generation made further changes to provide insight into the ongoing cooperation and competition between these systems (Fermin et al., 2010; Doll et al., 2009; Gershman et al., 2012; Daw et al., 2011; Gläscher et al., 2010; Otto et al., 2013; Simon and Daw, 2011; Wunderlich et al., 2012a, 2012b). Finally, we highlight the immediate horizon of questions that we surmise are now being, or perhaps are about to be, addressed by a fifth generation of investigations. Note that new work also continues in generations one to four, with the youthful exuberance of the later ones complementing the sage wisdom of the earlier.

In this Review, we primarily focus on human instrumental behavior. There are excellent reviews of habitual and goal-directed behavior that cover an extensive animal literature (Balleine, 2005; Dickinson and Balleine, 1994; Dickinson and Charnock, 1985). Consequently, these animal studies are only sketched in so far as they provide an essential background to our Review of the relevant human data. Many of the issues that we lack space to discuss are treated by others (Rangel et al., 2008; Botvinick, 2012; Berridge, 2001; Padoa-Schioppa and Assad, 2006; Daw et al., 2006a; Dayan and Daw, 2008; Balleine and O’Doherty, 2010; Yin and Knowlton, 2006; Maia, 2009; Niv, 2009; Doll et al., 2012).


Generation 0: Cognitive Maps

In a famous paper, the psychologist Edward Tolman considered a typical learning experiment involving rats negotiating a maze environment to reach a rewarded goal state (Tolman, 1948). This was a time of substantial theoretical debate, and though all could agree on the basic facts that with increasing experience, animals made fewer and fewer errors in reaching the goal state and took less and less time to do so, there were nevertheless starkly polarized views on the underlying cause.

Stimulus-response (S-R) theories, the bedrock of psychology in the first half of the 20th century, insisted that instrumental behavior reflected the emergence of an associative structure, wherein representations of a stimulus context during learning became, with increasing experience, more strongly connected to a mechanism generating behavioral responses. A favored analogy was that of a complicated telephone switchboard acting so as to couple incoming sensory signals to outgoing effectors. This seductive narrative reduced to the idea, as caricatured by Tolman, that learning resulted in an animal coming to respond more and more “helplessly” to a succession of external and internal stimuli that “call out the walkings, runnings, turnings, retracing, smellings, rearings and the like which appear” (Tolman, 1948). Tolman argued strongly against what he considered the fundamental poverty in this type of account. Rather, he aligned himself with so-called “field theorists” (Tolman, 1948), who proposed that animals learn such a maze task by forming “a field map of the environment,” more commonly referred to these days as a cognitive map (O’Keefe and Nadel, 1978), which then provides the necessary guidance mechanism for the observed learning.

This dispute led to the design of critical experiments, for instance, examining the nature of learning that occurs in the absence of the driving force of reinforcement. The classic example here was the observation that an animal left to explore a maze environment, without ever experiencing a reinforcing reward contingency, can nevertheless be shown to be engaging in what is known as latent learning (Blodgett, 1929; Thistlethwaite, 1951). Latent learning is “unmasked” when the animal is subsequently tasked to navigate toward a rewarded goal state in this same environment. Critically, pre-exposed animals show facilitation in learning relative to naive animals, suggesting that the preceding nonrewarded exposure epochs foster the formation of a cognitive map that aids subsequent attainment of the rewarded goal location (Tolman and Honzik, 1930). Latent learning about outcomes is also observed in procedures such as the irrelevant incentive effect (Krieckhaus and Wolf, 1968). Consider two groups of animals trained when thirsty, but not salt deprived, to press a lever to get either water or a sodium solution. Members of the latter group are found to press more avidly than those of the former when subsequently salt deprived, even if lever pressing is in extinction (when no solution of either sort is provided). This shows that latent learning occurred in relation to the salt characteristics of the solution, even when it was irrelevant in the context of the then prevailing motivational state.

At the time of the early studies, it was not easy to quantify how complicated the latent learning tasks were that the animals were being asked to perform. These experiments substantially predated the invention of dynamic programming (Bellman, 1957), which helped formalize the whole domain. The resulting theory, and particularly a computational variant called reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto, 1998), has underpinned much of the impact of computational modeling in the later generations of studies that has resulted in a considerable sharpening of experimental design and analysis.

In terms of behavioral control, a cognitive map can be seen as a representational template that enables an animal, through mental search, to find the best possible action at a particular state. Some indirect evidence about search came from what is termed “vicarious trial and error” (VTE), a class of behavior evident at choice points that is manifest as motor hesitations and repetitive looking back and forth (Muenzinger, 1938). VTE behaviors are not merely incidental, since animals that express more VTE behaviors turn out to be better learners (Muenzinger, 1938; Tolman, 1938). Furthermore, a diminution in the frequency of VTE over the course of learning was taken as evidence that learning involved a shift away from reliance on a form of search through a cognitive map toward more automatic forms of control (Muenzinger, 1938; Tolman, 1938).

The idea of a cognitive map, evidently a revolutionary notion in the early part of the last century, is now key to much theorizing in cognitive neuroscience. Cognitive maps occupy a central role in contemporary ideas related to active memory or prospection (Schacter et al., 2007), where the hippocampus (O’Keefe and Nadel, 1978) has been shown to play a critical role (O’Keefe and Nadel, 1978). For instance, human subjects with hippocampal lesions, when tasked to imagine possible future states, manifest a profound impairment in self-projection or prospection (Hassabis et al., 2007). Equally, in rats the expression of VTE behaviors is abolished by hippocampal lesions (Hu and Amsel, 1995). Furthermore, one of the most famous findings about the hippocampus in rats is the existence of place cells, which provide a population code for representing space (O’Keefe and Nadel, 1978). These cells are known to be activated at choice points in a way consistent with internal exploration of future possibilities, possibly coupled to VTEs (Johnson and Redish, 2007; Pfeiffer and Foster, 2013; van der Meer and Redish, 2009). Note, though, as we discuss below, structures other than the hippocampus are also implicated; these include distinct prefrontal cortical regions and possibly the basolateral nucleus of the amygdala and dorsomedial striatum (Balleine and Dickinson, 1998; Corbit and Balleine, 2003; Yin et al., 2005; Balleine, 2005).


Generation 1: Goal-Directed Actions and Habits

These early studies established an attractive dichotomy between control based on a cognitive map and control based on S-R associations. With the decrease in VTE behavior as a function of experience, they even offered the prospect of a transition from map-based to S-R-based determination, consistent with the long-standing observation that repetition endows a high degree of motoric fluency to even the most complex action sequences (James, 1890; Kimble and Perlmuter, 1970). However, short of using virtual reality, it is hard to achieve stimulus control in navigational domains, and it remains possible that spatial behavior may depend on special-purpose mechanisms of geometrical cognition (Gallistel, 1990; Burgess, 2008; Cheng, 1986; O’Keefe and Nadel, 1978) or indeed Pavlovian approach, for which the contingency between action and outcome is moot (Mackintosh, 1983). Therefore, the first generation of analytical studies operationalized the use of a cognitive map in a nonspatial domain as goal-directed behavior, which it then contrasted with the notion of a habit (Dickinson and Balleine, 1994, 2002; Balleine and Dickinson, 1998; Graybiel, 2008; Adams and Dickinson, 1981; Dickinson and Charnock, 1985).

Instrumental behavior is considered goal directed if it meets two criteria. First, it should reflect knowledge of the relationship between an action (or sequence of actions) and its consequences. This is known as response-outcome or R-O control. Second, the outcome should be motivationally relevant or desirable at the moment of choice. Crudely, subjects choose actions because they think that those actions lead to outcomes that they presently desire. By contrast, habitual instrumental behavior is supposed to have been stamped in by past reinforcement (Thorndike, 1911) and so is divorced from the current value of an associated outcome. Thus, key characteristics of habitual instrumental control include automaticity, computational efficiency, and inflexibility, while characteristics of goal-directed control include active deliberation, high computational cost, and an adaptive flexibility to changing environmental contingencies (Dayan, 2009).

Demonstrating that behavior is goal directed is usually assayed in a test session using posttraining manipulations, which either involve reinforcer devaluation or contingency degradation. Consider a test session carried out in extinction, i.e., without ongoing reinforcement. In this case, there should be less instrumental responding for an outcome that has been devalued (for example, a food reinforcer that has just been rendered unpalatable) than for an outcome that has not. Importantly, this is only true if knowledge of a reinforcer’s current value (i.e., its desirability) exerts a controlling influence on performance; in other words, if task performance is mediated by a representation of the reinforcer (Adams and Dickinson, 1981). Conversely, habitual behavior comprises instrumental responding that continues to be enacted even when the outcome is undesired. Various circumstances promote habitual responding, notably extended training on interval schedules of reinforcement involving single actions and single outcomes (Dickinson and Charnock, 1985; Dickinson and Balleine, 2002; Dickinson et al., 1983). The requirement for extensive experience is key and this also implies that behavior is initially goal directed but then becomes habitual over the course of experience. For completeness, we also mention the contingency criterion wherein goal-directed behavior also involves an encoding of the causal relationship between actions and their consequences. Consider a subject trained to press a lever to receive an outcome. If the outcome subsequently becomes equally available with and without a lever press, goal-directed control leads to a decrease in pressing (Dickinson and Balleine, 1994; Dickinson and Charnock, 1985).

The behavioral distinction between goal-directed and habitual control has provided the foundation for a wealth of lesion, inactivation, and pharmacological animal experiments investigating their neural bases. Rodent studies repeatedly highlight a dorsomedial striatum circuit that supports goal-directed behavior (Balleine, 2005; Corbit and Balleine, 2005; Yin et al., 2005). Related studies show that a circuit centered on dorsolateral striatum supports habit-based behavior (Yin et al., 2004, 2005; White, 1997; Balleine, 2005; Balleine and Dickinson, 1998; Killcross and Coutureau, 2003; Yin and Knowlton, 2006). Lesions to dorsolateral striatum result in a maintenance of goal-directed behavior even with extended training, a pattern that contrasts with the effect of lesions to dorsomedial striatum that result in an early emergence of habitual behavior (Yin and Knowlton, 2006). There is also explicit evidence for the transfer from dorsomedial to dorsolateral over the course of training (Belin et al., 2009; Graybiel, 2008; Yin et al., 2009; Thorn et al., 2010).

Behavioral dissociations that mirror precisely those seen following striatal lesions are also seen with lesions to distinct sectors of prefrontal cortex, a testament to the close functional affinity of these regions. Frontal prelimbic lesions abolish sensitivity to both outcome devaluation manipulations as well as to degradation of instrumental contingency (Balleine and Dickinson, 1998; Corbit and Balleine, 2003). Pretraining, but not posttraining, lesions disrupt acquisition, but not expression, of goal-directed behavior (Ostlund and Balleine, 2005). Likewise, a reversible inactivation targeting infralimbic medial prefrontal cortex impacts on the expression of habitual behavior (Coutureau and Killcross, 2003). Furthermore, selective lesions to prelimbic medial prefrontal cortex induce lack of sensitivity to goal value following either limited or extended training, whereas selective lesions to infralimbic regions result in an opposite deficit, namely retained sensitivity to goal value after both limited and extended training (Killcross and Coutureau, 2003).

The fact that prelimbic prefrontal cortex and dorsomedial striatum both support goal-directed action is in line with the anatomical connectivity between these regions (Groenewegen et al., 1990; McGeorge and Faull, 1989). The connection between infralimbic cotex and dorsolateral striatum is rather less clear and in the rat, caudal, but not rostral, infralimbic cortex projects to ventral parts of medial caudate putamen (Vertes, 2004), but there is no known projection to dorsolateral striatum. Thus, one possible locus for interaction is through indirect connections via the ventral striatum, the amygdala, the substantia nigra, or by way of projections to other cortical areas and thence to dorsolateral striatum (Hurley et al., 1991). It is known that the activity of ensembles of neurons in dorsolateral striatum and the infralimbic cortex reflect the creation and stabilization of habits, with interesting differences between the regions in the evolution of these patterns (Smith and Graybiel, 2013). However, it needs to be acknowledged that there is, as yet, no consensus as to what constitutes the homologous area in primates to rat infralimbic cortex.

This double dissociation makes a strong case that prelimbic regions are crucial for goal-directed performance, while infralimbic lesions prevent the emergence of habitual responding that overrides an initial dominance in goal-directed responding. However, it is likely that in the intact animal, there is a dynamic interdependency between goal-directed and habitual systems and that control is likely to emerge simultaneously and competitively (Wassum et al., 2009). If habit and goal-directed processes indeed act concurrently, then this invites questions regarding what precisely are the factors that influence the integration and competition between the two systems. We return to these issues below. It is also worth noting here that although goal-directed or response-outcome learning has a strong declarative flavor, it is conceptually distinct from a hippocampal-dependent stimulus-stimulus form of learning.

There are some alluring parallels with this account of the evolution from goal-directed to habitual responding. One is the transfer of control of a simple spatial behavior (turning in a “plus” maze) from a hippocampal-dependent, allocentric, reference frame to a striatum-dependent, egocentric one (Packard and McGaugh, 1996). Similar double dissociations arise from reversible lesions in these two regions at different time points, for example early or late, during learning. The other parallel is with the transfer over the course of experience from allocentric to egocentric reference frames of a sequence of manual button presses (Hikosaka et al., 1999), although this was proposed to depend on two separate cortical regions that both interact with the basal ganglia. Recent lesion studies have examined more sophisticated representational issues, for instance, comparing the sort of stimulus-response associations that underpin habits to a hierarchical association scheme in which the presence of a certain stimulus implies that a response leads to a particular outcome (Bradfield and Balleine, 2013). Control apparently based on the latter representation is compromised by lesions to posterior dorsomedial striatum, whereas in complex circumstances, lesions to dorsolateral striatal actually enhanced learning, suggesting that a form of competition might be at work.


Generation 2: Actions and Habits in the Human Brain

The rich backdrop of animal experiments has inspired a collection of studies that address the architecture of human instrumental control, often employing straightforward adaptations of successful animal paradigms as well as seeking and exploiting homologies (Balleine and O’Doherty, 2010; Haber and Knutson, 2010). Many of these have involved the use of fMRI in order to investigate the neural representation of the value of stimuli and actions to see whether or not they are affected by devaluation.

We consider two studies of particular interest in this context that respectively target goal-directed and habitual choice (Valentin et al., 2007; Tricomi et al., 2009). Valentin and colleagues trained human subjects on a task in which two different instrumental actions resulted in two distinct food reward outcomes (Valentin et al., 2007). One of the outcomes was then devalued (by feeding subjects that food to satiety, i.e., until they would consume no more of it). As expected from the moderate amount of initial training, behavior was goal directed, with actions leading to the devalued outcome being selectively depressed in extinction. Of note was the observation that the BOLD signal in a ventral sector of orbitofrontal cortex decreased for a devalued compared to a nondevalued action, leading the authors to conclude that this region plays a role in goal-directed choice. Indeed, there has been much work in humans, nonhuman primates, and rodents suggesting that this region plays a key role in representing the sort of values that underpin goal-directed control (Daw et al., 2006b; Gottfried and Dolan, 2004; Hampton et al., 2006; Padoa-Schioppa and Assad, 2006; Schoenbaum and Roesch, 2005; Thorpe et al., 1983). vmPFC is likely to have a complex role in value representation and there is strong evidence linking this region to both stimulus value and outcome value, and even recent evidence linking it to action value (FitzGerald et al., 2012). We note also that human lesion data has led to the suggestion that orbital prefrontal cortex implements encoding of stimulus value with dorsal cingulate cortex implementing encoding of action value (Camille et al., 2011).

Tricomi and colleagues set out to investigate the emergence of habitual behavior (Tricomi et al., 2009). Subjects were trained on action-outcome reward contingencies that mirrored a free-operant paradigm in the animal literature, where one group of subjects had extensive training, and another had little training. After outcome devaluation, performance showed that the minimally trained group retained outcome sensitivity, while the extensively trained group did not, just as in the animal studies. A within-group analysis of fMRI data from the extensively trained subjects comparing later sessions (when behavior was habitual) to earlier sessions (when it would likely have been goal directed) highlighted increased cue-related activity in right posterior putamen/globus pallidum, consistent with the rodent findings showing involvement of the dorsolateral striatum in habitual responding.


Generation 3: Model-Based and Model-free Analyses

Along with these experimental results, the conceptual precision of goal-directed and habitual decision making invited the ascription of computational accounts to both of them and to their potential interactions. These models in turn led to the design of novel experimental paradigms that cast new light on the dichotomy.

The basis of the models is the normative account of instrumental control that comes from the field of reinforcement learning (RL). This is based on dynamic programming (Bellman, 1957) and brings together ideas from artificial intelligence, optimal control theory, operations research, and statistics to understand how systems of any sort can learn to choose actions that maximize reward and minimize punishments (Sutton and Barto, 1998).

Typical RL problems involve four key quantities: (1) states, which can be thought of as contexts or stimuli; (2) actions that are available at or given by these states; (3) transitions between states that are occasioned (perhaps stochastically) by actions; and (4) utilities, which quantify the immediate worth of states in terms of reward or punishments. The utilities depend on the motivations of the subject (water is more valuable given thirst). The subject has to find a good policy—i.e., a good choice of action at each state—that optimizes the long-run worth of all the utilities that will be collected. All the tasks discussed above can be mapped onto this framework in a straightforward manner.

Two ends of a spectrum of RL methods are model-based and model-free control (where the term model refers to a mental as opposed to a computational model); it is these that have been associated with goal-directed and habitual control, respectively (Daw et al., 2005; Doya et al., 2002). As we noted, goal-directed control is based on working out, and then evaluating, the outcomes associated with a long-run sequence of actions. Model-based control conceives of this in terms of sophisticated, computationally demanding, prospective planning, in which a decision tree of possible future states and actions is built using a learned internal model of the environment. The current state is the root, and the policy with the highest value is determined by searching the tree either forward from the root to the leaves (the terminal points) or backward from the leaves to the root, accumulating utilities along the way to quantify the long-run worth. This search process can be thought of as an expression of a form of mental simulation (Chersi and Pezzulo, 2012; Doya, 1999; Hassabis et al., 2007; Johnson and Redish, 2007; Pfeiffer and Foster, 2013; Schacter et al., 2012). Critically, the idea that prospective outcomes are explicitly represented allows these states to be valued (putatively via the orbitofrontal or ventromedial prefrontal cortex) (Valentin et al., 2007; Fellows, 2011; O’Doherty, 2011) according to their current worth and so choices can be immediately sensitive to devaluation. Equally, given information that the transitions have changed, as in contingency degradation, the decision tree and the associated optimal choices will adapt straightaway. The tree is just like a cognitive map, one that enables the flexible consideration of the future consequence of actions (Thistlethwaite, 1951). It is easy to appreciate that building and evaluating a tree imposes processing and working memory demands that rapidly become unrealistic with increasing depth. Consequently, a model-based agent is confronted with overwhelming computational constraints that in psychological terms reflect the known capacity limitations within attention and working memory.

By contrast, model-free control involves a particular sort of prediction error, the best known example of which is the temporal difference (TD) prediction error (Sutton, 1988). Predictions at one step are supposed to be of the long-run sequence of actions or states starting at that step, and so the ideal prediction error would measure the difference between the amount of utility that is actually delivered over that long run and the amount that is predicted. However, waiting to experience all those utilities in the long run is usually impossible. The TD prediction error obviates this requirement via the trick of using the prediction at the next step to substitute for the remaining utilities that are expected to arrive and it is this aspect that leads it to sometimes be seen as forward looking. In total, this prediction error is based on the utilities that are actually observed during learning and trains predictions of the long-run worth of states, criticizing the choices of actions at those states accordingly. Further, the predictions are sometimes described as being cached, because they store experience. Much evidence points to phasic activity of dopamine neurons as reporting an appetitive prediction error (Schultz et al., 1997; Montague et al., 1996).

Model-free control is computationally efficient, since it replaces computation (i.e., the burdensome simulation of future states) with memory (i.e., stored discounted values of expected future reward); however, the forward-looking nature of the prediction error makes it statistically inefficient (Daw et al., 2005). Further, the cached values depend on past utilities and so are divorced from the outcomes that they predict. Thus, model-free control is fundamentally retrospective, and new cached values, as might arise with a change in the utility of an outcome in an environment, can only be acquired through direct experience. Thus, in extinction, model-free control, like habitual control, has no immediate sensitivity to devaluation.

Initial human imaging studies that used RL methods to examine the representation of values and prediction errors largely focused on model-free prediction and control, without worrying about model-based effects (Berns et al., 2001; O’Doherty, 2004; O’Doherty et al., 2003; Haruno et al., 2004). These showed that the BOLD signal in regions of dorsal and ventral striatum correlated with a model-free temporal difference prediction error, the exact type of signal thought to be at the heart of reinforcement learning. A huge wealth of subsequent studies have confirmed and elaborated this picture.

More recently, a plethora of paradigms has provided as sharp a contrast between model-free and model-based for human studies as animal paradigms have between goal-directed and habitual control. One set of examples (Daw et al., 2011; Gläscher et al., 2010) is based on a sequential two-choice Markov decision task, in which the action at the first state is associated with one likely and one unlikely transition. Model-free control simply prefers to repeat actions that lead to reward, irrespective of the likelihood of that first transition. By contrast, model-based control, because it builds the decision tree, can correctly ascribe those rewards following a rare transition to an alternative (nonselected) action—which, despite not predicting reward on the current trial, will be more likely to lead to reward on future trials. This key difference makes it possible to discern the influence of each controller on behavior and also to determine whether neural signals are correlated with predictions and prediction errors specific to each controller.

Motivated by Tolman and Honzik (Tolman and Honzik, 1930), Gläscher and colleagues employed a variant of this task to examine latent learning (Gläscher et al., 2010). Subjects were extensively taught the first-state transitions and were then told the utilities at the second state. Appropriate initial behavior in the task once the utilities were revealed could only arise from model-based control. However, the authors observed that the initial supremacy of model-based controller declined rather precipitately over time, even in the absence of information that would contradict this controller (Gläscher et al., 2010). This decline was suggested as an analog of fast acquisition of habitual behavior. During the interregnum, behavior was best fit by a hybrid model in which both systems exerted some control. fMRI data highlighted a conventional model-free temporal difference reward prediction error in ventral striatum, whereas a different sort of state prediction error, associated with the acquisition of the model, was seen in posterior inferior parietal and lateral prefrontal cortices.

Daw and colleagues devised a different variant of the task to encourage a stable balance between model-based and model-free control (Daw et al., 2011). The logic of the task was that model-based and model-free strategies for RL predict different patterns by which reward obtained in the second stage should impact first-stage choices on subsequent trials. Consider a trial in which a first-stage choice, uncharacteristically, led to a second stage state with which it is not usually associated, and the choice then made at the second stage turned out to be rewarded. Model-free reinforcement predicts that this experience will increase the probability of repeating the successful first-stage choice. By contrast, if a subject chooses using an internal model of the transition structure, then this predicts that they would exhibit a decreased tendency to choose that same option. The best account of the behavioral data in this task was provided by a hybrid model in which model-based and model-free predictions were integrated during learning (unless subjects had to accomplish a cognitively demanding dual-task, in which case model-free control becomes rampant (Otto et al., 2013). However, across subjects, there was a wide spread in the degree of dependence on each system. Unexpectedly, ventral striatal fMRI signal, a region that normally correlates with model-free temporal difference prediction errors, was found to covary also with a temporal difference prediction error calculated on the basis of model-based predictions. The extent of this covariation for an individual subject was correlated with the extent to which that subject’s behavior was model based. One reason for a surprise at the presence of this signal is that the model-based system is not thought to use these prediction errors for its own calculations (rather, it uses the state prediction error, where a state prediction error is a measure of the surprise in a new state given a current estimate of state-action-state transition probabilities (Gläscher et al., 2010). One suggested possibility here is that the model-based system is training the model-free system.

Along with these human studies, there is now an accumulating wealth of reports of the sort of neural response profile that would be predicted if indeed an animal is evaluating a menu of internally represented actions and their consequences at critical decision points. This is particularly true in spatial tasks (Johnson and Redish, 2007; Pfeiffer and Foster, 2013; van der Meer and Redish, 2009) and is a potential neural associate of the VTE behavior we mentioned above. In particular, at decision points such as a branch point in a maze, hippocampal place cell responses can be observed to sweep forward from the actual location of the subject. They do so in a manner consistent with the idea that the subject is engaged in some form of deliberation regarding its future potential states and the worth thereof (Johnson and Redish, 2007; Pfeiffer and Foster, 2013; van der Meer and Redish, 2009), for instance, being correlated with the subject’s ultimate choices. In a similar vein, a recent mouse study has reported that units in ventral hippocampus, a region which is strongly connected to those supporting reward processing, mediates a form of goal-oriented search (Ruediger et al., 2012).

The forward sweeps relevant to immediate choices are assumed to start at the subject’s current location. However, when an animal is not running in its environment, or indeed when it is sleeping, it is also possible to observe a variety of forward and backward sweeps (Dragoi and Buzsáki, 2006; Foster and Wilson, 2006, 2007; Lee and Wilson, 2002; Louie and Wilson, 2001) related to more or less recent experience in the world. It has been suggested that these are reflections of a model-based system training a model-free system, something that had been suggested in RL in the form of a technique called DYNA (Sutton, 1991). Backward sweeps (called reverse replay) seem particularly relevant for understanding the mechanisms supporting certain aspects of value learning, providing the means for the back propagation of value signals to the earliest predictor of their likely future occurrence, without needing a forward-looking prediction error (Foster and Wilson, 2006). One computational formulation that addresses this question is DYNA-Q (Sutton, 1990), which allows an agent to exploit previously recorded experience to update values and policies, an idea that has now been exploited in modeling studies (Johnson and Redish, 2005). One could argue that a decision-making counterpart of consolidation (which is a normal view of hippocampal replay; McClelland et al., 1995) is exactly a model-free instantiation of a policy.


Generation 4: Elaborations on Model-Based and Model-free Control

With these prior generations as the foundation, a current set of studies is focusing on unearthing more about the interaction between model-based and model-free control (Doll et al., 2012) and indeed more about model-based control itself, given its manifest computational complexities. This is given added urgency by recent evidence that even the simplest type of instrumental learning task has model-based and model-free components (Collins and Frank, 2012).

First, there has been anatomical and pharmacological insight into the balance of influence between the two systems. For example, the strength of white matter connections between premotor cortex and posterior putamen is reported to predict vulnerability to “slips of action” (where non-goal-relevant, previously trained, actions are automatically elicited by environmental cues), a vulnerability also predicted by gray matter density in the putamen (de Wit et al., 2012b). Such slips have been considered as intrusions of habits. This contrasts with tract strength between caudate and ventromedial prefrontal cortex that predicted a disposition to express more flexible goal-directed action, evident in an ability to selectively respond to still rewarding outcomes (de Wit et al., 2012b).

Most work on the pharmacology of the different forms of control has centered on the neuromodulator dopamine. However, complexities are to be expected since dopamine is likely to play a role in both systems (Cools, 2011). First, as noted, the phasic firing of dopamine neurons has been suggested as reporting the temporal difference prediction error for reward (Montague et al., 1996; Schultz et al., 1997) that underpins model-free evaluation and control via its influence over activity and plasticity (Reynolds et al., 2001; Frank, 2005). Second, dopamine projects to the entire striatum, including regions such as dorsomedial striatum (or caudate), which have been implicated in model-based control, and dorsolateral striatum (or putamen), implicated in model-free control (Balleine, 2005). Indeed, lesions to nigrostriatal dopamine impair habit (stimulus-response) learning (Faure et al., 2005). Substantial work in conditions such as Parkinson’s disease, in which dopamine is reduced, shows that manipulations favoring D1 and D2 dopamine receptors result in effects that are most readily interpretable in a model-free manner (Frank et al., 2004). Third, dopamine exerts a significant influence over prefrontal cortical functions such as working memory (Williams and Goldman-Rakic, 1995), in a manner that depends on initial levels or efficacy of this neuromodulator (Cools and D’Esposito, 2011). These functions are particularly critical for the operation of model-based control. For instance, in a rat experiment in which a posttraining manipulation of value was coupled to a dopamine infusion into ventromedial PFC (vmPFC) (Hitchcott et al., 2007), a bidirectional effect was evident whereby the dopamine infusion decreased responding to a devalued outcome and enhanced responding to nondevalued outcomes, suggesting an influence on model-based valuation.

At a mechanistic level, dopamine is likely to affect model-based control via its impact on maintenance processes associated with the prefrontal cortex. For example, disrupting prefrontal function using TMS renders behavior more habitual (Smittenaar et al., 2013), while boosting dopaminergic function enhances psychological and electrophysiological signatures of such maintenance processes (Moran et al., 2011). This is consistent with the effects of dopamine on working memory in macaques (Williams and Goldman-Rakic, 1995) and also with the fact that manipulations of dopamine in prefrontal regions directly affect model-based control (Hitchcott et al., 2007). However, the extensive dopamine innervation of regions of the striatum devoted to goal-directed control suggests the possibility that control over working memory might not be its sole mode of influence (Frank et al., 2001).

Finally, in a modern experiment into the irrelevant incentive effect (Krieckhaus and Wolf, 1968), it was observed that sudden revaluation in Pavlovian conditioning is associated with dramatic upregulation of activity in dopaminergic nuclei as inferred from elevated Fos activity (along with many other regions, including the orbitofrontal cortex) (Robinson and Berridge, 2013). Specifically, rats who had learned repulsion to an unpleasant salt stimulus, when first reencountering this stimulus in a salt-deprived state, showed immediate attraction to this same stimulus. If one interprets revaluation in this context as depending on some form of model-based prediction (albeit not necessarily the same as instrumental model-based prediction; P.D. and K. Berridge, unpublished data), then this places dopamine at the heart also of the model-based system.

One indirect method to address the role played by dopamine in instrumental control in humans exploits a dopamine depletion technique, involving acute dietary phenylalanine and tyrosine depletion (APTD). de Wit et al. (2012a) used this manipulation in subjects performing a reward learning paradigm, employing outcome devaluation and measuring slips of action to assess the degree of model-based versus model-free control. After devaluation, depletion had no impact upon stimulus-response learning or response-outcome learning. Instead, depletion tipped the balance of control toward more habitual responding as revealed in a greater frequency of slips of action. However, depletion studies, whether experimental or disease based, are likely to exert a much less detrimental effect on dopamine function than the 6-OHDA lesions conventionally used in animal studies.

The frequency of slips of action does not offer a very precise measurement of the relative influence of model-based and model-free systems. In a double-blind, fully counterbalanced (repeated-measures), design, Wunderlich et al. (2012b) administered either L-DOPA (to boost the influence of dopamine) or placebo while subjects solved the two-step Markov decision task of (Daw et al., 2011). By fitting the same class of model as in the original study, the authors showed that subjects were more model based in their behavior when under L-DOPA, favoring the notion that the dominant influence of this type of dopaminergic manipulation is over prefrontal function rather than over dorsolateral striatal habits (Wunderlich et al., 2012b).

Conversely, Parkinson’s disease involves the progressive death of dopamine cells and so causes a decrease in dopamine release. de Wit and colleagues tested Parkinson’s patients in an instrumental conflict task in which response-outcome links associated with a model-based system would putatively impair performance in a critical set of (incongruent) trials, whereas model-free, stimulus-response, associations would be helpful (de Wit et al., 2011). They showed that subjects with the disease could solve the task, arguing that habit formation may not have been eliminated. They also showed that (goal-directed) performance in a posttraining devaluation test covaried negatively with disease severity, arguing that model-based influences were impaired. These results are consistent with the findings above, albeit harder to integrate with other notions about deficits in model-free learning in Parkinson’s patients.

Various new tasks have also shed light on model-based and model-free systems (Doll et al., 2012). For instance, Wunderlich and colleagues exposed subjects to a task with elements explicitly designed to engage each system (Wunderlich et al., 2012a). Here, in the element directed at model-free control, subjects were overtrained to make choices within four sets of pairs of options, based on experience of the probabilistic reward to which the options led. In the element directed at model-based control, they had to navigate a branching, three-step decision tree to reach one of several possible terminal states, each associated with an instructed probability of reward that changed on a trial-by-trial basis. Critically, the choice at the middle step was made by the computer playing a minimax strategy to ensure that subjects engaged in a form of model-based dynamic programming that involved estimating the values of distinct stages in the decision tree. Finally, while being scanned, subjects were faced with three different tasks: the full three-step decision tree; a choice between two overtrained pairs; or a choice between one overtrained pair and half a decision tree.

In the full three-step decision tree, anterior caudate nucleus BOLD covaried with optimal and alternative values, such that during a root branch decision, caudate activity related to several values relevant to the choice, including those present at consecutive choices deeper in the tree. However, during the third, deepest, choice, caudate activity was still associated with the values of both current choice alternatives but no longer with the value of the previously rejected root branch (Wunderlich et al., 2012a). This is exactly the pattern expected in a forward tree search during goal-directed (model-based) decision making, where values related to distinct options are prospectively represented. Notably, these model-based effects were not evident in another basal ganglia structure, the putamen, which only encoded model-free values for extensively trained options at the time of choice. By contrast, when subjects were required to choose between an overtrained pair and half the tree, a situation requiring access to both model-based and model-free values, the caudate represented the planned target value of the decision tree, while activity in the putamen pertained solely to the value of the overtrained pair.

This dissociation corresponds exactly to the response patterns of a model-free controller that depends on cached values (putamen) and a model-based controller that depends on values calculated on the fly (caudate). Thus, when goal-directed and habit-based options compete, the activity in caudate and putamen covaried with planned and cached values even under situations where the relevant actions were not chosen. The findings fit snugly with an animal literature both in terms of anatomical dissociations as well as findings that highlight both systems act synergistically and in parallel (Wassum et al., 2009). In stark contrast, activity in vmPFC encoded the winning outcome of the choice process (chosen value), irrespective of whether this choice was based on a model-based or model-free value. Thus, vmPFC can access both model-based and model-free values, consistent with parallel, and independent, operation of model-based and model-free valuation systems.

Simon and Daw designed a different, spatial, task in order to examine model-based inference (Simon and Daw, 2011). Here, subjects navigated a maze consisting of a set of rooms connected by one-way doors in order to get to goals; however, the structure of the maze changed randomly at every step, with the doors changing their allowed directions according to a small, fixed, probability. The constant change in the structure of the maze invited subjects to use model-based planning, and indeed their behavior was better fit by a model-based rather than a model-free method. Having pinned the behavior down, the authors were then in a position to study the neural representations of value signals associated with the planning task as well as other model-based quantities, such as the number of choices at the current and the next step in the maze (Simon and Daw, 2011). Regions such as ventrolateral and ventromedial putamen, whose BOLD signals are traditionally supposed to covary with model-free values or prediction errors, turned out to covary with key model-based value signal. By contrast, there was little evidence that BOLD in the vmPFC was also related to value, as might have been expected, though parts of the medial temporal lobe also showed significant correlations with these and with reward predictions. The authors suggested that the latter findings might possibly reflect the spatial nature of the task, compared with the more abstract Markov decision problems that had previously implicated the vmPFC. Other regions including the anterior insula, the precentral cortex, and the medial cingulate covaried with facets of the transitions available from a room, suggesting that they might be involved in realizing the model of the world. Tasks such as this have a strong spatial component, as opposed to the more abstract structure of many planning tasks, and this attribute might account for the presence of model-based signals seen in hippocampus and medial temporal lobe. In fact, this has a bearing on a suggestion that there is another form of controller, an “episodic controller,” that involves these very structures (Lengyel and Dayan, 2008).

Other illuminating paradigms include a so-called grid-sailing task (Fermin et al., 2010), which uses structurally different rules (in the form of key mappings) in a motor-learning task. This task has provided evidence that subjects use a model-based strategy to generalize learning. There is also a suggestion that explicit instructions and advice (whose immediate impact must surely be more model-based than model-free) operate by boosting the impact of model-free learning on trials on which instructions are followed (Doll et al., 2009). Also, of note is a recent implementation of an ingenious behavioral design, involving a simple one- and two-step problem in which learning and performance occurred in distinct phases (Gershman et al., 2012). In the final phase of the task, model-based and model-free controllers would make the same choices, albeit for different reasons. In fact, the authors observed that subjects acted in a manner consistent with a model-based system having trained by a model-free one during an earlier phase of learning, as in an online or offline form of the DYNA-Q algorithms mentioned above (Sutton, 1991). In effect, these findings highlight cooperation, as opposed to competition, between the two systems.


Generation 5: The Future

There are many outstanding questions related to model-based and model-free control, and these are now the focus of intense investigation. In the remainder of this Review, we touch on some of the main strands of this research and the plethora of unresolved issues. These include how model-based control is realized; how the competition between model-based and model-free control is resolved when they disagree; the relationship between the formulation of model-based control that we have adopted and the many other related dichotomies; the relevant interactions between instrumental conditioning, which has so far been our central focus, and Pavlovian conditioning; and finally some early work on psychopathological interactions.


Model-Based Realization

The first critical issue is how model-based calculations are realized. Building and searching a deep tree imposes a huge burden on cognitive control and working memory. However, there is presently not much work that extends from hippocampal preplay in spatial domains (Johnson and Redish, 2007; Pfeiffer and Foster, 2013) to planning in multistep tasks (Wunderlich et al., 2012a; Simon and Daw, 2011). Nevertheless, the latter studies delivered neural evidence for tree-like calculations. Other related search tasks have found behavioral evidence for these calculations and have started to look at heuristics for pruning the tree, a necessity when it gets too wide or deep (Huys et al., 2012).

One general notion is to treat the problem of model-based evaluation as an internal decision problem (Dayan, 2012) with actions such as gating information into working memory (O’Reilly and Frank, 2006) or expanding a state in the tree in terms of the actions that are possible. These could depend sensitively on the hierarchical architectures of cognitive control in lateral and medial prefrontal regions and their striatal connections (Frank and Badre, 2012; Koechlin and Hyafil, 2007; Koechlin et al., 2003).

Adaptations of RL architectures such as DYNA-2 (Silver et al., 2008) may allow model-free values to be integrated with model-based values to circumvent the complexity of very deep trees (Sutton and Barto, 1998; Pezzulo et al., 2013); they might also provide a rationale for the observation that regions that are normally considered to report model-free temporal difference prediction errors can be invaded by prediction errors evaluated on the basis of model-based predictions (Daw et al., 2011). An alternative idea is to transform control-theoretic calculations of the optimal policy into the sort of probabilistic inference problems that are generally believed to be solved by sensory processing regions of the cortex in order to interpret input (Solway and Botvinick, 2012). The consilience is attractive; however, the calculational complexities largely remain (Pezzulo et al., 2013).


Competition between Model-Based and Model-free Control

In variants of an architecture such as DYNA-2 (Silver et al., 2008), there can be a seamless integration of model-based and model-free values of actions as part of the way that the former are calculated. Alternatively, if the model-based system mainly influences the model-free system by regurgitating examples (Dragoi and Buzsáki, 2006; Foster and Wilson, 2006, 2007) or selectively boosting its learning rate (Biele et al., 2011; Doll et al., 2009, 2011), and in so doing trains short-term model-free values, then the MF system could do its bidding and may not actually need explicitly to seize control. Otherwise one has to invoke some form of competitive combination of model-based and model-free values. Daw et al.’s finding that different subjects employ each system to a greater or lesser degree (Daw et al., 2011) might be seen as being evidence for the latter idea.

Various suggestions have been made for how arbitration should proceed, but this is an area where much more work is necessary. One idea is that it should depend on the relative uncertainties of the systems, trading the noise induced by the calculational difficulties of model-based control off against the noise induced by the sloth of learning of model-free control (Daw et al., 2005). This provides a natural account of the emergence of habitual behavior (Dickinson, 1985), as in the latter noise decreases as knowledge accumulates. By this account, it could be the continual uncertainty induced by the changing mazes in Simon and Daw (2011) that led to the persistent dominance of model-based control. Equally, the uncertainty associated with unforeseen circumstances might lead to the renewed dominance of model-based control, even after model-free control had asserted itself (Isoda and Hikosaka, 2011).

A different idea suggested by Keramati et al. (2011) starts from the observation that model-free values are fast to compute but potentially inaccurate, whereas model-based ones are slow to compute but typically more accurate (Keramati et al., 2011). They consider a regime in which the model-based values are essentially perfect and then perform a cost/benefit analysis to assess whether the value of this perfect information is sufficient to make it worth acquiring expensively. The model-free controller’s uncertainty about the relative values of the action becomes a measure of the potential benefit; and the opportunity cost of the time of calculation (quantified by the prevailing average reward rate (Niv et al., 2007) is a measure of the cost. A related suggestion involves integration of model-free and model-based values rather than selection and a different method of model-based calculation (Pezzulo et al., 2013).


Other Model-free and Model-Based Formulations

There is no unique form of model-free or model-based control and evidence hints that there are intermediate points on the spectrum between them. For instance, there are important differences between model-free control based on the predicted long-run values of actions (as in Q-learning) (Watkins, 1989), or SARSA (Rummery and Niranjan, 1994), and actor-critic control (Barto et al., 1983). In the latter, for which there is some interesting evidence (Li and Daw, 2011), action choice is based on propensities that convey strictly less information than the long-run values of those actions. There are even ideas that the spiraling connections between the striatum and the dopamine system (Joel and Weiner, 2000; Haber et al., 2000) could allow different forms of controller to be represented in different regions (Haruno and Kawato, 2006).

Intermediate points between model-based and model-free control can arise from temporally sophisticated representations of states that contain predictions about likely future states (thus being partly model based) but that can be used in a straightforward manner by the model-free controller, thereby including some facets of model-based control. One example is the successor representation (Dayan, 1993). Further, there are suggestions that there are multiple model-based controllers, i.e., a mixture model (Doya et al., 2002), in which the selection between them can have model-based or potentially model-free components.

Finally, there is a rich panoply of other formulations of the dichotomies between model-free and model-based control and of model-based control itself (Dayan, 2009; Kahneman, 2011; Stanovich and West, 2002). We have already seen some variants, with the issue of instruction versus experience (as in Wunderlich et al., 2012a) but there are many others too, including declarative versus procedural, spatial/geometric versus abstract, interpreted versus compiled, prior- versus data-bound (Dayan, 2009), and even episodic versus semantic control (Lengyel and Dayan, 2008). Teasing these various aspects apart, and understanding what properties and substrates they share, is critical. For example, iterations of reflective control as captured by ideas such as model based, declarative, and goal directed are almost certainly not fully commensurable.


Pavlovian Conditioning

So far, we have concentrated on instrumental control, i.e., the choice of actions based on their past or current contingencies. Another, even more influential source of control is Pavlovian, in which predictions of future valenced outcomes lead automatically to a choice of action (such as approach for appetitive outcomes and inhibition or withdrawal for aversive ones) irrespective of the benefit of that action (Dayan et al., 2006; Williams and Williams, 1969). One way to conceive of these Pavlovian systems is in terms of an evolutionarily specified prior, serving to facilitate performance by alleviating the computational costs that come with instrumental conditioning’s increased flexibility in being able to learn to emit arbitrary actions.

There is good evidence for Pavlovian predictions of actual outcomes, which what we argue underpins instrumental model-based control, and this seems to account for behavioral phenomena such as specific forms of Pavlovian instrumental transfer (PIT) (Ostlund and Maidment, 2012; Kruse et al., 1983). However, there are two key additional aspects to Pavlovian conditioning. First is the idea that Pavlovian control might influence instrumental model-based calculations. For instance, we noted above that building and evaluating the tree might be considered in terms of a set of internal actions (Dayan, 2012). Those actions might also be susceptible to Pavlovian biases. One example is the possibility that pruning of the decision tree, which we argued is likely to be of great importance in the face of its size, might be subject to Pavlovian manipulation. It could, for instance, happen automatically in the face of potential punishments, even when this pruning is suboptimal (Huys et al., 2012).

Second, Pavlovian conditioning differs from instrumental conditioning conceptually in the choice of action (automatic versus learned) rather than in the nature of the predictions, and so it is possible that it also has access to both model-free and model-based predictions. This is important for interpreting a range of Pavlovian conditioning results, such as the difference between identity unblocking, which is outcome specific (McDannald et al., 2011) and so putatively model based, versus valence unblocking, which is outcome general and so model free.

As a final example, consider Pavlovian to instrumental transfer (PIT), in which Pavlovian cues modify the vigor of instrumental responding as, for example, when appetitive cues increase responding for reward. PIT comes in two flavors: specific and general. Specific PIT depends on a match between the particular outcome that is expected as both the Pavlovian and instrumental target and so appears to be model based. Conversely, general PIT depends solely on the valence of the Pavlovian cue, as expected for a model-free prediction. This distinction has been used to good effect in determining the substrates of model-based and model-free predictions (Balleine, 2005), for instance, differentiating the role of basolateral and central nuclei of the amygdala and their connections to the core and shell of the nucleus accumbens.

Many early fMRI studies into prediction errors used model-free accounts in Pavlovian paradigms and located prediction errors in striatal BOLD (Berns et al., 2001; O’Doherty, 2004; O’Doherty et al., 2003; Haruno et al., 2004). More recent investigations have looked closely at the distinction between model-based and model-free, detecting evidence for the former in areas such as the amygdala (Prévost et al., 2013). However, it is not clear that Pavlovian and instrumental model-based predictions are the same (P.D. and K. Berridge, unpublished data). For instance, instant Pavlovian revaluation associated with saline deprivation happens normally in decorticate animals, evidently not depending on regions strongly affiliated with model-based control such as the vmPFC (Wirsig and Grill, 1982). Further, there are dissociations between the effect of devaluation in instrumental responding versus PIT (Holland, 2004), and the irrelevant incentive effect, which shows a form of model-based motivationally sensitive evaluation, appears to depend on something akin to PIT (Dickinson and Dawson, 1987a, 1987b) in a way that suggests this Pavlovian/instrumental difference.


Psychopathology

How control is parsed between model-based and model-free systems is likely to have psychopathological implications. There is currently great interest in using the sorts of ideas and tasks that we have discussed to provide a quantitative way of understanding the nature and underpinnings of abnormal decisions, choices, and evaluations. The suggestion that systems occupy something closer to a spectrum than a dichotomy makes this a potentially powerful way to parse deviance but also very challenging.

One example is obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) (Graybiel, 2008), where insensitivity to outcome devaluation and slips of action were used to test a hypothesis of dominance by a habitual system (Gillan et al., 2011). Patients with OCD (albeit potentially confounded by the effects of their neuromodulatory therapies) showed no deficit in using rewarding feedback to guide action but instead showed both lack of sensitivity to outcome devaluation and increased frequency in slips of action. A similar conclusion has been derived from observations of the two-step task (Daw et al., 2011) in OCD patients, as they, along with substance abusers and binge eaters, showed a lower dependence on model-based control (V. Voon, personal communication). Furthermore, evidence for abnormalities in components of a goal-directed system in OCD, particularly the caudate nucleus, aligns with a suggestion that key manifestations of this condition reflect on overdominance of a habitual system (Maia et al., 2008).

A second example is drug addiction (Belin et al., 2009). One influential proposal is that a protracted exposure to addictive drugs recruits dopamine-dependent striato-nigro-striatal ascending spirals (Haber et al., 2000; Joel and Weiner, 2000) from the nucleus accumbens to more dorsal regions of the striatum (Everitt et al., 2008). This results in a shift in control from action-outcome to stimulus-response mechanisms, a putative dominant mode of control in drug seeking and drug relapse. What this entails is that a key mechanism underlying the emergence of compulsive drug seeking, as well as relapse into addictive behaviors, is the subversion of control by a contextually dominant habitual mode.

A final question here relates to the consequence of overdominance of a model-based system. Speculatively, we suggest that it might at least be involved in components of the phenomenology seen in psychotic states, such as paranoia, delusions, and hallucinations. The latter can be seen as arising when the sort of processes that are associated with building and evaluating a model become sufficiently detached from external input from the world. We observed that boosting dopamine boosts the impact and control of such model-based influences (Wunderlich et al., 2012b) and perhaps this is at least one pathophysiological step. It is worth noting that in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease, boosting dopamine function often leads to the emergence of psychotic phenomena (Yaryura-Tobias et al., 1970).


Conclusion

We have provided an inevitably selective Review of the past, present, and future of model-based and model-free control in humans. The distinction is extremely long standing, has been an important source of ideas and experiments, has offered accounts of many brain regions critical to instrumental choice, and indeed has been a spur to computational modeling. However, even though it is not yet evident how the computational challenges of model-based control are addressed, it is becoming clear that model-based and model-free predictions and controls are more richly intertwined than originally supposed and thereby offer flexible and adaptive solutions to the manifest problems of exploring and exploiting potentially dangerous but lucrative environments.


A Community of One: Social Cognition and Auditory Verbal Hallucinations

Vaughan Bell — PLoS Biology, 2013. PMC3848915, CC BY 4.0.

Auditory verbal hallucinations have attracted a great deal of scientific interest, but despite the fact that they are fundamentally a social experience—in essence, a form of hallucinated communication—current theories remain firmly rooted in an individualistic account and have largely avoided engagement with social cognition. Nevertheless, there is mounting evidence for the role of social cognitive and social neurocognitive processes in auditory verbal hallucinations, and, consequently, it is proposed that problems with the internalisation of social models may be key to the experience.


Introduction

Auditory verbal hallucinations, the experience of “hearing voices”, present us with an interesting paradox: the experiences are generated from within a single individual but are typically experienced as a social phenomenon—that is, a form of communication from another speaker.

Current theories attempt to explain auditory verbal hallucinations as alterations to individualistic information processing—namely, misattributions of internal thoughts as external phenomena due to biases in cognitive monitoring. The fact that voices stem from an internal source is, of course, clear, but the typical experience of “hearing voices” is not that thoughts seem to be “spoken aloud” but that hallucinated voices have a social identity with clear interpersonal relevance. In other words, voices are as much hallucinated social identities as they are hallucinated words or sounds.

Nevertheless, neurocognitive theories have largely ignored how people who “hear voices” acquire what amounts to internalised social actors. To illustrate the extent of this neglect, a recent consensus statement that described an integrated cognitive model of auditory verbal hallucinations included only vague mentions of “perceptual expectations”, “top down influences”, and “emotion” to address how voices become distinguishable as social identities, without any specific suggestions for how these experiences take a social form.

This clear omission is all the more surprising given the significant advances in the field of social cognitive neuroscience. Although early theories in this field focussed largely on the development of abilities (like “theory of mind” and “mentalising”), more recent work highlights the importance of developing internalised models of social actors for both “inner” social reasoning and “live” social interaction. Here it is argued that alongside the well-established difficulties with source and intention monitoring that lead to misattribution, auditory verbal hallucinations may also involve a change in the neurocognitive processes that support our internal social models of people and how they behave.


The Social Cognition of Hearing Voices

Although, at its root, all speech is a social phenomenon, hallucinatory voices have clear interpersonal characteristics above and beyond the social basis on which they rest. First, hallucinated voices are usually experienced as having identities and making coherent communicative speech acts (see example in), and, second, they are primarily experienced as social actors the hearers can relate to and interact with.


Box 1. Hallucinated Social Identities

“I mean, there are two voices—Simon and Jeremy. Simon's…um…like a demon really. He's very demonic and he…says people read my mind and they know I'm evil…. I've got a year to live, that if I don't do as I'm told the horrible horseman of the apocalypse will come and get me and kill me and Armageddon will come and the world will be destroyed. And then Jeremy—he's just a little boy, he's just full of fun, you know, he'll tell me things like—um—‘Move the food from the cupboard and put it in mum's chest of 7 drawers.’ Just stupid things like that. It's funny but it's—it is annoying really.”

—Lucy from Knudson and Coyle

Phenomenological studies have reported that between 30% and 69% of people who hear voices experience them as having specific personal identities (e.g., members of the family, God, celebrities),–. The biggest study to date reported that 31% of 199 voice hearers with psychiatric diagnosis did not experience anonymous voices, 32% experienced a mix of known and unknown voices, and only 37% experienced purely anonymous voices. However, these figures are likely to be a minimum estimate of whether voices are experienced as having social identities, in terms of being able to reliably distinguish them from other voices by personal characteristics, because voices may have social identities but still be anonymous (e.g., identified only as an “unknown old woman” or “a man with a deep voice”, as in Leudar et al., who name them “incognito” voices). There is evidence to support this from studies that have specifically investigated this aspect of the experience. Nayani and David reported that 61% of psychiatric voice hearers knew the identity of their voices, but an additional 15% had voices that were familiar but unknown. McCarthy-Jones et al. found that 70% of voice hearers reported voices that, regardless of specific identity, were “like” people they had spoken to in the past. In a qualitative study of 50 psychiatric voice hearers, Beavan reported that characterising voice identity, regardless of citing a specific personal identity, was a major theme of the experience of hallucinating voices. In other words, regardless of whether a voice is associated with a personal identity in the outside world, the process of recognising it as a distinct social identity is likely to be a key experience for many voice hearers.

Similarly, numerous studies have now found that voice hearers understand their connection with the voices in terms of relationships and interact with their voices in ways that “share many properties with interpersonal relationships within the social world”. Most obvious in this regard is the fact that over 80% of people who experience auditory verbal hallucinations have reported that they are able to engage in interactive conversations with their voices,. Judgements about the identity of hallucinated voices rely on perceptual features similar to those required to judge identity when listening to the voices of other speakers, with perceived identity being an important mediator of distress.

With regard to the effect of social environment on voices, relationships with the hallucinated voices are experienced in terms of social power, while voice hearers' perception of the external social world is mirrored in their relationship with hallucinated voices—similarly a significant mediator of distress,. Studies on psychiatric voice hearers have indicated that the social environment plays a role not only in the formation of hallucinations but also the maintenance of the experience,. Although the risk of psychosis is raised after the experience of trauma in general, childhood sexual and emotional abuse—but not physical abuse—predict the presence of auditory verbal hallucinations in adulthood, suggesting a specific link with early relationship trauma. In adult life, the death of someone in a long-term, loving relationship will commonly lead to hallucinations of that specific person, and hallucinated voices are among the most common experiences. In line with phenomenological evidence that voices are typically associated with known people (either directly through identity or through resemblance), it seems likely that intense emotion within a relationship is associated with both the formation and content of hallucinated voices.

These results suggest that the experience of auditory verbal hallucinations is, for most voice hearers, primarily a social one, with social environment through the lifespan having a specific effect on the presence and form of voices. The fact that most voices are perceived as having social identities with which the hearer interacts in ways verifiably similar to external social relationships suggests that voices often function as internal models of social actors.


Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Social Cognitive Neuroscience

The majority of studies on the cognitive neuroscience of auditory verbal hallucinations have not looked at “voices” as specifically social phenomena, but there is evidence that the neural networks involved in supporting these experiences have significant overlap with areas that play a key role in social neurocognition.

Neuroimaging studies have linked auditory hallucinations to functional and structural differences in speech and language areas—most notably the superior and middle temporal gyri and the inferior frontal gyrus (Broca's area). In addition, a wider network of non-sensory areas is implicated. These include areas typically described in the auditory verbal hallucination literature as linked to cognitive monitoring—namely, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, and cerebellum—and areas typically linked to emotion and affect regulation—namely, the anterior insula, hippocampal and parahippocampal regions, and the orbitofrontal cortex,. However, these areas typically described as monitoring and emotion areas are also key components in social neurocognitive networks that make up the “social brain”,.

Of particular interest in the network commonly identified in neuroimaging studies of auditory verbal hallucinations is the temporoparietal junction, now clearly identified as having a key role in verbal working memory and social cognition and, according to Saxe, a central role in representing others' mental states. Using electroencephalography, this area has been found to be active in the second before the onset of auditory verbal hallucinations, and 1-Hz repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (used to dampen down neural excitability) applied to this area reduces hallucination intensity. In the only study that has directly stimulated the temporoparietal junction (increasing neural excitability in the area), Arzy et al. induced a clear experience of social imagery in non-voice-hearing, non-psychiatric participants in the form of a “sensed presence”.

Neuroimaging studies that have directly compared the experience of auditory hallucinations to imagined inner voices have found remarkably similar brain activity, indicating that voices are not likely to be just “misidentified thoughts” but specifically “misidentified voice images”, potentially experienced as unintentional because of an altered sequence of activation in the supplementary motor area and auditory perceptual areas,. Such voice images have been found to have dissociable neural substrates for spatial and social identity properties.


Towards a Social Cognitive Approach to Voices

There is good evidence that auditory verbal hallucinations are usually experienced as social entities with which voice hearers have dynamic relationships and which are associated with specific changes to brain networks used to support social cognition. It is surprising, therefore, that cognitive and neurocognitive theories of hallucinated voices have been almost entirely individualistic in their approach.

Perhaps one exception is Fernyhough's developmental theory that draws on Vygotsky's account of inner speech. According to Vygotsky, children learn language through interaction and dialogue with others. The dialogue format is then used, first out loud, to problem-solve (children literally talk to themselves), and later becomes internal as we learn to internalise speech as thoughts, with thoughts retaining dialogic qualities and having elements of “inner self-talk”. Fernyhough uses this to explain how the “misattribution of thought” model of auditory verbal hallucinations could produce speech-like experiences. However, this account still does not explain why hallucinated voices are typically experienced as distinct social identities with which the hearer has a relationship. In essence, it still strips the social phenomenology—and, therefore, it could be argued, key aspects of social cognitive processing—from the experience.

Considering the evidence that auditory verbal hallucinations involve a misattribution of internal phenomena as external due to biases in cognitive monitoring, we need to be clear about the nature of the internal phenomena that are being misattributed. It would be most parsimonious to assume that these phenomena stem from our normal ability to internalise models of people we know and their voices, rather than auditory hallucinations involving a de novo generation of persistent and internally vocal social identities. Accounts including internalised models of social actors suggest that we internalise others' voices and personalities so that we can predict what someone would say or do in any given situation. These internal models can be for specific people, so I can imagine how my spouse might respond in a hypothetical conversation, or for generic stereotypes, so I can imagine how a policeman or shopkeeper might respond.

Neuropsychological models of voice hearing, suggest there is an important component involved in the generation of heard speech (changes to activity in the language system) and an important component involved in difficulty distinguishing internal from external phenomena (altered cognitive monitoring). The hypothesis suggested here is that, in addition to these well-established factors, there is an alteration to the social cognitive or social neurocognitive systems that support internal models of social actors and their associated voice imagery, to explain why voices are typically experienced as having an identity and acting socially.

It is worth examining what this implies. First, it implies that an ability to internalise models of other people and generate associated imagery of their voices is a normal developmental process. Longitudinal studies looking at developmental psychology should see that this ability develops in line with other social cognitive processes, and that people with difficulties in internalising predictive models of other individuals should have marked social difficulties. Secondly, it implies that changes to the normal functioning of this system play a causal role in many voice-hearing experiences. Although typically experienced as social, voice-hearing experiences can range from simple repetitive syllables to conversations between the hearer and several hallucinated vocal identities. Drawing on the work of Hassabis et al., the more a voice is experienced as having a social identity, the more it should involve processes that support the creation of and prediction from internalised personality models at the cognitive and neurobiological level.

Furthermore, considering that one of the key experiences of voice hearing is the lack of agentive control over the voices, and that there is a link between social stress, trauma, and auditory hallucinations, the internal social models of individuals associated with intense traumatic or emotional experiences should be less predictable—and resultant imagery more intrusive—than for individuals not associated with such experiences. In addition, recent evidence has emerged that psychiatric voice hearers are much more likely to identify voices as specific living people than non-clinical voice hearers, suggesting that social cognitive factors may differ depending on the level of disability associated with the experience.

To further clarify these issues there is a clear need for more fundamental evidence to be gathered about the nature of voice-hearing experiences. Studies on how voices are distinguished as “individuals”, which social characteristics they are perceived to have, and how this is distinct from being associated with specific identifiable persons in the outside world (as opposed to voices with distinguishable personalities who remain “anonymous” or “incognito”) are still lacking. Furthermore, little attention has been paid to how voices evolve over time, and knowing when voices become “social” may be key to understanding the role of social cognition in the aetiology of auditory verbal hallucinations.

Over the last decade, psychological-level research has focussed on the link between social cognition and auditory verbal hallucinations and has amassed a significant amount of evidence as a result. However, researchers working in cognitive neuroscience, who are specifically looking to make links with neurobiology, have only occasionally engaged with studies that have investigated the social neurocognition of hearing voices. Despite some provocative results, they have not yet used paradigms that would disentangle the extent to which the “social brain” is part of the hallucinatory experience. This is clearly an area where more targeted research needs to be completed. Similarly, more effort needs to be put into developing theories that include the socially relevant evidence, as this has been largely ignored in both cognitive and neurocognitive accounts.

As one of our most enigmatic experiences, “hearing voices” is at once both individual and social. There is a clear need to understand it in terms of the individual mind and brain, and a clear opportunity for it to shed light on the social world that lives within us.


Selective visual processing across competition episodes: a theory of task-driven visual attention and working memory

Werner X. Schneider — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2013. PMC3758203, CC BY 3.0.

The goal of this review is to introduce a theory of task-driven visual attention and working memory (TRAM). Based on a specific biased competition model, the ‘theory of visual attention’ (TVA) and its neural interpretation (NTVA), TRAM introduces the following assumption. First, selective visual processing over time is structured in competition episodes. Within an episode, that is, during its first two phases, a limited number of proto-objects are competitively encoded—modulated by the current task—in activation-based visual working memory (VWM). In processing phase 3, relevant VWM objects are transferred via a short-term consolidation into passive VWM. Second, each time attentional priorities change (e.g. after an eye movement), a new competition episode is initiated. Third, if a phase 3 VWM process (e.g. short-term consolidation) is not finished, whereas a new episode is called, a protective maintenance process allows its completion. After a VWM object change, its protective maintenance process is followed by an encapsulation of the VWM object causing attentional resource costs in trailing competition episodes. Viewed from this perspective, a new explanation of key findings of the attentional blink will be offered. Finally, a new suggestion will be made as to how VWM items might interact with visual search processes.


Visual attention and visual working memory: a biased competition approach


A brief sketch of the biased competition framework for understanding visual attention

Humans sample visual information from their current environment by successions of discrete sampling episodes, the so-called fixations, which are interrupted by fast ballistic eye movements, the saccades. The extraction of useful visual information is restricted to periods of fixations. Within a fixation, visual processing is capacity limited, that is, only part of the information simultaneously present at the retina is available for perception (e.g. verbal report), sensorimotor action or encoding into long-term memory. The biased competition framework describes how these capacity limitations might emerge. Competition in visual processing means that neural representations of objects and events are characterized by limited capacity on the one hand and its counterpart, selectivity, on the other hand. Only a few of these representations (e.g. of visual objects) can be ‘used’ simultaneously, for example, for report or spatial sensorimotor actions. Bias implies that selection among competing representations does not occur on a random basis. Instead, selection is guided by top-down factors such as the current task and by bottom-up factors such as the ‘saliency’ (intrinsic quality) of a stimulus representation.

Some biased competition theories assume that top-down and bottom-up factors of attentional control are combined within a ‘priority map’ (but see for arguments against such specialized maps for attentional control). A priority map computes for each location (e.g. of an object) attentional priorities. On the basis of these priorities, attentional control signals are sent back in a location-specific manner to visual feature maps, that is, they bias competition there. As a consequence of these control signals from a priority map certain objects and their visual features win the competition over others and can therefore be accessed by goal-directed actions such as report. The existence of such a priority map for attentional control—sometimes also called saliency map—is also implied by non-biased competition theories of visual attention that assume the serial allocation of attentional resources in space. Single cell recordings in non-human primates and other findings suggest that a subset of neurons of frontal eye field (FEF), lateral intraparietal area (LIP), superior colliculus (SC) and the pulvinar might be involved in creating a priority map. A central open question is how these neurons of various primate brain areas build a common functional priority map in order allow coherent selection processes and behaviour.

In summary, the biased competition framework claims that ‘at some point (or several points) between input and response, objects in the visual input compete for representation, analysis or control. The competition is biased, however, towards information that is currently relevant to behaviour. Attended stimuli make demands on processing capacity, whereas unattended ones often do not’ [p. 194]. From this point of view, various experimental phenomena of visual attention (e.g. findings from the partial report or visual search task) are viewed as an emergent property of biased competition.

How might priority computation be used for biasing competition in visual processing? Two main classes of visual attention theories can be distinguished. The first class, the so-called serial visual attention theories, assumes that only one location (coherent region) and/or one object of the priority map at a time sends out in a location-specific manner attentional signals (e.g. in the form of a spotlight) to visual feature maps. Consequently, these serially attended visual features can be used for the task at hand (e.g. for deciding whether a T is present in a visual search task). Moreover, serial models assume sometimes that the currently attended location comprises only one object, so that fast attentional scanning one object after another (e.g. every 50 ms) should occur. The second alternative class of visual attention theories is called ‘parallel-and-capacity-limited theories’. They imply not only the computation of attentional priorities (e.g. attentional weights) for each location and/or object, but also assume that these priority values are normalized in a capacity-limited manner (e.g. in the form of relative attentional weights). Based on these normalized priority values, an attentional output signal is sent in a location-specific manner to visual features in the corresponding cortical maps (e.g. V4 or middle temporal area (MT)). The higher the priority (e.g. attentional weight) of the output signal for visual features of location and/or object, the more attentional resources are allocated there, and the higher the chance that the features at this location will win the competition for being used in perception, memory or sensorimotor action. As stated above, and in line with the biased competition framework, the overall amount of visual attentional resources that are distributed within a fixation is capacity-limited. Therefore, the more resources are allocated to one object, the less resources are available for the processing of other objects.


The ‘theory of visual attention’: a specific version of the biased competition framework and its neural interpretation

The approach, taken, in this review, for understanding task-driven competitive visual processing, is based on a specific parallel-and-capacity-limited theory of visual attention (TVA), developed by Bundesen, namely the ‘TVA’ and its recent neurophysiological specification, namely a ‘neural theory of visual attention (NTVA). TVA and NTVA can be viewed as specifications of the biased competition framework in terms of computational theories. They describe task-driven selective visual processing within an eye fixation. TVA explains within a formal mathematical language a large dataset from classical experimental paradigms of attention research such as visual search, partial report or spatial cueing. NTVA delivers a specific neural interpretation of TVA and it explains major single cell recording results of attentional manipulations at the level of cortical neurons such as V4, inferior temporal cortex (IT) or MT.

TVA implies a competitive race of sensory visual information towards visual short-term memory (VSTM). VSTM information can be used for task-driven actions such as partial report or deciding whether a target object was present in a visual search display. In NTVA, this competitive race towards VSTM is divided into two successive phases (waves) of visual processing. During the unselective phase 1, attentional weights are computed within a priority map. The weights are computed for early visual object representations and they are assumed to be bias object-based competition for VSTM access in phase 2 of visual processing. More precisely, this selective second phase consists of a weight-guided race (competition) of visual objects via their features towards capacity-limited VSTM. Importantly, the higher the attentional weight of an early visual object representation, the better its chance that one of its visual features reaches capacity-limited VSTM in time, that is, before all VSTM slots (a limit of about three to four) are taken or before their visual input is replaced (e.g. in backward masking). In this review, these early visual object representations with attentional weights in priority maps and visual features in cortical maps are called proto-objects. The term proto-object should make explicit that these early representations of visual objects cannot be used for goal-driven actions such as report (‘access consciousness’). In other words, transformation (further processing) of attentionally selected, competition winning proto-objects into VSTM objects is necessary for goal-directed actions.

Besides computing and applying attentional weights by the process of ‘filtering’, TVA and NTVA assume a second attentional process, called ‘pigeonholing’. It can be considered as ‘response category related’ and acts in a spatially unspecific manner after priority-based attentional modulation. Both types of visual attentional processes determine jointly the competition winners that are encoded into VSTM. For phenomena discussed in this review (e.g. saccade target selection or the attentional blink, AB), only the ‘filtering’ process is relevant; therefore, the ‘pigeonholing’ process will not be included in the following considerations. In NTVA, encoding in VSTM is specified as setting up a loop between visual features of an object and its object node within a ‘VSTM map of objects’. As soon as a feature of an object is encoded into the VSTM map of objects, a VSTM slot is reserved for other features of the same object. A slot-based limit of VSTM of about three to four objects is assumed.

As stated above, TVA and NTVA imply a distinction between successive forms of visual object representations within the visual mind and brain of human and non-human primates. The first form for representing an external visual object refers to visual features/visual categories that are segmented into elementary visual object representations. Here, these early object representations that are not accessible for goal-directed actions are called proto-objects. The following characteristics are ascribed to these proto-objects. First, following Wischnewski et al., proto-objects can be broken into two parts. The first part of a proto-object refers to its visual features/categories within the ventral and dorsal stream (e.g. maps of V1, V2, V4, MT, etc.). The second part of a proto-object is represented within a priority map) and refers to an early spatially extended representation of a tentative external object—here called a priority map region. Each priority map region is temporarily connected to the visual features in cortical maps. Besides retinal location within the priority map, the region has a rough shape and, importantly, an attentional weight. Following TVA, the weight of a proto-object region within a priority map modulates, in turn, the race of its temporarily linked visual features in cortical maps towards VSTM, that is, it influences the competition of visual features of the proto-object for VSTM access. One might say that proto-objects compete for VSTM access.

Once features of proto-objects are encoded into VSTM, a second form of visual object representation emerges. Here, these representations are simply called visual working memory (VWM) objects—visual tokens or object files might also be proper names. In other words, after VWM encoding, a proto-object is converted into a VWM object. Only VWM objects can be used for goal-directed actions. For young adults, up to about three to four visual objects can be encoded and maintained within VWM (see for evidence on ‘magical number four’, and for a recent review of evidence for the slot-based nature of VWM). As stated above, NTVA specifies VWM objects in terms of loops between a ‘VWM map (VSTM map) of objects’ and its visual features in cortical maps (e.g. V4, MT). The object representation node within the VWM map of objects can be seen as a pointer to visual features. At the neurophysiological level, VWM objects could be coded by synchronized and phase segregated activity patterns of the distributed representations of visual features and object pointers. If so, then synchrony-based binding could be realized via these object pointers—binding should be the result of attentional selection in processing phase 2, more precisely phase 2.

Moreover, the activation-based VSTM conception of NTVA includes visual features within cortical maps (e.g. V4, MT) as part of the VSTM process, as part of the loop. Therefore, visual perception and VWM cannot be structurally and functionally completely segregated. They should rely, in part, on overlapping structures and representations such as visual features as parts of online perception and of VWM (for a summary of confirmative experimental evidence about this claim of shared visual attention (in perception) and VWM processes). In summary, two successively computed forms of representing an external object (stimulus) within the visual mind and brain are distinguished here, namely proto-objects and VWM objects. While proto-objects include all visual objects that can be extracted from the current fixation, the number of VWM objects is more limited and does usually not exceed the limit of three to four objects.


Visual selection with eye movements: ‘where to look next?’ and its coupling to visual attention for perception

Natural vision proceeds as a succession of fixations and intervening saccades. The primate retina with its inhomogeneous structure has a much higher resolution in the centre, the fovea, than in the periphery. This anatomical fact can be seen as one reason for the high occurrence of saccadic eye movements (three to four times per second) to potential informative retinal locations (e.g. informative for the current task). Given a biased competition framework, the question emerges of how the next saccade goal (‘where to look next?’) might be selected. Currently available data of numerous studies of the past two decades deliver a converging answer, namely that a goal-directed, task-driven saccade to a location in space has to be preceded by the allocation of covert visual attention to this location (for an non-attentional perspective to saccade control). Deubel & Schneider performed—inspired by the visual attention model (VAM)—a series of experiments on this issue. Their findings demonstrate that the preparation of a space-based sensorimotor action such as an eye movement (or even an arm movement) to a target object binds simultaneously attentional resources for perceptual analysis to this location. For example, Deubel & Schneider's study required participants to make a saccade to a trial-wise cued saccade target object among other distractor objects. Prior to the saccade execution, that is, during the preparation phase of the eye movement, a perceptual discrimination target (DT) was briefly flashed at the location of saccade target, or at the location of nearby objects (pre-mask elements just one degree away). The data show clearly best perceptual performance when saccade target and DT refer to the same object. If they are just a degree apart, DT performance dropped substantially. Based on these and other studies, it can be concluded that biasing competition for saccade target selection (selection-for-action) and biasing competition for perceptual report of a target (selection-for-perception) are strongly coupled to one common target or even to several targets.

These findings on couplings of competitive visual processing for perception and for action are beyond the scope of TVA and NTVA in its current form. These theories explain behavioural and neurophysiological results of selective perception tasks such as visual search but do not make any claims of how selection-for-spatial-motor-action might work and how it might be linked to selective perception. However, for understanding biased competition dynamics in visual attention and VWM beyond a single fixation, it is necessary to state how the function of saccade target selection, of ‘where to look next?’ might be handled within the biased competition framework. Following earlier work from my laboratory and compatible with VAM, it is assumed that ‘where to look next?’ (saccade target selection) should be based on the attentional weights of TVA. During the preparation phase of a saccade and just prior to movement execution, the priority map region with the currently highest attentional weight should serve as the next saccade target. This suggestion implies that priority map regions couple selection-for-perception (covert visual attention) with selection-of-saccade-target-location. As a consequence of priority map modulation by attentional weights, up to four proto-objects (their visual features) win the competition for VWM access in perception and, simultaneously, one proto-object with the highest attentional weight determines ‘where to look next’. In summary, a covert attentional weight-guided biased competition process should not only modulate access of proto-objects to perceptual VWM, but should also determine—mediated by the same priority map regions—the target location of the next saccade.


Visual working memory: beyond encoding


Phase 3 of visual processing: the task-driven use of visual working memory information

What is biased competition in visual processing for? It should make visual information available for goal-directed behaviour such as space-based sensorimotor actions or verbal report actions. One interesting case of goal-directed behaviour refers to actions controlled by the current task. How are results of biased competition of visual processing made available for performing actions in the service of the current task? As stated before, in the specific versions of the biased competition framework such as TVA and other attentional theories, it is assumed that capacity-limited VSTM, here labelled VWM, should represent the results of biased competition. This suggestion implies that encoding visual information into VSTM makes it available for goal-directed behaviour and cognition. NTVA conceptualizes VSTM as reverberating loops between visual features/categories and a node of slot-limited ‘VSTM map of object’. As long as visual information is part of such an activation-based loop, it can be used for behaviour (e.g. grasping) and cognition (e.g. recoding into verbal format). An interesting implication of NTVA is that these loops of up to four objects are not only used for short-term retention, but they should also form the basis for online perception of stimuli that are present at the retina during current fixation. Supportive evidence for this claim comes from a recent study of Tsubomi et al. showing that continuously visible and no longer visible objects share the same capacity limit and neural signature of VSTM (e.g. contralateral delay activity;).

Extending the two visual processing phases, postulated by TVA and NTVA, the use of VWM/VSTM information for task-driven behaviour and cognition should be labelled phase 3 of competitive visual processing. ‘Use of VWM information’ can mean to initiate an already prepared sensorimotor action or store visual information for the delayed use in later competition episodes—examples will be given in the next subsections. It is suggested that only currently relevant VWM objects should be subject to the third phase of visual processing. For instance, if a non-relevant object is encoded into VWM owing to high visual similarity to a currently relevant object (e.g. a distractor in an inefficient feature search task might make it into VWM;), then this non-relevant object should have a low probability of being processed further in phase 3. Given that a key function of VSTM is to make visual information available for goal-directed behaviour and cognition, for phase 3 operations, the term VWM seems to be more appropriate than the term VSTM chosen by TVA and NTVA. The term working memory implies that storage—a key facet of VSTM—is just one function of this computational structure. Visual processing of encoded VSTM information for its task-driven use in behaviour and cognition should be the other important function (such as ‘manipulation’ of visual information).

In summary, the use of VWM objects for task-driven behaviour and cognition is the key function of phase 3 processing. Understandably, standard theories of visual attention such as TVA, NTVA, feature integration theory, guided search or Itti et al.'s computational model of visual attention have little to say how phase 3 processing might work. Their main focus is on how selection of visual information for further processing such as object recognition, working memory encoding, etc. works. Given that visual information processing capabilities of primates evolved in the service of efficient goal-directed behaviour, the issue of the use of VWM information should be of central importance for understanding vision as a whole. The most recent extension of TVA, namely the ‘theory of temporal visual attention’ (TTVA) by Petersen et al., suggests an interesting answer to the question of using visual information. TTVA states that ‘recoding’ of VWM information into ‘nonvisual (e.g. auditory, motoric or amodal) format’ is the next step of dealing with VSTM objects. Recoding should allow, for instance, verbal report of a VSTM object or a motor response based on a VSTM object (e.g. grasping).

In the next section, one form of using VWM information, namely short-term consolidation will be the focus of interest. It is a process that generates passive VWM representations that do not suffer from attentional resource costs of active VWM maintenance. Another class of phase 3 processes refers to the use of active VWM information for immediate sensorimotor actions. Action targets in space might already been specified at the level of proto-objects within activity-specific priority maps (e.g. neurons in FEF or SC for eye movements or even neurons in the anterior intraparietal area for hand movements)—‘where act next?’ is settled there. However, for triggering such a prepared motor action, it is suggested that VWM encoding of task-relevant features of the action target must have taken place. A goal-directed action should only be initiated if its triggering conditions are given (if condition ‘X’, then action ‘Y’). In other words, phase 3 of VWM should be necessary in order to allow ‘action initiation’.


Passive visual working memory: retaining visual information for task-driven actions across several fixations without attentional resource costs

An informative constraint on how VWM information could be used will now be derived from findings of how human and non-human primates sample and retain visual information over time in the service of the current task. Sampling occurs in permanently ongoing successions of fixations and saccades, that is, usually three to four saccades per second are executed. Therefore, on average, 250–300 ms of online processing time within a fixation are available for visual computations from phases 1 to 3. Is VWM information always used within the current fixation? No. Human and non-human primates can perform task-driven actions on visual information that has been sampled in immediately preceding fixations. First, there is ample evidence that a limited amount of visual information can be retained across one or several saccades, namely information about four visual objects. This short-term form of transsaccadic retention of visual objects might possibly be supplemented by ‘visual long-term memory components’ (passive VWM?) that results in a moderate transsaccadic memory performance increase. These findings from transsaccadic memory studies led to the conclusion that the retention of visual information across saccades for the current task relies at least in part on VWM with a capacity-limit of about four objects. Moreover, transsaccadic retention of visual objects can be influenced by their task relevance within individual fixations. More relevant items presented within some of the successive fixations can be prioritized and therefore be recalled and recognized better later on.

Second, besides findings from these just mentioned highly controlled laboratory tasks, further important constraints on the transsaccadic use of VWM for task-driven action control should now be derived from studies of real-world tasks. These tasks usually require using visual information from more than a single fixation. This is especially valid in dynamic environments of fast sport games whose task performance has sometimes been based on visual information sampled across several saccadic eye movements. Sometimes, task-relevant visual information is extracted within one fixation and is used a number of fixations later. Imagine, for instance, a football (soccer) player who wants to pass to a team-mate surrounded by several opposing defenders. The first saccade of the player may go to the current position of this team-mate, and the next saccade may go to the defenders. Finally, the player may saccade to the probable future position of the team-mate for planning the pass by using the previously sampled information (e.g. about the defenders). Moreover, the functional analysis of the everyday task of ‘sandwich making’ studied by Hayhoe & Ballard should make the requirements of task-driven short-term retention for later task steps even clearer. Imagine, you are sitting for the first time in front of the kitchen table of our friend and were asked to make a peanut butter sandwich. Your friend has put all the necessary ingredients already on the table. You will probably first scan the table with your eyes in order to acquire knowledge about which object is where. During the task of making the peanut butter sandwich, later steps such as ‘grasping the jelly glass’ should rely on previous sampled information about location and identity of relevant objects (jelly glass). Therefore, it seems unlikely that a ‘visual search without memory’ is performed in every task step of such multi-step everyday activities. Therefore, short-term retention about information sampled in previous task steps for later use might be an advantageous strategy for efficient task control.

In summary, empirical evidence from transsaccadic memory studies and functional considerations about sport tasks and everyday activities suggest that task-relevant visual information sampled in preceding fixations can be retained at the short-term scale and used in later fixations for the current task step. Combining this observation of task-driven short-term retention with the biased competition architecture of TVA and NTVA, a retention-encoding dilemma of VWM is postulated. On the one hand, VWM should be able to retain a limited number of task-relevant visual objects (within its three to four slots) over the course of several fixations for later use in the current fixation. On the other hand, task-driven competitive visual processing in each new fixation requires a VWM that has ‘space’, has slots available for encoding the competition winners.

An evident solution for handling this retention-encoding dilemma assumes, on the one hand, the selective retention of task-relevant visual information within some of the VWM slots and, on the other hand the selective clearance of other VWM slots prior to each fixation so that ‘space’ for new competition winners is made available. The existence of a clearance process for VWM (VSTM) has been explicitly postulated by NTVA prior to the start of a new race (competition); moreover, Duncan & Humphreys’ visual attention theory claimed that VSTM is cleared at the start of new fixation. Clearance of VWM creates room for new winners of the race, for a new phase of competitive visual processing. Therefore, relevant items for the current task should be maintained across fixations while non-relevant items that may have also won the competition (e.g. in the cases of high target distractor similarity) should be eliminated from VWM. However, this suggestion of selective maintenance/selective clearance of objects within VWM comes with substantial costs in terms of attentional capacity.

Actively maintained winners from preceding fixations reduce the number of limited slots for competition winners of the current fixation. Moreover, these maintained winners touch a second visual processing capacity limit, namely in terms of normalized attentional weights. Each maintained previous competition winner has an attentional weight that competes via normalization with other attentional weights of the current fixation. NTVA states that maintenance of a visual object within VWM should be activation-based implying that visual features within perceptual brain areas are maintained (e.g. ventral and dorsal stream areas such as V4, IT and MT; for a review). Activation-based maintenance implies that not only features but also attentional weights—crucial for competition—are retained. In other words, the activated and maintained visual features of a VWM object, in turn, should feed into a corresponding attentional weight that also is maintained. Therefore, top-down bound attentional weights of actively retained VWM objects from preceding fixations act as further competitors within the biased competition process of the current fixation. Attentional weights of all online items of the current fixation should compete via their attentional weights with maintained items from preceding fixations. In other words, it implies that actively retained VWM objects bind attentional weights from previous fixations. Therefore, the competitive processing of visual information within the current fixation should be substantially slowed down by maintained visual objects from preceding fixations. Therefore, this activation-based transsaccadic form of VWM maintenance implies ongoing attentional costs during the maintenance phase.


Passive visual working memory without attentional resource costs, short-term consolidation and retrieval into the active form of visual working memory

How might these ongoing attentional costs of selective activation-based VWM maintenance—blocking VWM slots and ongoing binding of attentional resources (attentional weights) during retention—be avoided? It is suggested that a further form of VWM retention without permanent attentional resource costs exists in the primate brain and that this form of short-term retention is realized by passive VWM. On the basis of a variety of findings and on computational considerations, a number of authors argued for the existence of such a passive VWM based on very short-term synaptic changes. Decisively, passive VWM traces of visual objects would not lead to attentional resource costs in terms of occupying slots in active VWM and binding attentional weights as further competitors.

How could such a passive VWM be created? Following Hebb's suggestion for long-term memory encoding, the generation of a passive VWM representation might presuppose the retention of objects within activation-based VWM. Here, the encoding of an object into activation-based VWM implies that the loops between visual features and its pointer within the ‘map of VWM objects’ are set up. Such object-based VWM loops should be necessary for a transfer of the activation-based code into a passive code that might rest on short-term synaptic changes. Borrowing a term from Jolicoeur & Dell'Acqua, this transfer of a visual object from active to passive VWM should be called ‘short-term consolidation’. The duration of such a consolidation process could follow an exponential distribution and it might be modulated by parameters such as importance or arousal. What is the difference between short-term consolidation and VWM encoding? Encoding into VWM means setting up the activation-based loop for a visual object, whereas consolidation means creating a passive code within VWM as a result of a sufficient looping duration. In summary, a distinction is suggested between activation-based VWM and passive VWM. Short-term consolidation refers to the process of transferring relevant visual objects from active VWM into passive VWM.

Evident questions for this conception of active and passive VWM are: how might the limit of three to four objects emerge? How might retrieval from VWM work? Following NTVA, it is assumed that the capacity limit of activation-based VWM is the result of a k-winner-take-all process between object pointers of the VWM map given k might be three to four for young adults. Therefore, within one competition episode of a single fixation, only k winners can be subject to short-term consolidation in phase 3. If so, then many competition winners (many active VWM objects) could be stored across several fixations in passive VWM—much more than k winners of one competition episode of one fixation. Given this analysis, why does a limit of three to four objects emerge? At the beginning of the retrieval process, the k-winner-take-all network of active VWM should be initialized (set to zero). An external signal might start competition between passive VWM objects and only three to four winners can emerge within the activation-based VWM map of objects.

How might retrieval from passive VWM be controlled? Importantly, the storage in passive VWM serves the key function of allowing task-driven actions based on objects encoded in preceding fixations, preceding competition episodes. Therefore, a key factor that influences the chance of retrieval competition should come from the current task step. For instance, the task ‘making of a peanut butter sandwich’ requires as one step ‘grasping the jelly glass’. Therefore, during this step, the position of the jelly glass should be retrieved from passive VWM for allowing an eye movement to the jelly glass and a following grasping movement (for eye-hand sequence coordination;). Long-term memory knowledge might restrict where the glass might be (e.g. on the table) but its position relative to other objects (for this specific table at this point in time) should be a matter of passive VWM. The pointer of the currently task-relevant object within passive VWM (e.g. pointer for the jelly glass) might be activated during retrieval by the triggering condition of the current task step (‘grasping of the jelly glass’). Further context factors for retrieval besides the current task step could be a representation of the current scene (e.g. in the sandwich example, the kitchen scene or in VWM experiments the current trial within a certain laboratory context with screen, etc.). In summary, the current task step and the current scene might be major factors in determining which objects of passive VWM will win the competition for becoming again a member in activation-based VWM. Evidently, various new experimental studies are required in order to test whether passive VWM actually exists and how shot-term consolidation and retrieval from such as passive system might work—for a review of experimental studies on retrieval from VWM, see Gazzaley & Nobre.

Cowan and Oberauer et al. put forward influential domain-unspecific models of working memory. Their models view working memory processes as an activated part of passive long-term memory. How is this approach different from task-driven visual attention and working memory (TRAM)'s assumption of passive VWM? First, Cowan and Oberauer et al. argue for a central capacity limitation. TRAM, instead argues for different forms of capacity limitations even within the visual modality (e.g. normalized attentional weights within priority maps, a slot limit of about three to four objects by a k-winner-take-all VWM map of objects) that should not be reduced to one common limitation. Second, TRAM has a more limited explanatory goal in terms of domains and phenomena. It focuses on competitive visual processing and relies on middle-range theories of visual attention and VWM (NTVA) that attempt to explain findings from vision studies such as visual search or partial report. Third, according to the viewpoint taken here, terms such as ‘focus of attention’ within working memory imply the risk of inadequately mixing different processes such as visual attention for modulating access to VWM (e.g. filtering in TVA) or task-driven maintenance processes within VWM into one common construct. Fourth, TRAM offers a process theory that specifies processing events by postulating that competitive VWM encoding (phases 1 and 2) is followed by the ‘use’ of VWM information (phase 3). Such a process account is not the explanatory goal of Cowan's or Oberauer et al.'s versions of central capacity theories of working memory. Instead, informative data on individual differences in complex working memory tasks are the ‘explanatory targets’ of these theories.


Visual working memory processing (phase 3) across competition episodes

An interim summary of the theory of TRAM specified so far should be given. At the start of a fixation, phase 1 of visual processing computes visual proto-objects that consist of visual features at different levels of the cortical hierarchy and priority map regions. Each priority map region receives an attentional weight, a measure of attentional priority. Each weight is based on stimulus-driven factors such as sensory evidence for its features and on top-down factors such as ‘pertinence’ (e.g. importance of object for the current task). At the end of processing phase 1, after the computation of relative weights, VWM should be cleared in order to create ‘space’ for encoding new competition winners. At the start of phase 2, visual feature processing is competitively modulated by the normalized weights, the attentional priority settings computed in phase 1. Weight-based feature modulation means that competition between proto-objects is biased. Those proto-objects, their features with higher attentional weights will have a higher chance of winning the competition for being encoded into capacity-limited active VWM than proto-objects with lower attentional weights. For young adults, three to four objects can be encoded in active VWM. Importantly, competition between proto-objects is regulated on the basis of priority-(weight)-modulated features. The faster the ‘race speed’ of a feature, the higher its competition value, the higher its chance to access a VWM slot before all slots are taken. If a feature of a proto-object is encoded into VWM (given there were still free slots), then this feature occupies the slot for all other later competition winning (later arriving) features of the same proto-object. Once features of proto-objects are encoded into VWM, a second form of object representation emerges, namely VWM objects, and phase 3 of visual processing starts for relevant objects (that match, e.g. the task set). One phase 3 operation is short-term consolidation that transfers the activation-based code (loops between a VWM map and features) into a passive code that might rely on short-term synaptic changes. A key advantage of passively retained VWM objects is the missing attentional resource costs in terms of slots and attentional weights.

This sketch of TRAM has an important implication. A new competition episode generates at the end of phase 1 a clearance signal for active VWM in order to achieve ‘space’ for encoding new competition winners. Phase 3 of visual processing that uses VWM information for behaviour and cognition should be finished before a new competition episode, a new race starts. What happens if phase 3 of the current competition episode, for example, short-term consolidation, is not finished while a new episode is called by changes in visual stimulation? An informative example is given by a standard backward masking experiment. A briefly presented and pattern-masked target stimulus should be reported without time pressure. Given a brief stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) between target stimulus and mask (e.g. 80 ms), it seems rather likely that phase 3, short-term consolidation, could not be finished prior to mask appearance. The mask calls a new competition episode—attentional weight settings have been changed from the target to the mask object (see below). What allows short-term consolidation of the target element to be finished despite a call of a new competition episode by the mask and therefore a call of VWM clearance? The following two subsections will suggest an answer in terms of a protective maintenance process. In short, the protective maintenance process allows finishing phase 3 operations on VWM objects during subsequent competition episodes. Protective maintenance simply protects the VWM slot from being cleared. As stated in §2, such non-clearance of VWM should have substantial attentional costs in terms of slots and attentional weights. In the following sections, an analysis of key findings from the ‘AB’ paradigm will reveal crucial aspects about this type of attentional resource cost. According to TRAM, these costs—as measured within the second target deficit within the AB paradigm—should reflect competition between protectively maintained and encapsulated VWM objects (encoded in preceding competition episodes with unfinished phase 3 operations), on the one hand, and proto-objects of the current episode (that attempt to access VWM) on the other hand.


Discrete visual processing over time: defining competition episodes

The term ‘competition episode’ has been used in the preceding paragraphs. Now, a more formal definition will be given following TVAs idea about a race. A new race during fixation should be called if the relative attentional weights change. Bundesen [p. 536] discusses this case under the label of ‘many view search’. A change in relative attentional weights, a change in attentional priority, should lead to a new race, a new competition episode. Therefore, a new competition episode will be called if the relative attentional weights change. Relative attentional weights are computed as the result of a normalization process of all absolute attentional weights. Relative weights refer to all proto-objects of the current race, the current competition episode. Not every change of visual input leads to a change of relative attentional weights and to a new competition episode. For instance, if further features/categorizations of a proto-object are computed as stimulus quality improves over time, then this change of visual input should not cause a change of attentional priorities and the competition episode should go on.

A new competition episode can be triggered internally, by a new task step implying a shift of the attentional set, or it can be triggered externally, by visual input accompanied with weight changes. An example of an internal triggering by an attentional set shift can be illustrated with the ‘peanut butter sandwich making’ example. If the task step ‘grasping the jelly glass’ is finished, then the next step of ‘transporting the glass to the desired location’ should be initiated. For the first step, the current location of the jelly glass is relevant, whereas for the following step, the future location of the glass is relevant and should therefore be part of the changed attentional set. An externally triggered new competition episode occurs if changes in visual stimulation are accompanied by changes in relative attentional weights. If an object is moving into (or out of) the retina, then the new weight (or disappearing weight) of the moving object should lead to recomputation of relative weights. Moreover, if objects within a fixation are occluded—either owing to movements of the occluder and/or of the occluded object—then relative attentional weights have also to be recomputed.


Protective maintenance of short-term consolidation during subsequent competition episodes. I. Encapsulation of visual working memory objects and attentional resource costs

Given our definition of competition episodes, the key question of §3 can be tackled: what happens if phase 3 processing of a competition episode is still going on and is not finished while a new competition episode is triggered by changes of attentional priorities? Is VWM cleared completely so that new competition winners can be encoded? An advantage of this solution would be to have no attentional resource costs (see the arguments in the section ‘visual working memory: beyond encoding’). However, such complete VWM clearance would have remarkable costs, namely the use of VWM information in phase 3 for behaviour and cognition would be interrupted. This would imply loosing information from VWM without any chance of recovery. However, as sketched above, even in a simple backward masking experiment with short SOAs with likely unfinished short-term consolidation, targets can be reported clearly above chance level. How is this possible? The suggested answer is a protective maintenance process. A protective maintenance process allows finishing phase 3 operations for a VWM object (e.g. such as short-term consolidation) during subsequent competition episodes. Protective maintenance simply prevents that an active VWM slot with an ongoing phase 3 operation is cleared at the start of a new competition episode. Importantly, it is selective protection of only those slots in which phase 3's short-term consolidation process is still going on. During phase 1 of a new competition episode either updating or encapsulation of a VWM object should occur. On the one hand, updating is issued if a VWM object receives visual input that fits in terms of its priority map region characteristics (location, rough region shape and attentional weight) to the predicted (expected) region characteristics maintained by the VWM object. In other words, updating is called if the visual system signals for new visual input to a VWM object (e.g., after a saccade) object continuity. On the other hand, if the new visual input signals a failure of object continuity of a VWM object then encapsulation should take place. It is suggested that encapsulation implies that the visual features and the attentional weight of the encapsulated object are retained at the current state (current activation level) at the moment of the encapsulation call. Crucially, an abrupt change in terms of the priority map region's expected location, rough shape or attentional weight should trigger encapsulation.

The ‘TTVA’ made a similar suggestion as the protective maintenance process introduced here. TTVA postulates that the attentional resources from a previous race could be locked during a new race. In explaining results of a dwell time paradigm, the authors assume a ‘locking of resources’ during recoding of task-relevant features of VSTM objects into a non-visual format. TTVA (p. 1031) introduces the ‘novel assumption that retention of a stimulus (e.g. T1) to be remembered in VSTM takes up visual-processing resources used to identify the stimulus. Until the stimulus is recoded into a nonvisual (e.g. auditory, motoric or amodal) format, the resources are locked and cannot be used to encode subsequent stimuli (e.g. T2) into VSTM. This mechanism creates a temporary encoding bottleneck that explains the time course of the AD (attentional dwell time). A difference between TTVA and TRAM is that TRAM assumes that retention of visual information for later report per se should not call a protective maintenance process with encapsulation and ‘resource locking’. According to TRAM, the process of encapsulation and ‘resource locking’ should only be triggered if phase 3 short-term consolidation for later report could not be finished when a new competition episode, that is, a change of relative attentional weights, and when an object continuity failure has been signalled.


Encapsulation of short-term consolidation during subsequent competition episodes. II. A new look at ‘rapid serial visual presentation’ and the ‘attentional blink’

As emphasized in §2, such non-clearance and encapsulation should have substantial attentional costs in terms of occupied slots and retained attentional weights. Highly informative in terms of understanding and specifying the processes behind these attentional costs are findings from the AB paradigm. In the following, a new look will be made at several key findings of the AB paradigm: the SOA-dependent core T2 deficit at short SOAs that recovers over time (the AB proper), lag-one sparing (including sparing for up to three Ts), the effect of a short post-T1 blank (150 ms) in eliminating the AB, as well as the reappearance of an AB within increasing SOA between T1 and T2 without any intervening D (lag-one sparing).

The AB paradigm belongs to a class of experiments with rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP). An RSVP stream consists of one target T stimulus among several distractor (D) stimuli. Every stimulus appears at the same location. At the end of the stimulus sequence of a trial, the T stimulus has to be reported without time pressure. The findings show that even for fast presentation rates of roughly 100 ms, T report reaches a high performance level. How does TRAM describe the processing dynamics within an RSVP situation? The presentation rate of items within an RSVP stream (e.g. 100 ms) is sufficient for encoding each item within VWM—otherwise, the report of a single T would be hard to explain. A D followed by a D should lead neither to a relative weight change and a new competition episode nor to a failure of object continuity owing to priority map region changes (e.g. attentional weight, location or rough shape). Each D re-categorizes the preceding D with a new feature (visual category) encoded into the same VWM slot. The competition episode remains the same as long as Ds are encoded. However, a change of the current competition episode occurs if a D is followed by a T. Clearly, this D–T sequence is accompanied by a change of attentional weights, that is, the D has a substantially lower weight than the T. Therefore, a new competition episode is called by the T and as a consequence, the preceding D is cleared from VWM. Ds are usually not subject to phase 3 operations and protective maintenance processes. During the new T competition episode, the features of the T-proto-objects should be encoded into VWM. After VWM encoding of the T, its phase 3 operations, that is, short-term consolidation for later report, starts. The D directly after the T signals an object continuity failure due to local object-specific weight change and again a new competition episode owing to a global change of relative attentional weights. Consequently, a clearance signal for VWM should be issued. Because the T is still subject to an ongoing phase 3 operation, namely short-term consolidation, 100 ms are not sufficient to complete all three processing phases including short-term consolidation. The T will be spared from VWM clearing by the protective maintenance process. Further trailing Ds will have to compete for VWM access with the encapsulated T as long as its short-term consolidation process is going on.

A standard AB experiment consists of an RSVP stream within two Ts (T1 and T2) within a stream of Ds. The presentation time for each item is usually fixed (e.g. 100 ms). In a typical experiment, two letters appear within a stream of digits. A deficit in reporting T2, called the AB, emerges if the SOA between T1 and T2 is short and, usually, if Ds appear in between the Ts; but see, findings of Nieuwenstein et al., discussed in the last paragraph of this subsection. Importantly, as the SOA between T1 and T2 becomes larger and more Ds intervene, the AB becomes weaker until the T2 deficit disappears at long SOAs—usually, the disappearance occurs at SOAs of 500–800 ms.

First, why does the core SOA-dependent T2 deficit, the AB, emerge at all? The first phase of a trial of an AB experiment—successive Ds until the appearance of T1—has already been described above in the RSVP section. Crucially, the trailing D after T1 causes an attentional weight change that issues a new competition episode for the D. The new competition episode of the D calls for clearance of VWM. However, T1 with its still ongoing phase 3 operation of short-term consolidation is spared from clearance by the protective maintenance process and the T trailing D signals a failure of object continuity. Every subsequent stimulus—D or T—will suffer from the encapsulated T1, from its attentional weight, as long as short-term consolidation—a necessary condition for protection—is going on. If T2 appears after a D, then a new competition episode will be started. A change in terms of attentional weights from the preceding D to T2 occurs. Therefore, T2 competes with T1 during its phase 2-based attempt to access VWM. More precisely, as long as phase 3 operation of short-term consolidation for T1 is going on, encapsulated T1 competes with T2 during phase 2 of its competition episode. Decisive for competition is the maintained attentional weight of T1 that is linked to its VWM object representation. In other words, as long as short-term consolidation for T1 is working, its corresponding attentional weight of the priority map region is encapsulated and competes with the weight of T2. The simultaneous presence of the T1 weight with the T2 weight during the T2 competition episode slows the race of T2 towards VWM (TVA) down considerably. Why does a D or pattern mask (interruption masking) after T2 lead to the emergence of an AB? Without a mask, iconic memory of T2 allows its VWM access despite its much slower ‘race speed’. In short, as long as short-term consolidation for T1 is going on, the chance of T2 to win the competition for VWM access should be substantially reduced by coexisting T1. If T2 is not able to access VWM prior to the appearance of a subsequent D, then T2 will be cleared by the D competition episode—as suggested by classical two-phase-based resource depletion theories of the AB. Protective maintenance for an object is possible only after VWM encoding.

Why does T2 performance improve with SOA? The longer the SOA, the higher the chance that phase 3's short-consolidation of T1 has been already finished so that T1 will not be subject anymore to protective maintenance and encapsulation. If T1 is not protectively maintained, then the trailing item (D or T2) will call a new competition episode and clear the unprotected T1 from VWM. In this case, T1 should not be able to compete anymore with T2. The longer the SOA between T1 and T2, the higher the chance of a finished short-term consolidation for T1 in phase 3, and the less likely the chance of a competition between T1 and T2 and the less pronounced the T2 deficit should be. More formalized and as suggested by Jolicoeur & Dell'Acqua, short-term consolidation duration might follow an exponential distribution.

Second, this explanation of the SOA-dependent core T2 deficit is in line with the standard explanation of resource depletion theories. However, it is a reductionist explanation of the ‘bottleneck effect’ in terms of weight-based competition between Ts and encapsulation. A major divergence between TRAM and classical two-stage theories of the AB emerges if a second key finding of the AB has to be explained, namely lag-one sparing (e.g. D, T1, T2, D), or sparing for several consecutive Ts (e.g. T1, T2, T3). In all these cases, no AB for T2 or T3 can be observed. The standard two-phase-based resource depletion explanations of the AB mentioned above have to introduce further assumptions for explaining this surprising finding. For TRAM, sparing of the AB is a direct consequence of the postulated processing architecture. Each T that directly follows a preceding T (e.g. T2 follows T1) without an intervening D does not call a new competition episode. T1 and T2 usually do not differ in terms of their attentional weights. Therefore, a T re-categorizes the preceding T and no change is signalled in terms of relative attentional weights. Therefore, a T that is followed by another T with the same attentional weight is not subject to protective maintenance and encapsulation. Instead, competition-free re-categorization and encapsulation of Ts takes place. Re-categorization should not interrupt short-term consolidation of the preceding categorization as part of one competition episode. Protective maintenance is called and an object continuity failure signalled by the first D after a series of Ts. It will encapsulate all categorizations and allows them to finish despite new trailing items. This explanation predicts that lag-one sparing should disappear if the presentation of T2 is accompanied by an attentional weight change.

Third, a blank after T1 of a sufficient duration (100–150 ms) reduces or even eliminates the T2 deficit significantly. This finding is highly important because it falsifies all explanations of the AB that assume a capacity-limited operation for T1 (such as short-term consolidation) of a fixed duration within the AB range (e.g. 500–800 ms) as the core of the T2 deficit. The devastating effect of encoding T1 into VWM seems to depend on the immediate availability of a trailing item. How does TRAM explain this important finding? After an additional blank of 100 ms after the end of T1 presentation (also usually approx. 100 ms) leads to iconic decay of the features and weights of T1. If the D appears next, then it will signal an object continuity failure and encapsulates T1 at a certain level of iconic activation at the time of the D appearance, or more precisely, at the time of a call of encapsulation by the D. Therefore, after 100 ms blank, T1 has undergone iconic decay and it will thereby be encapsulated with a lower weight compared with a condition with an immediately following D. Consequently, T1 is a weaker competitor for T2, and the chance of VWM access of T2 should be substantially increased, that is, the AB should be reduced or even eliminated.

Fourth, this suggestion that an iconically decayed T1 weight is a weaker competitor for T2—compared with standard RSVP conditions—will now be applied in explaining a recently published finding of the nature of lag-one sparing by Nieuwenstein et al.—a finding that appears counterintuitive and puzzling for almost all published AB theories. The authors manipulated the SOA between T1 and T2 in a lag-one sparing situation without any intervening D. In addition, they shortened the presentation of a masked T2 considerably (50 ms instead of 100 ms). Surprisingly, a classical AB curve with a large T2 deficit was observed in this condition of reduced and efficiently backward masked T2 presentation time. More precisely, if T2 follows T1 directly with small blank (50 ms item presentation followed by a 50 ms blank), then lag-one sparing is observed again. If the blank interval after T1 disappearance and T2 onset increases to 150 and 250 ms, then a large drop in T2 performance was found that recovered continuously during 500 ms. How does TRAM explain these findings? If T2 follows T1 directly, then no substantial iconic decay occurs, and no change of attentional weights is signalled. Therefore, no new competition episode, no protective maintenance process and encapsulation are called. A blank of about 150 ms and more after the end of T1 presentation leads to substantial iconic decay of the T1 weight. Iconic decay should reduce the absolute and also the relative weight of T1 (given that not just T1 but also other items of the current fixation such as the screen frame receive an attentional weight within its episode—an assumption that seems rather likely). Therefore, a change in attentional weights between decayed T1 and T2 is signalled. Consequently, a new competition episode, protective maintenance and encapsulation for T1 are called. The encapsulated weight of T1 is in this experiment a strong competitor for T2 given that the T2 presentation duration has been substantially shortened (from 100 to 50 ms). Therefore, a strong AB is observed. The longer the interval between T1 end and T2 appearance, the stronger will be the iconic decay of T1 and therefore the weaker will be the competition effect of T1 on T2. Therefore, the size of the AB should decrease with an increasing interval between the two Ts.

What is the major difference of TRAM's explanation of the AB and other explanations? In short, TRAM offers a reductionist explanation of the T2 deficit described as a bottleneck phenomenon with strong deficits at short SOAs that recover with increasing SOA. It is claimed that an unfinished phase operation of short-term consolidation that started during the preceding competition episode binds and encapsulates attentional weights during the current competition episode of T2 access to active VWM. The degree of competition between the encapsulated T1 weight and the T2 weight determine the chance of VWM access of T2. Necessary for the call of encapsulation of T1 should be a change of attentional weights from T1 to the immediately trailing item (object continuity failure)—an assumption that is not shared by any other AB theory and that should imply unique predictions.


Implications of task-driven visual attention and working memory: a selective look at the interaction of visual working memory and visual search tasks

Here, a few selected implications of TRAM for explaining the enormous and still nonlinearly growing experimental literature on the interaction of visual attention (especially visual search) and working memory (for overviews) should be spelled out. TRAM's assumption that VWM should be cleared within a new competition episode relatively late, at the end of phase 1, will be the explanatory key. This property is not only necessary for understanding the cross-episode interference effects such as AB effects of two consecutive targets without intervening distractors (reported by Nieuwenstein et al., see the preceding section). It also allows a new look at biasing of visual search by trial-wise set-up VWM search templates. Moreover, based on the assumption of late clearance, results from dual task paradigms with ‘visual search during VWM retention’ will be analysed. It will be claimed that the presence and absence of interference effects of retained VWM objects on visual search should be caused by the clearance or non-clearance of the activation-based VWM retention objects prior to visual search.


Biasing competitive visual processing by trialwise visual search templates

In most visual search experiments, the search target (e.g. ‘search for black letter X!’) is constant within a block of trials and sometimes even across the complete experiment. For such visual search tasks, it has been claimed that a repeated search target allows acquiring of and using a long-term memory-template of the target. By contrast, if the visual search target varies from trial to trial, then a VWM search template should bias competition in the search process. This assumption of a search template within VWM is in line with many versions of the biased competition approach. A still open question is how the search template might be retained in VWM and how its biasing effect might be realized mechanistically. TRAM suggests a non-trivial answer. First, the trialwise varying search target item is usually visually presented at the beginning of the trial. TRAM implies for this case that the search target is encoded within activation-based VWM. The search display appears a few hundred milliseconds later. Importantly, the search target encoded at the beginning of the trial is not encapsulated in VWM anymore when the search display appears. Short-term consolidation of the search target has already been completed at search display appearance, so that no protective maintenance and encapsulation can be triggered. Second, how this biasing effect might be realized can be directly derived from TRAM's processing dynamics, especially its feature of late VWM clearance. As stated above, the search target is retained after encoding at the beginning of the trial until the end of phase 1 of the next competition episode. The appearance of the search display initiates the next competition episode. During processing phase 1 of the search display—the computation of the attentional weights of the display elements—the search template from the preceding competition episode is still present within VWM. Biasing of attentional weight computation takes place.

Given this explanation, an important question emerges: if the search target is retained in active VWM why does it not—instead of biasing the computation for sensory-derived weights of the new episode—bring in its attentional weight as a further element of weight computation? If this would be the case, then massive interference effects—see the AB explanations above—should be observed. Why are no inference costs observed? VWM objects encapsulated with ongoing phase 3 operations create interference effects, but not VWM objects without phase 3 operations or VWM objects after the end of phase 3. As stated above, in visual search experiments with trialwise varying search targets, phase 3 of the search target (STM consolidation) should be clearly finished by the time the search display appears. After finishing, iconic decay of features and the attentional weight of the search target should take place within the ongoing processing episode (see, above, the explanation of the findings of Nieuwenstein et al.). However, even after the iconic decay of features and the weight, the VWM pointer of the search target should still be present (e.g. due to self-excitation). The VWM pointer can only be eliminated by the clearance signal from the next episode at the end of phase 1. In other words, immediately prior to the onset of the search display, the search target should be present as an active representation of the VWM pointer, that is, as a pointer without retained features or features at a very low activation level, and therefore also without a retained priority map region. Biasing signals from VWM pointers but not retained objects should survive the end of phase 3 and iconic decay of the search template. Therefore, prior to VWM clearance, the visual search template, the pointer, should exert its biasing influence. Owing to short-term consolidation, the temporary connections of the pointer to the features (without or very low activation) still exist and allow top-down biasing. The clearance of the search template from active VWM prior to the start of competitive phase 2 has the advantage that all VWM slots are available. Visual search should be efficient ‘even if VWM is full’.


The presence and absence of interference effects in dual task paradigms with visual search during visual working memory retention

Olivers et al. offer a review on the interaction of VWM tasks with visual search tasks. In many of these reviewed dual tasks, a search process (task 2) has to be carried out, whereas items have to be retained in VWM (task 1) for a later response (e.g. change detection or recognition). The findings from the dual task experiments are complex, showing sometimes effects of retained VWM items on visual search performance, and sometimes no effects. For instance, the Olivers et al.'s study, on the one hand, reported an effect of a VWM item on search. A coloured circle was presented at the start of the trial and had to be retained for later recognition (task 1). During the retention interval, a visual search task (task 2) was performed that contained a singleton distractor. If the colour of the singleton distractor matched the retained memory item, then visual search time was increased compared with a condition of non-match. This result is implied by the processing dynamics of TRAM. During the presentation of the coloured memory item at the start of the trial, its encoding into VWM takes place. Next, short-term consolidation of coloured task 1 item is initiated creating passive VWM traces for later retrieval and recognition. Given the long presentation duration of the task 1 item and an empty interval before the search display, consolidation of this item should clearly be finished by the time the search display appears. Before VWM clearance of the search target and during weight computation at the beginning of phase 1, the task 1 memory item exerts—similar to a trial-wise search template—a biasing effect by increasing the attentional weight of the singleton distractor. The VWM pointer of the search target is still active (prior to VWM clearance) and exerts after the end of short-term consolidation nevertheless an effect via its temporary connections to features. The fact that short-term consolidation has ended does not imply that activation of VWM pointer should be reduced to baseline. As stated above, an activated pointer within the VWM map of objects can be eliminated only by the VWM clearance process. Consequently, owing to biasing by the VWM pointer of the search target, search time increases compared with a non-matching singleton that did not (or to a weaker degree) receive a biasing signal from the VWM item.

On the other hand, the dual task study of Downing & Dodds and other dual task studies reported no effect of visual short-term retention on visual search. In the Downing & Dodds experiment, at the start of the trial, two items were presented, namely the STM item for later change detection (task 1), and the search target item (task 2) that varied trialwise. An efficient strategy would be, in this case, to encode the STM item first (competition episode n) and consolidate it into passive VWM for later comparison in the memory test phase. In the next step, competition episode n + 1 with a new attentional set (‘attend to the search target’), the search target item should be encoded into activation-based VWM. This step clears at the end of its phase 1 the STM item from episode n from active VWM. This order of competition episodes and VWM encoding allows the search target to bias the search process by a powerful activation-based code and it later allows a memory test based on passive VWM traces. Given this chain of events, the memory item should exert no biasing effect in visual search in competition episode n + 2. When the search display appears, the search target template encoded in episode n + 1 is still part of active VWM, whereas the STM item from episode n has already been cleared during episode n + 1. Therefore, no effect of the STM item should be observed.

This selective interpretation of two studies on interaction of VWM retention and visual search should illustrate the suggested processing dynamics of TRAM. However, more published studies and results have to be analysed, and direct experimental tests are required before more firm conclusions about the explanatory capabilities of TRAM can be made.


Representational geometry: integrating cognition, computation, and the brain

Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Rogier A. Kievit — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2013. PMC3730178, CC BY 4.0.

The cognitive concept of representation plays a key role in theories of brain information processing. However, linking neuronal activity to representational content and cognitive theory remains challenging. Recent studies have characterized the representational geometry of neural population codes by means of representational distance matrices, enabling researchers to compare representations across stages of processing and to test cognitive and computational theories. Representational geometry provides a useful intermediate level of description, capturing both the information represented in a neuronal population code and the format in which it is represented. We review recent insights gained with this approach in perception, memory, cognition, and action. Analyses of representational geometry can compare representations between models and the brain, and promise to explain brain computation as transformation of representational similarity structure.


The representational geometry of neuronal population codes

The concept of representation is central to the cognitive and brain sciences. We interpret neuronal activity as serving the function of representing content, and of transforming representations of content, with the ultimate objective to produce successful behaviors. The content could be a visual image, a sound or odor, a semantic interpretation of sensory input, a proposition, a goal, a planned action, or a motor sequence. The representational interpretation provides a powerful explanatory framework that makes it easier to understand neuronal activity in the context of the overall function of the brain. Representation links cognition to brain activity and enables us to build functional theories of brain information processing.

Neurophysiology has long interpreted the selectivity of neurons as serving to represent various kinds of sensory and higher-level information. The population of neurons within an area is thought to jointly represent the content in what is called a neuronal population code. It is the pattern of activity across neurons that represents the content. The many possible combinations of activity states of neurons provide a rich representational space. Motivated by this idea, recent analyses of neuronal recordings and functional imaging data have increasingly focused on patterns of activity across many neurons within a functional region.

We can think of a brain region's representation as a multidimensional space. The dimensions of the space correspond to the neurons, and a point corresponds to an activity pattern (i.e., each neuron's activity provides the coordinate value for one of the dimensions). A visually perceived object, for example, will correspond to a point in the representational space of a given visual area. The set of all possible objects (or pieces of mental content) corresponds to a vast set of points in the space. It is the geometry of these points that defines the nature of the representation.

Mathematical and cognitive psychology have a long history of investigations of representational geometry on the basis of behavioral data,. However, the notion of representational geometry has only more recently been brought into the analysis of brain-activity data,. To characterize the geometry of a representation, we can compare the brain-activity patterns representing a set of stimuli (or, more generally, experimental conditions) to each other. The dissimilarity of two patterns corresponds to the distance between their points in the representational space. Having measured these distances, we can construct a matrix, the representational dissimilarity matrix (RDM), in which we can look up the representational distance (or dissimilarity) for each pair of stimuli. Intuitively, the RDM tells us which distinctions between stimuli the population code honors and which distinctions it disregards.

Considering RDMs makes it very easy to compare different representations (e.g., different brain regions, a region to a computational model representation, or the same region between different individuals or species) by just computing the correlation between the RDMs. Comparing activity patterns directly, by contrast, would require us to define the correspondence mapping between, say, voxels of two regions, or between single neurons and the units of a computational network model, or between voxels of the same region in two individuals. Establishing these mappings can be difficult and generally requires a separate experimental data set,. The ‘representational dissimilarity trick’ obviates the need for such correspondence mappings.Representational similarity analysis (RSA) is pattern information analysis that compares representational geometries between brain regions, stimulus descriptions, conceptual and computational models, and behavioral reflections of similarity. It can be applied to functional imaging data (including fMRI, MEG, and EEG) as well as neuronal recording data. The three basic steps are as follows. (i) Choose a brain region and estimate the activity patterns. The region can be functionally or anatomically defined. The patterns can be estimated with standard methods used in univariate analyses. In fMRI, for example, a linear model with a hemodynamic response predictor for each stimulus might be used to estimate the response of each voxel to each stimulus. For neuronal recordings, a windowed spike count might be used. However, any other features of the responses, such as features reflecting the temporal response structure or energy in different frequency bands, could equally be used to define the representation of each stimulus. (ii) Estimate the representational dissimilarity matrix (RDM). The representation in a given brain region or computational model is characterized by the matrix of dissimilarities between the stimulus representations. A popular distance measure is the correlation distance (1–Pearson correlation across voxels, neurons, features, or model units). The correlation distance disregards the overall activation level (spatial mean), rendering the analysis complementary to analyses of overall activation. Other distance measures such as the Euclidean or Mahalanobis distance, or cross-validated measures such as the discriminant t value or accuracy can also be used. (iii) Compare RDMs from brains, behaviors, and models. The key step is to compare RDMs to assess to what extent different representations are alike. We might want to know whether a brain representation (a) reflects stimulus properties, (b) reflects higher-level semantic properties, (c) can be accounted for by a computational model, (d) reflects representations in other brain regions, (e) is similar to a putative homologous representation in another species, or (f) is reflected in behavior, for example in similarity judgments, in stimulus confusions, or in reaction times in discrimination tasks. One useful way to compare RDMs is to compute the correlation between the corresponding dissimilarities. The rank correlation (Spearman) is often used for this purpose when a linear relationship between the dissimilarities cannot be assumed (e.g., when comparing fMRI-based RDMs to other RDMs). Statistical inference is commonly performed by means of randomization testing (randomly permuting the stimulus labels to simulate the null distribution of the RDM correlation) and bootstrap techniques (to compare the relative performance of different models). Comparing two representations at the level of dissimilarities rather than at the level of the original patterns is a useful trick that obviates the need for defining the correspondence mapping between the representational units. Like classifier decoding, RSA is a pattern information technique that is sensitive to information encoded combinatorially in fine-grained patterns of activity. However, rather than asking what information can be (linearly) read from the representation, RSA attempts to characterize the representational geometry and compare it to various models. Like encoding models (also known as voxel or population receptive field models in the fMRI literature), RSA captures the representation of a rich set of stimuli and aims to test computational models of brain information processing that generalize to novel stimuli. However, rather than comparing brains and models at the level of activity patterns (requiring fitting of weights that define the relationship between model units and voxels), RSA compares representations at the level of dissimilarity matrices.

A popular method for testing whether two classes of stimuli can be discriminated in the representation is pattern classifier analysis,. Classifier analysis, or decoding, typically focuses on binary distinctions and on revealing whether a region contains information about the class of a stimulus. In practice, the classifier is often linear and successful classification indicates some degree of linear discriminability between the classes. The analysis of representational geometry is complementary to classifier analysis and goes beyond the question of discriminability of classes (and the presence of information). Two classes of stimuli can be discriminable for many different representational geometries (scenarios 2–9). However, the particular geometry matters for the computational function of the region. Beyond the question of what information is present (i.e., pieces of content distinctly represented) and what information is explicit (e.g., in the sense of being amenable to linear readout), a representation imposes a rich structure on the domain of its content. The detailed geometry of the representations of particular items can reflect their similarity, their categorical divisions, and their continuous variation along property dimensions of behavioral significance. Items that are clustered in a representation can easily be grouped together, and their differences abstracted from, when the code is read by other brain regions. Representational geometry thus provides a basis for generalization and abstraction, important hallmarks of cognition. In fact, brain computation can be construed as the transformation of the representational geometry along stages of processing.

Recent papers have reviewed results from pattern decoding of visual representations and pattern-information methods for testing computational models. Here we give an overview of some of the insights from recent studies of representational geometry. The next section covers vision, the field that has been most active with this approach. We then describe applications beyond vision, addressing other sensory modalities, memory, cognition, and action from this perspective. Finally we highlight current challenges and future directions for studies of representational geometry.


Representational geometry in the visual system

The most rigorous account of a sensory representation is provided by a computational model that predicts neuronal responses to arbitrary stimuli. If we can accurately predict the responses of all neurons in an area, we have captured the computations up to that area. This method has been very successful for V1 and is being extended to higher-level cortical representations. If we could predict neuronal responses throughout the brain, along with behavioral output, we might not need the abstraction of representational geometry, or indeed the concept of representation. However, even for V1, the degree to which we can predict responses is limited. Predicting neural responses becomes more difficult as we move to higher-level regions. The space of computational mechanisms and model parameters becomes very complex, making it hard to consider all plausible models and to adjudicate between them with the limited amounts of data we can acquire. It is useful therefore to first seek a more abstract descriptive characterization of the population code for each area. Analyses of representational geometry have brought insights into all stages of visual representation, from early visual areas to high-level object representations in the ventral stream.

For example, Hegdé and Van Essen found that considering the population representational geometry revealed clearer distinctions between early visual areas than single-cell selectivity measures. Neuronal population response patterns elicited by symbols and visual patterns showed clustering according to complexity categories in V2 and V4, but not in V1 (A). Freeman et al. found a clear distinction between V1 and V2 when investigating the representation of natural textures. V2 neuronal representational distances better reflected perceived texture similarities. Human functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has suggested that the perceived similarity of natural textures, including metal, wood, glass, and fur, is best reflected in the representational geometry of higher ventral-stream regions (B). Whereas V1 may represent local Fourier statistics, V2 and higher regions might compute higher-order statistics of V1 outputs, which are more predictive of the perceptual quality of a texture (G),.Inspection of the representational dissimilarity matrices (RDMs) that characterize brain regions, various models, and behavioral data is an important exploratory process that can reveal interesting and unexpected representational structure. Here we consider RDMs from a wide range of recent studies. Note that prior hypotheses and statistical inference, as reported in the original papers, are required to support any theoretical conclusions. (A) RDMs for human IT and explicit behavioral dissimilarity judgments reveal related yet distinct structures. Both IT and judgments emphasize animate/inanimate and face/body divisions. However, the judgments additionally emphasize human/nonhuman and man-made/natural divisions. Note that the categorical structure is obvious only because the stimuli are ordered by category. In contrast to 2D arrangements by representational dissimilarity (see in main text), which do not depend on any choice of stimulus order, the appearance of an RDM depends on the order chosen for display. (B) The early visual representation of natural textures, including metal, ceramic, and glass, resembles a model based on low-level image features. The representation in the fusiform gyrus is distinct from the early visual representation and more consistent with human perceptual similarity ratings. (C) RDMs from neuronal recordings in macaque middle and anterior face patches illustrate the transformation of representational geometry across stages of processing. Neuronal population response patterns cluster by face view in the middle face patches (left RDM). The blocks of similar patterns correspond to faces of different identities in the same view. By contrast, the anterior face patch (right RDM) exhibits strong view tolerance and selectivity for individual identities. Each identity elicited similar response patterns when presented in different views (subtle dark diagonal lines). (D) Images of animals from six biological species are represented distinctly in early visual and lateral occipital cortex. The early visual RDM resembles that from a computational model of V1. The lateral occipital RDM resembles judgments of biological similarity, which reflect the categories (insects, birds, primates). (E) An RDM model of gaze direction is contrasted with two competing models: a low-level model of physical stimulus features and a categorical model of gaze direction relative to the observer. Searchlight representational similarity analysis (not shown) revealed that anterior STS might represent gaze direction with tolerance to head view. (F) RDM of whole-brain activity patterns during pain perception and other mental states. The RDM reveals the similarity in terms of global brain activity of eight mental states, suggesting shared recruitment of specialized brain regions in pain, emotion, interoception, and reward. Yarkoni et al. have presented a comprehensive meta-analytical framework for analyzing the discriminability of mental states from whole-brain activity patterns. Note that the representational interpretation appears less natural for whole-brain patterns reflecting various kinds of task processing than for the localized representations in the other studies discussed here. However, similar caveats apply at both levels of analysis. (G) The RDM for a set of natural images (based on spatial human EEG patterns 101 ms after stimulus onset) is substantially correlated with an RDM predicted by a model of spatially pooled image-contrast statistics, namely the parameters of a Weibull fit to the distribution of local contrast measurements.

The transformation from a low-level feature representation to a representation that reflects perceptual qualities is a common theme among studies of representational geometry. In the domain of color, a human fMRI study showed that the representational geometry in V4, but not V1–3, reflects perceptual color space, although color decoding was most accurate in V1 (B). This illustrates the need to reveal not only what information is present in a region but also its representational geometry to understand the neural basis of perception.

Whereas textures and colors make the ‘stuff’ of vision, a major function of the ventral stream is the visual recognition of ‘things’. Ventral-stream representational geometry has been investigated using abstract parameterized shapes, which serve as a stepping stone towards real-world object images. Op de Beeck et al. found that the parameters of a simple 2D shape space were reflected in the representational geometry in monkey inferior temporal (IT) and in perceptual judgments of monkeys and humans (C). Human fMRI studies similarly support a representation of shape reflecting perception in lateral occipital complex (LOC), with the anterior LOC reflecting perceptual similarities most strongly and lateral LOC tuned to smaller features. More complex 3D shape parameterizations have also been successfully used to model IT single-neuron responses, suggesting that IT represents 3D shape.

Parameterized shapes afford good experimental control, but they lack naturalism and behavioral relevance. This has motivated the use of real-world photos depicting faces, people, animals, objects, and scenes. Several studies using photos suggest that ventral-stream regions do not merely represent objects in a continuous space of high-level visual features, but emphasize categorical boundaries and semantic dimensions of the visual images in humans, (D) and monkeys. Both the categorical divisions and the within-category representational geometry are strikingly similar between monkey IT and human ventral–temporal object-sensitive cortex. Beyond the presence of category information, several studies suggest that response patterns elicited by images of the same category form clusters in ventral–temporal response-pattern space,. The major categorical divisions are between animates and inanimates, and between faces and bodies. Such clustering was not observed in early visual representations or computational visual features of a range of complexities, suggesting that the clusters do not simply reflect visual feature similarity. Instead, the ventral temporal code might be optimized to emphasize behaviorally relevant categorical divisions and semantic dimensions,. The geometric centrality of an object in the representation has been linked to the perception of typicality. Animates appear to form a representational cluster not only in IT but also in the amygdala. The representation appears to be sensitive to the dimension of animacy, even when comparing real faces and physically similar mannequin faces, strengthening the case for a semantic component to the code. The animate–inanimate division is associated with a large-scale lateral-to-medial gradient in ventral temporal cortex, which is unaltered in congenitally blind individuals, suggesting that it does not require visual experience to develop. Finer categorical divisions within animates have also been observed in monkeys and humans (D).

Human ventral–temporal representational distances closely match human dissimilarity judgments, which exhibit the same major categorical divisions and a similar within-category structure. However, human judgments transcend the ventral–temporal representation in that they additionally emphasize the division between human and non-human animals and that between man-made and natural objects, which are not very pronounced in the ventral stream (A).

Places and faces are thought to have special behavioral relevance and specialized cortical regions dedicated to their analysis. Several studies have attempted to characterize the representational geometry of these regions. Walther et al. found that natural scenes presented as either photographs or line drawings could be decoded from V1, the parahippocampal place area (PPA), retrosplenial cortex (RSC), and LOC,. However, only in the higher visual regions did pattern dissimilarities predict behavioral confusions. Kravitz et al. compared the representational geometry of scenes in early visual cortex and PPA and found that early visual representation strongly reflected the distance of the perceived scene (near vs far), whereas PPA represented whether scenes were closed or open. A comparison of the representational geometries of LOC, RSC, and PPA suggested that LOC represents the objects present in the scene and RSC the global spatial layout, and PPA combines information about both of these components of scenes. Morgan et al. found that geographic distances between landmarks of a college campus were reflected in hippocampal responses when subjects familiar with the location of the landmarks viewed them in a scanner. The hippocampus responded more strongly to changes spanning a greater physical distance. However, response-pattern dissimilarity was not significantly correlated with physical distance anywhere in the brain.

Studies of face-specific representations in humans have suggested that the fusiform face area (FFA) emphasizes the distinction between faces and non-faces, whereas anterior temporal cortex discriminates individual faces (E),. However, individual-level face information has also been observed in the FFA and other regions,. The best demonstration of the transformation of face representational geometry across face regions comes from fMRI-targeted neuronal recordings in monkeys (C). The representation of identities was view-specific in the middle face patches (ML and MF), partially view-tolerant in anterior face patch (AL), with mirror-symmetric views co-localized in the representational space, and almost view-invariant in the most anterior face patch (AM). A mirror-symmetric representation of face views has also been observed in humans. Many higher visual areas, including LOC, occipital face area (OFA), FFA, PPA, and dorsal regions, showed a mirror-symmetric response to faces. For example, views of –60° and 60° elicited similar response patterns, suggesting pooling of mirror-symmetric lower-level features as a computational step towards greater tolerance to view changes.

Achieving tolerance to stimulus variations that are not relevant to a given task such as face identification is one of the central challenges of object recognition. Although ventral-stream representations are not fully invariant to the view, position, or scale of an object, they support linear readout with some robustness to these accidental properties. To understand how tolerance is achieved, Rust and DiCarlo compared the population representational geometries of V4 and IT on the basis of neuronal recordings in monkeys. Both regions discriminated individual images and their scrambled counterparts. IT exhibited reduced information about scrambled images, but increased generalization for intact images across position and context clutter. This suggests a transformation of representational geometry in which position and clutter are de-emphasized relative to the presence of complex feature conjunctions diagnostic of differences between real-world objects.

A special case of clutter is the presence of additional objects in the image. Several studies have investigated ventral temporal response patterns to multiple simultaneously presented objects in monkeys and humans,. Results suggest that the response pattern elicited by multiple objects is well predicted by the average of the response patterns. If one of the objects is attended, this object receives a greater weight in the average. These results are broadly consistent with biased competition and with the divisive normalization model, in which the summed neural population response to multiple inputs is held constant through recurrent suppression.

As we observe people in the real world, we do not just recognize them. We infer a host of socially important pieces of information. Facial expressions of emotion appear to be represented in posterior STS with the representational geometry reflected in similarity judgments of the expressions. It has been suggested that the STS and medial prefrontal regions represent perceived emotions with invariance to the sensory source (dynamic faces, bodies, or voices). Another socially important feature of faces is gaze direction. Displacement of the dark iris and pupil provides a subtle but socially important indication of where someone is looking. Carlin et al. reported a representation of gaze direction in right anterior STS that was tolerant to changes in both head view and physical image features (E).

Visual representations are not merely perceptual but are also involved in mental imagery in the absence of visual input. A number of human fMRI studies have investigated brain representations during visual imagery and their relationship to perceptual representation. Results support the idea that imagery and perception of the same visual content might be represented in the same cortical regions and in a similar representational format,.

Overall, studies of the geometry of visual representations have impressively documented the stage-wise transformation of the retinal image from low-level representations of local physical features to high-level holistic representations of objects, faces, and scenes that better reflect perceptual qualities, emphasizing behaviorally important categories and semantic dimensions and deemphasizing accidental and behaviorally irrelevant variation of the visual input. Further studies are needed to reveal the full computational mechanism giving rise to these transformations.


Representational geometry beyond vision


Auditory perception

Like vision, audition requires substantial tolerance to accidental variations of the signals to be recognized. The imposition of categorical boundaries on a fundamentally continuous space of stimuli is another shared feature between the two modalities. Recent studies have investigated the representation of sound categories,. Giordano et al. investigated the representation of natural environmental sounds and reported that representational geometry in the planum temporale emphasized particular categorical distinctions more strongly than predicted by low-level feature models. The categories were living/non-living and human/non-human, which are highly behaviorally relevant divisions similar to those emphasized in ventral visual representations.

The clearest examples of categorical representation might be expected in the domain of human language. Speech percepts are categorical not only at the level of conceptual and semantic content but also at the phonetic level. A well-known example is the categorical perception of phonemes. A recent study used human intracranial electrode arrays to investigate the representational geometry of a continuum of artificial speech sounds ranging from ‘ba’ through ‘da’ to ‘ga’. Response patterns in posterior superior temporal gyrus formed clear clusters corresponding to phonemes, despite the fact that the sound continuum was sampled in acoustically equal steps. Pattern dissimilarity emerged rapidly over time, peaking at the same time (∼110 ms) as the evoked potentials. A human fMRI study investigated representations of the phonemes /la/ and /ra/ in native speakers of English and Japanese. The representational dissimilarity between /la/ and /ra/ phonemes in the right primary auditory cortex, but not the overall activation, predicted the extent to which speakers were able to discriminate between the two phonemes between, and even within the two groups.

Beyond vision and audition, a close link between representational geometry and perception has also been observed for olfactory stimuli. Behavioral similarity ratings for smells correlated with neural pattern representational similarities in the posterior piriform cortex. Across several sensory modalities, studies of representational geometry have demonstrated that brain representations emphasize behaviorally relevant categorical distinctions and predict perceptual similarities.


Memory

Recent studies have begun to investigate representations of particular items during memory encoding and retrieval, and how the precision of representational reinstatement during encoding and retrieval predicts the success or failure of these memory operations. Polyn et al. showed that the category-specific patterns arising during encoding of faces, locations, and objects are reinstated in a subsequent free-recall phase. Activity patterns during free recall predicted the category about to be recalled several seconds in advance.

A more recent study by Xue et al. investigated the encoding process and found that more precise perceptual reinstatement of representations during encoding predicted better memory. Interestingly, the precision of perceptual reinstatement of representations has also been associated with conscious representation. Subsequent studies suggested some refinements to this picture, in which activity patterns in the hippocampus and other medial temporal regions have distinct signatures that predict successful encoding and retrieval,.

In the studies described so far, memory served as a storage facility, but the structure of the representational categories was never manipulated. A recent study associated particular exemplars from each category with a shock. This led to emergence in the frontoparietal representation of a new categorical division between the shock-associated and other images. Moreover, the patterns during fear learning predicted the long-term behavioral expression of fear memories.

In sum, studies of representational geometry are beginning to reveal how the perceptual representation of an individual piece of content affects its mnemonic encoding and how reinstatement of the representation during recall enables successful recollection. We are also beginning to elucidate the specific roles of the hippocampus and other medial temporal regions and the plasticity of the representational space itself, including the formation of new behaviorally relevant categorical divisions.


Action and motor control

We should be able to characterize representations along the entire perception–action cycle by their representational geometry. The primary motor representation is a classic example of a population code. We focus here on two recent studies that explored the geometry of motor representations. Wiestler et al. studied the representation of finger movements and sensations in the cerebellum, a structure thought to relate sensory and motor representations for smooth sensorimotor control. They compared cerebellar regions to cortical areas M1 and S1. Cerebellar and cortical representations both discriminated movements of different individual fingers. Both also discriminated sensations in different individual fingers. For a given finger, movement and sensation were associated with similar patterns in M1 and S1. In the cerebellum, however, the representations were not consistent between movement and sensation, with motor and sensory finger representations apparently randomly interdigitated. This arrangement may enable the cerebellum to associate movements and their sensory consequences in flexible ways, a requirement in learning new motor tasks. In another study, Diedrichsen et al. investigated co-localized motor representations of our two hands, which might serve to coordinate the hands during bimanual tasks. Representations of unimanual finger movements were represented mostly in contralateral M1 and S1, with a faint echo of a symmetric representation in ipsilateral areas. Such an arrangement might facilitate symmetric bimanual movements. In premotor and parietal areas, unimanual movements also had an ipsilateral representation. However, it was not a symmetric echo, but qualitatively different. Such a co-localized representation of both hands might serve to associate the movements of the two hands in flexible ways to coordinate the hands during asymmetric bimanual tasks.


Current challenges for investigations of representational geometry


Testing many models: a simultaneously hypothesis- and data-driven approach

Many studies have focused on one or two models of representation. In the visual domain, this could be a particular computational model, such as a Gabor filter model, a parameterized shape model, a semantic model, or a behavioral characterization of the representational geometry. The field is in an early phase in which finding that a model explains significant variance (of neuronal or voxel responses or response pattern dissimilarities) is considered an advance. This is a low bar. The theoretical advance is not always substantial, because a great number of qualitatively different models may capture some component of the representation. For theoretical progress, we need statistical model comparisons along with estimates of the amount of non-noise variance left unexplained by each model. Ideally, we would like to cover the entire space of models that have not yet been strictly eliminated. Realistically, we may want to focus on a range of models that are qualitatively different in a single study. These should include models for which we have strong predictions (so as to put current opinion to the test) and models for which we have no strong predictions (to go beyond the state of the literature and advance theory). In fMRI studies, we can test our models in a variety of regions of interest or continuously throughout the measured volume using a searchlight approach. Such more exploratory analyses represent another major source of important information. We can combine exploration and confirmation in a single study using multiple-testing correction and cross-validation.

Testing of a wide range of well-motivated models in multiple brain regions constitutes an approach that is simultaneously strongly hypothesis- and strongly data-driven,. This is the kind of approach we need to bridge the divide between modeling and experimental approaches, and to richly constrain brain theory with empirical data. We must resist two temptations: (i) to shy away from disconfirmation of prevailing bias and (ii) to restrict our analyses to be able to tell a better ‘story’. A story that crumbles upon consideration of a broader view of the available evidence (i.e., more comprehensive analyses of our own data) is clearly not worth telling.


Engaging temporal dynamics

Representations are inherently dynamic, emerging over time as evidence from the sensory stream accumulates or recurrent computations converge on an interpretation of the input. At the level of higher cognition, thoughts emerge dynamically through the interplay of perception, long-term memory associations, and the current contents of working memory. Representational dynamics can be investigated by analyzing the representational geometry with a temporal sliding window. Recent studies have begun to move in this direction, using sliding-window decoding techniques for neuronal recordings and human magnetoencephalography (MEG), and electroencephalography (EEG) data.


Improving characterizations of representational geometry

We might seek improvements to the approach of comparing representations by the rank correlation between their distance matrices. This approach does not require the (often questionable) assumption of a linear relationship between the distances, and deals gracefully with the fact that distances estimated from noisy pattern estimates are generally positively biased. However, it also discards potentially important geometric information. A promising complementary approach to comparing representations based on noisy data is pattern component modeling, in which the pattern variance is decomposed into components that correspond to experimental factors and noise.

Analysis of representational dissimilarity matrices is one important tool for understanding representational geometry. However, linear decoding remains useful as a straightforward test of linear separability (a particular feature of the representational geometry) and of the degree to which the linear decision boundary generalizes to different stimuli. Nonlinear decoders based on quadratic boundaries or radial basis functions similarly reveal information that is available for immediate readout and might thus be considered explicit in the code, just like information available for linear readout. We will need a repertoire of specific models to test for a range of computationally relevant properties of the representational geometry.


Considering different population codes and representational distance measures

Current studies have largely defined representations as spatial activity patterns (e.g., from fMRI or windowed spike counts), with the activity level in each voxel or neuron contributing one dimension to the space. However, population coding theory has explored a much wider range of possible codes, including temporal codes. For example, the representational dissimilarity of two stimuli could be measured by comparing the temporal order in which neurons fire their first spike in response to the stimulus or relative to the Gamma cycle. Another approach would be to use spatiotemporal or time–frequency patterns to define the representational space. In addition, a range of distance measures based on neuronal population spike trains deserves to be explored.


Investigating plasticity and individual differences

One of the challenges in understanding the brain (or the mind) is that it is not a unitary object. Everyone is different, and our brains are continually plastic. If we are to understand the mind or the brain, we must be interested in interindividual variation and plasticity. Several studies suggest that the neural representation of visual stimuli is largely shared across people,. Future work should elucidate how representational geometries are transformed through experience and whether, in addition to the component of the representation that is shared between individuals, there is a replicable individually unique component that can explain a person's unique perception and behavior.


Concluding remarks

The study of representational geometry has provided novel insights into such diverse domains as vision and audition, categorical perception, memory encoding and recall, emotion, motor control, and higher cognitive processes including conscious awareness. Representational geometry can serve as a hub that enables us to connect experiment and theory at the crucial intermediate level of description, where computational network models meet massively multivariate data from electrophysiological population recordings and high-resolution functional imaging. Moreover, representational geometries can be compared between stages of processing, between model and brain representations, between individuals and species, and between brain and behavior. Many outstanding questions remain. Future studies should systematically test wider ranges of models, including computational models, better integrate population-coding theory, reveal the representational dynamics, and elucidate representational plasticity and the individually unique component of representational geometries. How are representational geometries transformed across stages of processing in vision and other modalities?How do perceptual representational geometries emerge over tens and hundreds of milliseconds as sensory information accumulates and recurrent computations converge?How do learning and expertise affect representational geometry?What aspects of behavior can we predict from the representational geometry at different stages of the perception-to-action cycle?Can representational geometries explain unique aspects of an individual's mind and behavior?Are impairments of perception and cognition in mental illness associated with atypical representational geometries? Can representational geometries be tracked over time to characterize the course of an illness and the effect of therapeutic interventions?What multivariate distance is best suited for measuring representational dissimilarities in neuronal or fMRI data?What mathematical concepts of topology and geometry might be useful for understanding neuronal population codes (e.g., non-Euclidean or nonmetric geometries)?How can neuronal coding theory best be brought to bear on analyses of representational geometry?The geometric model of similarity judgments and generalization behavior can help us understand neuronal population codes. Does the same hold true for feature-, analogy-, and transformation-based similarity models?What form of statistical inference best enables us to adjudicate between competing models that explain representational geometry?


Brain mitochondrial oxidative metabolism during and after cerebral hypoxia–ischemia studied by simultaneous phosphorus magnetic-resonance and broadband near-infrared spectroscopy

A. Bainbridge, I. Tachtsidis, S.D. Faulkner, D. Price, T. Zhu, E. Baer, K.D. Broad, D.L. Thomas et al. — Neuroimage, 2014. PMC4229502, CC BY 3.0.

Multimodal measurements combining broadband near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) and phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy (31P MRS) assessed associations between changes in the oxidation state of cerebral mitochondrial cytochrome-c-oxidase (Δ[oxCCO]) and 31P metabolite peak-area ratios during and after transient cerebral hypoxia–ischemia (HI) in the newborn piglet.

Twenty-four piglets (aged < 24 h) underwent transient HI (inspired oxygen fraction 9% and bilateral carotid artery occlusion for ~ 20 min). Whole-brain 31P MRS and NIRS data were acquired every minute. Inorganic phosphate (Pi)/epp, phosphocreatine (PCr)/epp, and total nucleotide triphosphate (NTP)/epp were measured by 31P MRS and were plotted against Δ[oxCCO] during HI and recovery (epp = exchangeable phosphate pool = Pi + PCr + 2γ-NTP + β-NTP).

During HI Δ[oxCCO], PCr/epp and NTP/epp declined and Pi/epp increased. Significant correlations were seen between 31P ratios and Δ[oxCCO]; during HI a threshold point was identified where the relationship between Δ[oxCCO] and both NTP/epp and Pi/epp changed significantly. Outcome at 48 h related to recovery of Δ[oxCCO] and 31P ratios 1 h post-HI (survived: 1-h NTP/epp 0.22 ± 0.02, Δ[oxCCO] − 0.29 ± 0.50 μM; died: 1-h NTP/epp 0.10 ± 0.04, Δ[oxCCO] − 2.41 ± 1.48 μM).

Both lowered Δ[oxCCO] and NTP/epp 1 h post-HI indicated mitochondrial impairment. Animals dying before 48 h had slower recovery of both Δ[oxCCO] and 31P ratios by 1 h after HI.


Introduction

Neonatal encephalopathy following perinatal hypoxia–ischemia (HI) is associated with high rates of mortality and morbidity worldwide (Kurinczuk et al., 2010). Although successful treatment strategies such as therapeutic hypothermia (Tagin et al., 2012) have been developed and are in use in the developed world, there is still an urgent need for novel therapies to improve clinical outcomes. There is also a need to detect those individuals at most risk of brain injury and who may benefit from adjunct therapies or redirection of clinical care.

In human infants, phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy (31P MRS) can be used to study the evolution of cerebral energetic metabolism following intra-partum HI (Hope et al., 1984). In infants with eventual adverse outcome, despite adequate oxygenation and circulation, phosphocreatine (PCr) and nucleotide triphosphate (NTP—mainly adenosine triphosphate, ATP) decline and inorganic phosphate (Pi) increases in the first days of life (Cady et al., 1997). These metabolic changes are termed “secondary energy failure” (SEF) on the basis that they followed primary intra-partum cerebral energy generation impairment (resulting in transiently reduced PCr and NTP and increased Pi), which resolved following resuscitation (Lorek et al., 1994). Since the 1980s there have been few studies using 31P MRS as outcome biomarkers in babies following asphyxia, as the 31P MRS facility is not routinely available on clinical scanners, but the decline in the brain energy measured in this manner in the days and hours after birth strongly correlates with neurodevelopmental outcome and head growth (Azzopardi et al., 1989). The main MRS biomarker now used in babies to predict outcome and as a surrogate outcome measure in clinical neuroprotection trials (e.g. TOBY Xenon) is the proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H MRS) thalamic lactate/N acetyl aspartate (NAA) peak area ratio (Thayyil et al., 2010). Lactate/NAA correlates with the severity of PCr/Pi decline. 1H MRS is attractive as it is practical and easy, using the same nucleus as MR imaging, and provides a higher resolution with smaller voxel sizes compared with 31P MRS. Lactate/NAA is currently used as a surrogate outcome measure in phase II clinical trials, see e.g.: www.ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00934700

Broadband near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) provides brain energetics information complementary to MRS. In adult humans, NIRS has measured concentration changes in oxygenated haemoglobin (HbO2), de-oxygenated haemoglobin (HHb), and the oxidation state of cytochrome-c-oxidase (Δ[oxCCO]) (Tachtsidis et al., 2009, Tachtsidis et al., 2011, Tisdall et al., 2007, Tisdall et al., 2008a). CCO is the terminal electron acceptor of the mitochondrial electron transfer chain and therefore plays a crucial role in cellular O2 utilization and ATP synthesis (Richter and Ludwig, 2003). NIRS can be a cotside tool for human neonates and several NIRS instruments monitoring only tissue oxygen saturation (SO2) are approved for clinical use (Wolf et al., 2007). However, these cerebral oximeters have attracted specific criticisms: (i) SO2 alone is not a robust indicator of sufficient tissue oxygen delivery (Weiss et al., 2005); (ii) the NIRS measurement has poor reliability compared with SO2 in jugular venous blood (Nagdyman et al., 2005); and (iii) the absolute oxygenation level is relatively poorly determined (Greisen et al., 2011). However, broadband NIRS enables Δ[oxCCO] monitoring and measuring Δ[oxCCO] during recovery from HI may provide additional clinical utility.

Our study uses an established piglet model of transient perinatal HI (Faulkner et al., 2011, O'Brien et al., 2006, Robertson et al., 2012a, Robertson et al., 2012b) utilizing 31P MRS to quantify cerebral energy metabolism before, during and after transient HI. Measurement of Δ[oxCCO] in parallel with 31P MRS has been previously reported in the piglet. Cooper and Springett reported measurement of Δ[oxCCO] contemporaneously with 31P MRS in a single piglet during HI and up to 40 hof recovery (Cooper and Springett, 1997). However, 31P MRS temporal resolution in that work was low, comprising 3 measurements covering baseline and HI and 4 during the first hour of recovery. Springett et al. (2000a) reported measurements made during brief (105 s) anoxias. Temporal resolution was better but anoxia was insufficient to reduce NTP generation.

In this current study, our goal was to ascertain how Δ[oxCCO] correlates with changes in energy metabolism during HI and during early recovery after reperfusion and re-oxygenation. We achieved this using broadband NIRS and 31P MRS simultaneously to provide continuous measurements every 1 min. Our hypothesis was that the extent of recovery of Δ[oxCCO] and 31P MRS metabolite ratios would correlate during early recovery post HI.


Methods


Subjects and maintenance

All animal experiments were performed under UK Home Office Guidelines (Animals [Scientific procedures] act, 1986). Twenty-four male term-born piglets were anesthetized and surgically prepared (aged < 24 h) as described previously (Lorek et al., 1994). Briefly, piglets were sedated with intramuscular midazolam (0.2 mg/kg) and arterial O2 saturation (SpO2) was monitored (Nonin Medical, USA). Isoflurane anesthesia (4% (vol/vol)) was initially given through a facemask to facilitate tracheostomy and intubation and was maintained throughout (3% during surgery and 2% otherwise). Piglets had mechanical ventilation adjusted to maintain partial pressures of oxygen (PaO2) and carbon dioxide (PaCO2) at 8–13 kPa and 4.5–6.5 kPa, respectively allowing for arterial-blood temperature correction.

An umbilical venous catheter was inserted for infusion of maintenance fluids (10% dextrose, 60 ml/kg/day), fentanyl (3–6 μg/kg/h), and antibiotics (benzylpenicillin 50 mg/kg and gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg, every 12 h). An umbilical arterial catheter was inserted for continuous heart rate (HR) and mean arterial blood pressure (MABP) monitoring and intermittent measurement of blood PaO2, PaCO2, pH, electrolytes, glucose and lactate (Abbot Laboratories, UK). Bolus infusions of colloid (Gelofusin, B Braun Medical Ltd., Emmenbrucke, Switzerland) and inotropes maintained MABP at > 40 mm Hg. All animals received continuous physiological monitoring (SA Instruments, New York, USA) and intensive life support throughout experimentation. Arterial line clotting was prevented by continually infusing 0.9% saline (Baxter, Deerfield, IL;1 ml/h) with heparin sodium added (1 IU/ml).

Both common carotid arteries were surgically isolated at the level of the fourth cervical vertebra and encircled by remotely controlled vascular occluders (OC2A, In Vivo Metric, Healdsburg, California, USA). Then piglets were positioned prone in a plastic pod and the head immobilised in a stereotactic frame which included NIRS optodes placed against the sides of the head. A 7 cm × 5 cm elliptical transmit–receive MRS surface coil tuned to the 31P resonant frequency (51.6 MHz) was positioned on top of the head. NIRS and MRS data were acquired before, during and up to 60 min after HI. MRS data were also acquired 24 h and 48 h post HI.


Broadband NIRS

For NIRS we used an “in house” constructed broadband spectrometer previously used for other studies of piglet brain (Cooper and Springett, 1997, Springett et al., 2000a), and brain injury patients (Tisdall et al., 2008a). Light from a stabilized tungsten halogen source was filtered with 610-nm long-pass and heat-absorbing filters, and transmitted to an optode secured stereo-tactically against the left side of the head via a 3.3-mm diameter glass, 7 m long optical fibre bundle. This setup did not cause any heating of the tissue or any other diverse effects. Light incident on the detector optode (right side of head) was focused via an identical fibre bundle onto the 400-μm entrance slit of a 0.27-m spectrograph (270M, Instruments SA, France) with a 300-g/mm grating blazed at 1000 nm. Optodes were co-linear over the ventromedial/temporal region with a line passing through the brain centre. Spectra between 650 nm and 980 nm were continuously acquired every 1 min on a cooled-charge coupled device detector (Wright Instruments, United Kingdom) with the shutter open, giving a signal of 10,000–30,000 electrons per digital conversion at 800 nm and about 1 nm dispersion per pixel and an approximate spectral resolution of less than 5 nm. A reference spectrum was acquired and changes (Δ) in the brain concentrations of HbO2, HHb, and oxidised CCO were determined using the UCLn algorithm (Matcher et al., 1995) after correction for the wavelength dependence of path-length (Essenpreis et al., 1993). The optical set-up, optical algorithm and experimental methodology did not allow us to measure the absolute baseline oxidation state of CCO. The optical path length for the 840-nm water absorption feature was obtained by fitting the second differential of the attenuation spectra to the second differential of the in vitro water signal between 800 and 880 nm and assuming 85% cerebral water content (Matcher et al., 1994). Changes in haemoglobin difference (Δ[Hbdiff] = Δ[HbO2] − Δ[HHb]; indexing changes in brain oxygenation) and changes in total haemoglobin (Δ[Hbtot] = Δ[HbO2] + Δ[HHb]; indexing cerebral blood volume) were also calculated. The measurements of Δ[oxCCO], Δ[HbO2] and Δ[HHb] are defined to be zero at the point of first measurement. Thus their values over the course of the experiment represent the aggregate change with respect to this first measurement.


31P MRS

Simultaneously with NIRS, whole-brain 31P MRS was acquired with 1 min resolution using a 9.4 T Agilent spectrometer and non-localised single-pulse surface-coil acquisition (repetition time 10 s, 6 summed acquisitions per spectrum). MRS data were analysed using AMARES (Vanhamme et al., 1997) as implemented in the jMRUI software (van den Boogaart, 1997). Prior knowledge of the NTP multiplet structure was used (fitting doublets to α- and γ-NTP and a triplet to β-NTP) but no assumption was made as to multiplet relative sizes. NTP is predominately ATP and the latter contributes approximately 70% of the NTP signal e.g. in the rat pup (Mandel and Edel-Harth, 1966). Thus NTP changes during this experiment predominately reflected ATP changes. Pi was fitted using 4 separate components and PCr with a single component. The following peak-area ratios were calculated: Pi/epp, PCr/epp, and NTP/epp where epp = exchangeable phosphate pool = Pi + PCr + 2γ-NTP + β-NTP.


Hypoxia–ischemia

Baseline NIRS and MRS data were recorded for 10 min before HI. HI was induced inside the MR scanner by remotely inflating the vascular occluders around both common-carotid arteries, and simultaneously reducing fractional inspired (Fi) O2 to 9% (vol/vol). During HI the β-NTP peak height was continuously monitored using in-house Matlab (Mathworks) software. The period from the start of HI to when β-NTP had fallen to 40% of its baseline height is defined as “Initial HI”. At the end of Initial HI FiO2 was titrated to maintain β-NTP peak height between 30% and 40% of baseline for 12.5 min (the “Titration” period). At the end of Titration the occluders were deflated and FiO2 normalised (the “Recovery” period).


Statistics

When grouped data are used results are mean (standard deviation). Data were tested for normality prior to parametric statistics using an Anderson–Darling normality test with a null hypothesis that the data were normally distributed. Where data were normally distributed, analysis of variance (ANOVA) compared grouped data with the significance of any difference being determined by a Student t-test. Where data were not normally distributed, a Wilcoxon rank sum test was used instead. Significance was assumed for p < 0.05.

31P MRS ratios were plotted against Δ[oxCCO]. During Initial HI and Titration plots were fitted with a linear function as a first level of analysis. Additionally, in order to model any threshold change at a particular Δ[oxCCO] the same plots were fitted with a double-linear function of the following form:where y = 31P MRS ratio and x = Δ[oxCCO]; A is Δ[oxCCO] at the point of gradient change. The final condition ensures a continuous function (however, note that it is not continuously derivable). For display plots were transposed so point A was the origin. For recovery comparisons plots were fitted with only a linear function. Δ[oxCCO] and 31P MRS ratios were expected to show heterogeneous recovery as measurements during this period are an average over diverse populations of cells recovering at different rates. The measured relationships between Δ[oxCCO] and 31P MRS ratios were therefore not expected to reflect the relationships in a single-cell and thus the double linear model was not used for the recovery data [see the section “”].


Results


Physiology

Baseline 10-min average physiology measurements were all normal for a newborn piglet. shows mean physiology measurements over all subjects at baseline, end of Initial HI and 10 min and 60 min into Recovery. The mean duration of HI was 27.5 (3.8) min. During Initial HI SpO2 was significantly reduced due to decreased FiO2. MABP decreased significantly during HI and then normalised during Recovery. HR was elevated during HI and early Recovery. Rectal temperature was unchanged.


Temporal NIRS and 31P MRS measurements

shows temporal NIRS and 31P MRS measurements for each piglet. During HI Δ[Hbtot] generally increased briefly (mean maximum during Initial HI period 5.2 (4.7) (range − 0.1 to 19.3) μM) before decreasing later (mean minimum during Titration period − 6.7 (5.0) (range − 17.4 to 0.3) μM). During Recovery Δ[Hbtot] returned to baseline or slightly less (mean maximum during Recovery period 3.1 (3.4), range − 4.2 to 10.5 μM). In all piglets Δ[Hbdiff] declined at HI initiation (mean minimum during Initial HI period − 59 (24) (range − 127 to − 19) μM) with eventual regain towards baseline during Recovery (mean maximum during Recovery period 2.0 (8.2), range − 10.6 to 19.5, μM). There were no overall relationships between Δ[Hbtot] and Δ[Hbdiff] at 1 h and NTP/epp at 1 h, 24 h or 48 h after HI.

Baseline 31P MRS ratios and Δ[oxCCO] are in. Δ[oxCCO] fell rapidly at the start of HI minimising during Titration (mean minimum during Titration period − 4.5 (1.4) (range − 2.1 to 7.2) μM) and then increasing during Recovery: however, baseline was not reattained in some piglets. During HI, PCr/epp decreased (mean minimum during Initial HI and Titration periods 0.02 (0.02) (range 0.001 to 0.08)) and Pi/epp increased (mean maximum during Initial HI and Titration periods 0.91 (0.04), (range 0.81 to 0.98)). During HI NTP/epp briefly remained near baseline before decreasing (mean minimum during Initial HI and Titration periods 0.04 (0.02) (range 0.004 to 0.09)) once PCr/epp had declined substantially.


Outcomes

31P MRS ratios and Δ[oxCCO] 1 h into Recovery and NTP/epp 24 h and 48 h after HI are in. Piglets were grouped according to whether they: (a) died (including termination) before 48 h due to physiological deterioration consequential to HI; or (b) survived to 48 h. Nine subjects died before 48 h: 4 had cardiac arrest between 24 and 48 h and 1 before 24 h; the remaining 4 were terminated within 3 h of HI because NTP/epp did not recover to baseline (experiment continuation would have been unethical). The remaining 15 piglets all survived to 48 h.

In piglets surviving to 48 h, by 1 h into Recovery PCr/epp had recovered to baseline; Pi/epp remained higher and NTP/epp and Δ[oxCCO] lower than at baseline. In those dying before 48 h, 1 h into Recovery PCr/epp, Pi/epp, NTP/epp and Δ[oxCCO] were all significantly different from their baselines and from the 1-h recovery values for those surviving to 48 h. The was no significant difference in either Δ[Hbtot] or Δ[Hbdiff] between the outcome groups at 1 h recovery (t-test, p > 0.9 and p > 0.1 respectively).


Relationships between Δ[oxCCO] and MRS measures during Initial HI and Titration

a–b demonstrate the rationale for double-linear fitting NTP/epp and Δ[oxCCO]. a shows all data for each piglet demonstrating overall only a small NTP/epp decrease during initial Δ[oxCCO] decline up to a threshold after which NTP/epp decreases faster. This threshold point is defined by A in the double-linear model (see Eq.). b shows the double-linear fit for a single piglet.

Each 31P ratio was plotted against Δ[oxCCO] for each subject and had both a linear and double-linear fit. The statistics from these fits are in. For presentation the Δ[oxCCO] axes in c–e were transposed such that Δ[oxCCO] = A was the origin. During early HI, Δ[oxCCO] declines but NTP/epp is effectively buffered until PCr/epp has fallen significantly (c and e); mean PCr/epp when Δ[oxCCO] = ANTP (A for the NTP/epp fit) was 0.11 (0.04) (37% of baseline, p < 0.001 vs baseline, t-test). In c at Δ[oxCCO] = ANTP NTP/epp had declined to only 0.21 (0.03) (86% of baseline; p < 0.001 vs baseline, t-test). The mean gradient of NTP/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] for Δ[oxCCO] > ANTP was significantly lower than for Δ[oxCCO] < ANTP. As a percentage of the total fall in Δ[oxCCO] during HI (baseline Δ[oxCCO]–minimum Δ[oxCCO] during HI) Δ[oxCCO] had fallen by 71 (12)% when Δ[oxCCO] = ANTP.

For Pi/epp, APi (i.e. A for the Pi/epp fit) defines a threshold at which the mean rate of change of Pi/epp with Δ[oxCCO] increases towards the end of HI (d). At Δ[oxCCO] = APi, Pi/epp had doubled from baseline to 0.53 (0.10) (p < 0.001 vs baseline, t-test). The mean gradient of Pi/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] for Δ[oxCCO] < APi was significantly higher than for Δ[oxCCO] > APi (p < 0.0001, t-test).

The PCr/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] plot is shown in e with a single linear fit. There was no significant difference in the mean gradient of PCr/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] in the regions Δ[oxCCO] > APCr and Δ[oxCCO] < APCr (e). There were no significant differences between ANTP and APi for each subject (p > 0.9, paired t-test). f shows the ANTP and APi correlation. There were also no significant correlations between ANTP and APCr or between APi and APCr.


Relations between Δ[oxCCO] and MRS measures during Recovery

shows MRS ratios plotted against Δ[oxCCO] during Recovery with died and survived groups plotted separately. Statistics from these fits are in. 31P ratio and Δ[oxCCO] recovery were significantly lessened for piglets dying before 48 h. Overall 31P ratio vs Δ[oxCCO] linear-fit gradients were significantly larger in the survivor group. 31P ratio vs Δ[oxCCO] correlations were also weaker (smaller mean R2) for piglets dying before 48 h (p < 0.01 for all comparisons; t-test).


Discussion

We used 31P MRS to study brain high-energy phosphates and NIRS to study the oxidation status of cytochrome oxidase in the brain with the aim of elucidating the relationships between these measurements during and after HI. We demonstrated that the extent of recovery of Δ[oxCCO] and 31P MRS metabolite ratios were associated during the early period of recovery post HI. During HI, PCr/epp appears to decline linearly with Δ[oxCCO]. The majority of the decline in NTP/epp occurred after PCr/epp has decreased to approximately 1/3rd of its baseline value. Thus there was a clear threshold, ANTP, in the NTP/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] plots where the gradient of the regression line changed significantly. Similarly, there was a threshold point, APi, where the gradient of the Pi/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] curve increased significantly; ANTP and APi correlated significantly. During recovery, animals that survived to 48 h demonstrated a more complete recovery of 31P MRS ratios and Δ[oxCCO]; animals that died or were terminated prior to 48 h had weaker recovery of both 31P MRS ratios and Δ[oxCCO].


The model

The piglet asphyxia model used in the current study has strong pre-clinical value; it allows intensive care to be applied as it would be in an intensive care setting in the clinic, thus maintaining metabolic and physiological homeostasis. The model was developed to replicate the delayed appearance of abnormalities observed on 31P MRS spectra in human neonates acquired in the early period after birth (Hope et al., 1984). The data acquired from the model has relevance to the human newborn with hypoxic–ischaemic encephalopathy. MRS biomarkers are known to change during and after HI (Lorek et al., 1994), serve as linking biomarkers in infants with HIE (Cheong et al., 2006) and are used as surrogate outcome measures in neuro-protection trials. Furthermore, the timing and evolution of cerebral 31P and 1H MRS biomarkers are similar in the piglet following HI and the regional pattern of injury is similar to that observed in humans and in primate models (Myers, 1975). Importantly, several neuro-protection studies performed in the piglet model have provided proof of concept data for subsequent translational studies in newborn babies in the clinic, for example therapeutic hypothermia (now standard therapy for HIE) (Tagin et al., 2012), xenon augmented hypothermia (Faulkner et al., 2011), melatonin (Robertson et al., 2012a) and amiloride (Robertson et al., 2012b). This study however furthers our understanding in that we define particular thresholds for NTP below which the correlation between NTP and CCO changes dramatically.


The double-linear model

Visual inspection of the data suggested that the relationship between NTP/epp and Δ[oxCCO] during HI was similar in each subject in terms of the pattern of change but heterogeneous in terms of the absolute values of Δ[oxCCO]. The double-linear model was used to extract the general features of the relationship between NTP/epp and Δ[oxCCO] rather than to directly model any specific features of the underlying bio-chemistry. Nevertheless the parameter A in the model does define a specific reference position on the Δ[oxCCO] axis. The raw data in a demonstrate well the heterogeneity of the Δ[oxCCO] signal across the subject group. By transposing each dataset such that A = 0, as illustrated in c, the general pattern of the relationship between NTP/epp and Δ[oxCCO] can be more easily seen. This model was extended to investigate the relations between Pi/epp and Δ[oxCCO] and between PCr/epp and Δ[oxCCO].

Additionally, each dataset was fitted with a linear function. In general, care must be taken to avoid over-specifying the model function; usually, when fitting two functions to the same data, it is feasible to perform a statistical comparison to determine whether the more complex function yields a better fit to the data. However, in this case, the linear regression line is simply equivalent to a special-case solution to the double linear model where the gradient is identical either side of point A. Thus the R2 value for the double-linear model fit will always be ≥ R2 from a simple linear regression. A statistical comparison of the model function fits (for example by F-test of the residuals to the regression lines) is therefore likely to be meaningless. For the NTP/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] and the Pi/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] datasets there was a significant change in the gradient of the regression line at point A. Furthermore, there was a significant correlation between ANTP and APi. This is taken as evidence that ANTP and APi have some physical significance in these data and is our justification for considering the fits to the double-linear model when discussing these data in further detail below. In contrast, for the PCr/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] datasets there was no significant change in gradient at APCr and no correlation between APCr and either ANTP or APi. Thus the results of using a simple linear regression to these data are considered in the discussion below. For completeness the results of both the double-linear model and simple linear model fits are included in.


Response of the brain during HI

For the analysis of the data acquired during HI, all subjects were analysed as a single group. There was no difference between the subjects at baseline when stratified according to outcome group and no justification for stratifying subjects at this stage.

A model of the biochemistry of the piglet brain during anoxia has been previously developed to simulate NIRS and MRS data (Moroz et al., 2012) and this informs much of the following discussion of the experimental changes seen in this work. Δ[oxCCO] is closely linked to the production of ATP and, by extension, the 31P MRS measurement of NTP/epp. We interpret a decreased Δ[oxCCO] as impairment of the electron transport chain (ETC) which in turn results in failure of ATP production through ATP synthase. The double-linear model defines the point ANTP at which there is a threshold change in the relationship between NTP/epp and Δ[oxCCO]. During the initial period of HI, Δ[oxCCO] declines and so does ATP synthase. During this period, ATP levels are initially buffered through the creatine kinase reaction leading to a decline in PCr (Lawson and Veech, 1979). At the ANTP point, NTP/epp has reduced only slightly whereas PCr/epp is severely depleted at approximately 1/3rd of its baseline value. Eventually, after the ANTP point, the depletion of PCr causes ATP to decline and therefore NTP/epp declines faster with Δ[oxCCO]. The model of Moroz, along with experimental data (Korzeniewski and Zoladz, 2001), suggests that the reaction rate for ATP hydrolysis remains high until ATP concentrations are severely depleted. Thus Pi is produced as a by-product and, because ATP synthase is failing, Pi/epp increases. At the APi point, not significantly different from ANTP, the slope of the Pi/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] plot increases. Presumably, as NTP/epp starts to fall quickly at this point, there is now little production of ATP via ATP synthase. The increase in the slope of Pi/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] may therefore reflect the continuing demand for ATP (ATP is not yet severely depleted at the ANTP point) along with now much reduced re-combination of Pi into ATP via ATP synthase. We speculate that the ANTP and APi points represent the point at which ATP manufacture via all pathways is almost completely suppressed. Furthermore, at this point over 2/3rds of the eventual reduction of Δ[oxCCO] has occurred suggesting that the majority of the reduction in Δ[oxCCO] occurs during the period where ATP manufacture via ATP synthase declines. The change in the slopes of the NTP/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] and the Pi/epp vs Δ[oxCCO] regression lines and the strong correlation between ANTP and APi are further evidence that the decline in Δ[oxCCO] represents the decline in ETC activity in this model.


Response of the brain during recovery

During recovery from HI, the electron transport chain activity recovers and Δ[oxCCO] starts to recover as oxidative phosphorylation resumes. This leads to Pi reduction as it combines with ADP to produce ATP. The production of ATP causes PCr reserves to be restored via creatine kinase and recovery of both NTP/epp and PCr/epp is observed on 31P MRS.

Nine piglets showed poor recovery during the first hour post HI and had to be terminated prior to 48 h post HI because of the extent of their injury. The HI in this experiment is severe and is designed to induce brain injury. The parameters of the HI were carefully controlled and reproduced in each experiment. The level of NTP was monitored in real time during HI and the FiO2 adjusted during Titration to ensure that β-NTP peak height was held between 30% and 40% of its baseline value. Despite a similar level of hypoxia–ischaemia in our model, there is a heterogeneous response to this insult. Many factors including aetiology, extent of hypoxia and ischaemia, maturational stage of the brain, regional cerebral blood flow and general health of the subject all influence the response to injury. This is similar to the heterogeneous response to injury seen in human fetuses and babies. After HI, Δ[oxCCO], PCr/epp and NTP/epp remained lower and Pi/epp remained higher in these animals than in survivors. ATP levels in early recovery are dependent on the severity of HI with lower ATP levels correlating with longer periods of ischemia (Nishijima et al., 1989, Phillis et al., 1996). Indeed, the response of NTP/epp during and for 1 h after HI has previously been used as a measure of insult severity (O'Brien et al., 2006). Furthermore, 31P metabolite ratios 2 h post HI can be used as early markers of the likely extent of injury with increased Pi/epp and decreased PCr/epp and NTP/epp correlating with poor outcome in the piglet at 48 h (Cady et al., 2008). The MRS ratios measured during the early recovery period are consistent with early markers of adverse outcome.


Factors affecting the measurements of 31P MRS and NIRS biomarkers

MRS was performed using a simple pulse-acquire sequence, and the signal was localised to the brain by using a surface coil in transmit and receive mode. The dimensions of the coil limit the volume over which MRS signals are acquired and so effectively localise the signal acquisition to the brain. NIRS data were acquired in transmission mode with optodes positioned on the right and left hand sides of the head at approximately the middle part of the brain. The use of transmission mode for NIRS is a significant development compared to previous studies (Cooper and Springett, 1997, Springett et al., 2000a). The surface coil used for MRS was sufficiently large to acquire signals from the deep grey matter nuclei as well as the superficial structures of the brain. Computational simulations suggest that transmission mode NIRS affords greater sensitivity to deeper structures (Gunadi and Leung, 2011) than does reflection mode. The data from both modalities represent an average over both superficial and deep brain structures. Although the positioning of the coil and optodes was arranged such that data were acquired from similar volumes of tissue, the weights of contributions from different brain structures will be different—31P data are more weighted to superficial structures given the positioning of coil on the top of the head.

31P MRS data are given as metabolite peak-area ratios. Referencing to epp allows separate interpretation of PCr, Pi and NTP changes and there is evidence (Cady et al., 2008) that these ratios are more sensitive to abnormalities than the PCr/Pi ratio used in many previous studies. However, the 31P biomarkers are not direct concentration measurements. Interpreting changes in metabolite/epp ratios as equivalent changes in the concentration of the metabolite relies on an additional assumption that the net contributions of PCr, Pi and NTP to the total visible phosphorus pool is unchanged through the course of the experiment.

The NIRS measurements in this work are of relative changes therefore we cannot directly estimate tissue oxygen saturation. Previously Springett et al. (2000b) estimated tissue saturation after calibrating the system to complete anoxia. However, this was not within the scope of this work. Given that Δ[oxCCO] is a measurement only of the change in oxidation state of CCO, there is no information about the absolute value of [oxCCO] at baseline and no a priori knowledge as to the concentration of mitochondria in the brain. The optical set-up, optical algorithm and experimental methodology did not allow us to measure the absolute baseline oxidation state of the CCO. Previously a methodology has been described to quantify absolute deoxyhaemoglobin (Matcher and Cooper 1994). Recently the absolute oxidation of CCO has been using light in the visible spectrum (Sakata et al., 2012). We are actively pursuing the development of new instrumentation to quantify independently the absorption and scattering and hence, using the independent spectra of the oxidation and the reduced CCO, to quantify its absolute redox state (Tachtsidis et al., 2010).


Factors affecting Δ[oxCCO]

Mathematical modelling suggests that an increased substrate supply of electrons reduces [oxCCO] and increased oxygen supply oxidises [oxCCO] (Banaji, 2006). Experimentally, other factors such as pH and mitochondrial inhibitors may explain other small changes in Δ[oxCCO] (Cooper and Springett, 1997). During HI, decreased substrate supply and reduced oxygenation would have an opposite effect on the oxidation states of electron transport chain intermediates and, consequently, on Δ[oxCCO]. In the fetal sheep, Δ[oxCCO] has been observed to increase during 25 min of complete occlusion of the umbilical cord (Bennet et al., 2007) and during occlusion of maternal common internal iliac artery for 1 h (Newman et al., 2000). Bennet et al. speculate that increased Δ[oxCCO] during occlusion is a result of reduced substrate supply of electrons during occlusion suggesting a rapid decrease in metabolic activity. In the naïve healthy piglet brain, small changes in oxygen delivery do not induce concurrent changes in Δ[oxCCO] (Quaresima et al., 1998); reductions in Δ[oxCCO] typically reflect larger scale reductions in oxygen supply. Furthermore, Tsuji et al. (1995) have shown in the piglet that hypoxia with 12% and 8% FiO2 produced slight increases in Δ[oxCCO] whereas only for more severe hypoxias did Δ[oxCCO] reduce. Our observation of a profound reduction in Δ[oxCCO] during HI is consistent with previous observations in the piglet (Springett et al., 2000a). The reasons for the differences in the data from pigs and sheep are not clear but data from individual models appear consistent.


Interpretation of results

The NIRS and 31P MRS data acquired in this study are averaged measurements on the whole brain. The evolution of the 31P metabolite ratios during HI has been described in the section “” in terms of the biochemistry that is happening at a cellular level despite that fact that the data originate from a heterogeneous population of cells. We speculate that this description is possible because during acute HI the cells are responding similarly and approximately simultaneously to a global stimulus such that the average signals over the bulk tissue represent a good approximation to the changes occurring at a single cellular level. The relationships between 31P metabolite ratios and Δ[oxCCO] therefore provide some insight into the significance of Δ[oxCCO] decline during HI, in particular that this likely represents the decline in ETC activity. In contrast, recovery from HI is likely to be heterogeneous (Vannucci et al., 2004). It is likely that there will be different populations of cells that differ in both the extent and rate of their recovery. Thus, the observed pattern of recovery of 31P metabolite ratios is likely to be a poor representation of the pattern of change at a single cellular level. Similarly, the observed relationships between 31P metabolite ratios and Δ[oxCCO] are less likely to accurately describe the true relationships at a single cellular level. Nevertheless, these data may provide an index of the averaged extent of recovery in the brain. Persisting reduced NTP/epp in the Recovery period after restoration of oxygen supply suggests synthesis of ATP is either impaired or absent. Thus this implies either impaired mitochondrial function or cell death. In the poor outcome group there was poor recovery of both Δ[oxCCO] and NTP/epp. This suggests that mitochondrial metabolism is not now generating ATP and that, in this model, continued mitochondrial impairment after HI may be the cause of continued suppression of Δ[oxCCO].


Translation to the clinic

The NIRS system used in this study was in-house developed and adapted to monitor human neonates. It is based on using multiple wavelengths (not just two or three discreet wavelengths) to improve the precision of the measurement (Kolyva et al., 2012, Tisdall et al., 2008b). The instrumentation operation and applicability is similar to other commercial NIRS systems. Movement artefacts can affect the signals therefore careful consideration is needed regarding the application of the optode holder to the head. Measurement of the oxidation state of CCO has the potential to provide information about the severity of HI and whether the brain is recovering in the early period after birth. However, it is also true that the oxidation state of naïve brain before the insult is not known and hence the comparison with the injured oxidation state cannot be made. The development of absolute measurement of oxCCO will simplify the clinical interpretation. Nevertheless, in this study we demonstrated that oxCCO measurement is a potential marker of metabolism in the brain independent from the haemoglobin/oxygenation measurement. Measurement of the trend of Δ[oxCCO] over time after the injury is likely to indicate the degree of development of SEF and hence will be useful to collect to determine the extent of recovery of the brain.


Conclusions

We have demonstrated the monitoring in-vivo of the metabolic events during and following HI with high temporal-resolution. During HI there are significant correlations between 31P MRS ratios and Δ[oxCCO]. Both NTP/epp and Pi/epp exhibit a significant change in their relations with Δ[oxCCO] at the point when PCr/epp becomes severely depleted. During recovery those animals that survived to 48 h demonstrated more complete recovery of 31P MRS ratios and Δ[oxCCO] than those who subsequently develop secondary energy failure.


The Influence of Spatiotemporal Structure of Noisy Stimuli in Decision Making

Andrea Insabato, Laura Dempere-Marco, Mario Pannunzi, Gustavo Deco, Ranulfo Romo, Tim Behrens — PLoS Computational Biology, 2014. PMC3990472, CC BY.

Decision making is a process of utmost importance in our daily lives, the study of which has been receiving notable attention for decades. Nevertheless, the neural mechanisms underlying decision making are still not fully understood. Computational modeling has revealed itself as a valuable asset to address some of the fundamental questions. Biophysically plausible models, in particular, are useful in bridging the different levels of description that experimental studies provide, from the neural spiking activity recorded at the cellular level to the performance reported at the behavioral level. In this article, we have reviewed some of the recent progress made in the understanding of the neural mechanisms that underlie decision making. We have performed a critical evaluation of the available results and address, from a computational perspective, aspects of both experimentation and modeling that so far have eluded comprehension. To guide the discussion, we have selected a central theme which revolves around the following question: how does the spatiotemporal structure of sensory stimuli affect the perceptual decision-making process? This question is a timely one as several issues that still remain unresolved stem from this central theme. These include: (i) the role of spatiotemporal input fluctuations in perceptual decision making, (ii) how to extend the current results and models derived from two-alternative choice studies to scenarios with multiple competing evidences, and (iii) to establish whether different types of spatiotemporal input fluctuations affect decision-making outcomes in distinctive ways. And although we have restricted our discussion mostly to visual decisions, our main conclusions are arguably generalizable; hence, their possible extension to other sensory modalities is one of the points in our discussion.


Introduction

Although decision making has been approached from various perspectives, it is generally understood as a complex process involving the comparison of different scenarios and the evaluation of the perceived outcomes in light of one's objectives, as in the paradigmatic example of choosing between different job offers. However, the much simpler tasks, such as those involved in perceptual decision making, have proven useful to investigate the neural basis of decision making. Our main focus is on the recent advances in perceptual decision making as addressed by both neurophysiological data derived from single-cell recordings and modeling studies. To guide this discussion, we have selected a central theme, i.e., the assessment of how the detailed spatiotemporal structure of sensory stimuli affects the perceptual decision-making process. This question allowed us to scrutinize the advances made during the last decade in the neural basis of decision making, while at the same time encompassing a number of research issues that have remained open and are the subject of active debate. These issues include: (i) to understand the role of spatiotemporal input fluctuations in perceptual decision making, (ii) to explore how the current results that were mainly derived from a simple two-alternative choice may extend to scenarios with multiple competing evidences, and (iii) to establish whether different types of spatiotemporal input fluctuations affect decision-making outcomes in distinctive ways.

This review is organized in two parts. First, we give a brief overview of the main neurophysiological results derived from single-cell recordings in monkeys performing a sensory discrimination task. This is followed by a critical revision of the two main theoretical paradigms used to explain these data, namely drift diffusion models (DDM) and attractor neural networks (ANN). Subsequently, recent advances in the field, such as the consideration of multiple alternatives, are reviewed. The section “” constitutes the second part of this work. In this section, we have attempted to pinpoint some aspects that remain unresolved under current experimental and theoretical paradigms and to raise questions that could push our current understanding of the neural basis of decision making further. This will hopefully lead to new experiments being designed and conducted.


The neurophysiology of decision making

Using different tasks and sensory modalities, various brain areas that encode different stages of the decision-making process have been determined. Beyond deep differences in (among others) stimuli, timing, and motor output, the vast majority of the tasks were based on an -alternative forced-choice (AFC) paradigm. In this paradigm the subjects are always required to commit to a choice among alternatives, even in the absence of evidence for choosing one of the alternatives at all. Vast amounts of evidence about decision-making processes have been provided in the last decades by studies based on single-unit recordings in monkeys performing 2AFC tasks, either in the somatosensory or the visual domain. Importantly, these studies combine neurophysiological recordings and psychophysical measurements, a type of experimental protocol pioneered in the 1960s by Mountcastle and colleagues –.

In the vibrotactile frequency-discrimination task in the somatosensory domain, the subject's fingertip is stimulated with a vibrator during two subsequent intervals separated by a delay. The subject must decide whether the second stimulation has a higher or a lower frequency than the first one and communicate the decision by pressing one of two buttons,. Neurons in the primary somatosensory cortex (S1) have been found to increase their firing rate as a function of the stimulus frequency. During the delay between the two stimulations, the frequency of the first one must be kept in working memory, and neurons in the secondary somatosensory cortex (S2), medial and ventral premotor cortices (MPC, VPC), and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) were identified to encode stimulus frequency during this period –. When the second stimulation is applied, and must be compared, and some neurons in premotor and prefrontal cortices (and to a minor extent also in S2) encode this comparison in their firing rate, while other neurons encode either or. By adding a delay between and the response (see, bottom row), Lemus et al. found that the firing of some MPC neurons during this period reflects the comparison between and, while other neurons still encode either or, thus suggesting a possible role for this area in the post-decision processing of the choice. Such a role has also been observed in other areas –.

As reviewed in, the results suggest that the decision-making process is implemented in the brain in a distributed and gradual fashion, and thus, there is no such thing as a single decision locus. This also seems to be the case in the continuous processing relating sensory activity, the formation of a decision variable, and the motor activity, in that the borders separating these stages do not appear to be so clearly demarcated in the primate brain.

In visual discrimination tasks, the great richness of features of our visual experience enables the design of a variety of decision-making tasks, including, but not limited to, the discrimination of motion, heading, disparity, and bar orientation,. A prevalent task is random dot motion (RDM) direction discrimination. In this task subjects look at dots, some of which display random movement while others move coherently in one direction. Subjects must decide which is the direction of coherent motion (even when there is none) and the typical response is made by an oculo-motor movement towards the corresponding visual target. The percentage of dots moving coherently determines the difficulty of the trial. This task allows one to study the various stages of a decision: evidence formation, its integration into a decision signal, holding the decision in memory (in fixed-time experiments), and the commitment to a choice. Neurons in middle temporal area (MT) are tuned to motion and therefore provide the sensory evidence for the decision –, whereas lateral intraparietal area (LIP) and frontal eye fields (FEF) were found to integrate the evidence into a decision signal. After stimulus onset, LIP neurons present a dip in firing rate. Subsequently the activity varies according to the subject's choice: for stimuli moving towards the response field (RF) of the neuron the firing rate increases, while for movements in the opposite direction the rate decreases. The slope of the ramping correlates with trial difficulty. Both in reaction time (RT) and fixed duration experiments, the activity reaches an asymptotic value about 70 ms before saccade initiation, thus suggesting the existence of a decision criterion like the one postulated by diffusion-like models (see next section). Indeed, the results obtained in the visual domain comply well with the view of decision as an integration of sensory evidence until a criterion is reached.

While all the previously discussed results show that several aspects of decision-making processes can be unveiled by analyzing the neuronal recordings in monkeys, our understanding of these phenomena may also be promoted and, indeed, consolidated by directly stimulating the neural system. Following this approach, several studies have demonstrated that electrical microstimulation of areas involved in decision making, both in the somatosensory and in the visual – domain, show similar effects to those observed when the sensory organs receive the stimulation.


Integration of noisy evidence: Two modeling perspectives

As has been previously stated, 2AFC tasks have been commonly used to investigate decision-making processes. Although several theoretical models have been proposed to explain the available neurophysiological results, most of them – share the fundamental assumption that an integration of noisy evidence over time takes place, thus accumulating such evidence until a decision is made. It is beyond the scope of this review to describe all of these models in detail. Instead we will focus on the two main competing theoretical frameworks, namely the drift diffusion model (DDM) and the attractor neural networks (ANN).

Historically, the DDM was developed first and has been broadly used since then. The equation implementing the DDM in a 2AFC task is based on a continuous variable, representing the accumulated difference between the two alternatives (see for a sketch). In its simplest implementation, describes a Wiener process and is integrated over time according to:

where is the accumulated time interval, is the evidence to be accumulated (inversely proportional to task difficulty and named drift rate), and is the so-called noise-diffusion term. The value of is a number extracted from a normal distribution with zero mean and standard deviation equal to the square root of. The decision-making process is accomplished when reaches one of two boundaries (see -/2 or /2 in).

The overall RT can be thought of as the sum of the time that takes to reach the boundary, i.e., the decision time and non-decision time components that account for sensory and motor processing. It is worth noting that several common extensions of the standard DDM have been proposed to specifically account for across-trials variations related to fluctuations in (1) the starting point value, (2) non-decision processing components, and (3) the drift rate. One of the main strengths of the DDM stems from its ease to fit behavioral data. In this respect, DDM has been used to test a broad range of psychophysical hypotheses. In particular, DDM accounts well for RT and performance distributions for different task procedures, and for speed-accuracy trade-offs (e.g., with or without time pressure; see for a review). Moreover, it has been shown that DDM can reproduce the shape of the RT distributions both when it is approximately Gaussian, (with a model implementing collapsing boundaries) and when it has the usual positive skewness, (with fixed boundaries). All of these examples illustrate a situation that is inherent to models that can be flexibly adapted to a large variety of specific situations, i.e., different implementations of a DDM can account for different types of behavior by manipulating certain parameters of the model.

Generally, a number of features that include average and instantaneous drifts, changes in boundaries, or the introduction of a leak parameter (hence obtaining a stable Ornstein-Uhlenbeck [OU] velocity process, accounting for an imperfect integration), may be easily added to the simplest DDM versions to accurately reproduce behavioral data. Yet it remains to be seen what fundamental insights are to be extracted from such accurate behavioral accounts. Although, in a way, adding and tuning new parameters may lead to substantial fitting improvements, it is not always the case that it goes hand-in-hand with an enhanced understanding of the fundamental underlying processes.

Furthermore, special care when interpreting the results associated with the exploitation of the DDM fitting capabilities should be taken, for one could be tempted to attribute all causality to one particular parameter (or set of parameters), to the neglect of other causal elements. We should thus bear in mind that naive interpretations of Occam's razor, combined with methods prone to overfitting, can lead to the disregard of certain relevant features.

It is worth pointing out that the DDM is a phenomenological model and therefore does not attempt to provide a detailed description of the neural mechanisms that underlie decision making. Nonetheless, a biological motivation for the DDM was recently proposed, and we will discuss this later. In contrast to DDM, nonlinear ANN models of spiking neurons crucially seek to provide a biophysically inspired description of these processes. Such ANN models were initially used to explain the neurophysiological basis of other cognitive functions, such as working memory –. Indeed, the observation that, besides decision-related activity, LIP neurons also exhibit persistent activity during delay periods inspired Wang to explore the possibility that ANN of working memory could also explain the integration of stimuli and the formation of perceptual choices.

In ANN models the long-term behavior of nonlinear dynamical systems, defined by neural networks of interconnected neurons, is described by so-called fixed points. These split the configuration space into basins of attractions. Such basins arise from the initial configuration of the system that leads to the same attractor. In this theoretical framework, 2AFC decision making can be modeled by an attractor network with a minimum of two stable fixed points, which represent the two alternatives. Such a system would display bistability and the transition from an initial configuration towards one of the two stable attractors (i.e., stable unless a sufficiently large perturbation takes the network out of the attractor) would correspond to the decision process.

A type of ANN that is commonly used in decision-making research consists of populations (pools) of leaky integrate and fire neurons with common inputs and connectivities, where corresponds to the number of choices in tasks, –. The integrators are implemented by pools of excitatory neurons that respond selectively to one of the alternatives and are thought to encode decision-related activity. The other two populations correspond to a homogeneous pool of inhibitory neurons, globally connected to all neurons in the network, and a pool of excitatory neurons, which is not selective of any of the alternatives. The models exhibit recurrent connections between cells from the same selective pool potentiated by a factor with respect to the baseline connectivity level, and weakened connectivities by a factor between cells from different selective pools, following the hypothesis of Hebbian plasticity (i.e., synaptic efficacies are modified by neural activity following a training process). This is a key aspect in the formalism of attractor dynamics, which endows the system with the capability to implement a biased competition of the different populations of excitatory neurons that is mediated by inhibition. The competition and cooperation processes thereby established are the basic elements of the underlying neural computations.

Especially during the last decade, which has seen an increase in experimental evidence, both theoretical frameworks have proved successful in accounting for the reported findings. One such example can be found in the case of the previously described motion discrimination task where motion pulses influence both behavior and LIP neural activity, with the later pulses being less relevant than earlier ones,. A DDM with a leakage term was able to reproduce this experimental finding, while the time-varying dynamics of the attractor model explained both behavioral and neural data,.

Although at the expense of reduced biological plausibility, one of the great advantages of DDM over ANN is the fact that DDM is described by a single equation. In contrast, ANNs are endowed with richer dynamics, thus allowing one to model neurophysiological data (i.e., neuronal spiking activity) that may subsequently be used to derive behavior. Nevertheless, the mean-field approach can also reduce the amount of equations of the ANN, thus leading to a formal framework that allows the analytical treatment of dynamical systems. In this approach the number of equations is proportional to the number of different populations of neurons. A further step was made by an approach that combines numerical and analytical methods (i.e., mean-field) to reduce the system to two rate equations; see. Later, Roxin and Ledberg derived a formal relation between the mean-fied reduction of the ANN and a one-dimensional nonlinear diffusion in the proximity of the bifurcation to bistability where the spontaneous state destabilizes. This is a valid reduction for all the winner-takes-all models, which lets one relate the variables of the nonlinear diffusion process to those of the full spiking-neuron model, and thus, to neurobiologically meaningful quantities. Otherwise, Smith takes a different approach to provide a neurophysiological motivation to the DDM. First, he shows that, after initial transient effects, a Wiener process is equivalent to an integrated OU process. As is already well known from the Stein model, an integrated OU process can be approximated to a pair of opponent shot noise processes (when their intensity is very high). The link with neurophysiology can be established in that shot noise processes have been used to model neural responses. In a subsequent study Smith and McKenzie provided an alternative analysis that demonstrated how a time inhomogeneous OU velocity process emerges even in the context of a simple recurrent architecture. All in all, the relations between ANN and DDM are complex, mathematically involved, and need to be further analyzed.


Beyond 2AFC tasks

The study of 2AFC has paved the way for establishing basic principles underlying decision making. But such tasks neglect important aspects inherent to most decisions. However, these aspects can still be considered in highly simplified experimental scenarios such as those used in typical psychophysical or neurophysiological experiments. Such aspects include the consideration of multiple alternatives, the possibility of changing one's mind, and the effect of different sources of neural response variability on decision making. Admittedly, many other aspects, such as those related to subjective experience during decision making (e.g., value-based decision making or confidence-related decision making), have also received notable attention. These aspects are, nonetheless, beyond the scope of this review.

The study of decision making between multiple alternatives was already being addressed from a psychophysical perspective in the 1950s. A number of experimental procedures have been used to this end (e.g., absolute identification paradigms and the study of preferential choice). However, only during the last few years have single-cell neurophysiological recordings been becoming available – (see for a review).

It is also worth noting that theoretical attempts to account for multiple choice decision making were already being made in the 1970s and have since been an active area of research, –. The first attempts to model multiple choices were made in the context of preferential choice, but they failed to reproduce all the experimentally described effects. Later Roe et al. extended the decision field theory of Busemeyer and Townsend, which is a kind of sequential sampling model, to account for the multiple preferential choice paradigm. In a subsequent work, Usher and McClelland introduced leakage and nonlinearity in the multiple accumulator model. Building on this work, Bogacz et al. studied the role of nonlinearities and the application of this model to value-based decisions and to Weber's law. The general idea behind it all is that a family of models known as race models (where each target or decision is described by an accumulator that is close in formulation although not mathematically equivalent to DDM) can easily be extended to multiple targets by the simple addition of more integrators.

The first single-cell neurophysiological recordings in a multiple-alternative discrimination task were made by Churchland et al.. The recordings were acquired in monkeys (area LIP) on a two- and four-choice direction-discrimination task, while behavioral results were also being registered. These results have been theoretically modeled in different studies,. Beck et al. followed a probabilistic approach with special emphasis on optimality, whereas Furman and Wang and Albantakis and Deco pursued a neurodynamical approach with an emphasis on the detailed biophysical description of the circuitry that underlies decision making.

Of special interest is the situation where multiple choices simultaneously receive evidence, hereafter denoted as multiple competing evidences. Following this experimental paradigm, Niwa and Ditterich tested human participants on a 3AFC version of the RDM task. A key aspect of their experimental setting was the multicomponent RDM stimulus, i.e., a stimulus comprised of up to three coherent motion components instead of just one direction of coherent motion. Thus, the amount of sensory evidence for all three alternatives could be controlled.

It is worth noting that in a subsequent work, different DDMs (e.g., with/without leak, lateral/feed-forward inhibition) were tested on these experimental data. This study showed that all models explained the behavioral data equally well. In particular, one of the diffusion models used in that study had a similar architecture to a commonly used, biologically plausible ANN model, that is, with one common inhibitory pool, thus suggesting that a spiking neural network could account for the behavioral data as well.

Later, Bollimunta and Ditterich used the same experimental paradigm with monkeys while recording neurophysiological activity from LIP. Their experimental results suggest that a unique variable in the 3AFC task, the net motion strength (NMS) variable, suffices to predict monkeys' accuracy and RTs. The NMS is defined by the amount of information associated with the highest coherence and the average coherence of the second and third components as. The NMS thus aims to capture all available evidence within a single variable.

Interestingly, these neurophysiological results seem to challenge the class of ANN models that explain well both behavior and neural activity in decision-making tasks. Specifically, Bollimunta and Ditterich suggest that competition cannot be solely mediated by lateral inhibition and they indicate that feedforward inhibition is a necessary component of the neural circuitry that underlies their data. Such conclusions are based on the fact that the firing rates of LIP neurons seem to show an earlier influence of the inhibitory sensory evidence than that driven by the excitatory sensory evidence. In the case of the neurophysiological recordings, the inhibitory sensory evidence corresponds to the evidence against choosing the target that is in the receptive field (RF) of the neuron being recorded, whereas the excitatory sensory evidence corresponds to that evidence in favor of choosing the target in its RF.

However, in contrast to the conclusions derived from the reported experimental results, it is worth noting that the NMS fails to predict behavioral performance in those cases where the difference between the coherence of the two motion components with less coherently moving dots is large. To illustrate this point, let us consider a situation where the coherence of each motion component is, = 45%, and = 5% (NMS = 25). Based on the hypothesis that NMS can be used to predict behavioral performance, this performance should be equivalent to that obtained when, = 25%, and = 25%. Of course, this is clearly not the case. This is relevant because the firing rates of the LIP neurons reported in are pooled on the basis of a variable akin to the NMS previously described. The variable as defined in the context of the neurophysiological recordings may, however, contain large differences between the coherences of the components defining the inhibitory sensory evidence.

It is also worth noting that most studies, both in the DDM and the ANN framework, consider that a decision is made once an established threshold is reached. One may wonder how such a mechanism could accommodate a change of mind. Resulaj et al. addressed this question experimentally by means of a psychophysical RDM task, where human subjects had to indicate the selected choice by moving a handle towards a left or right target. By using continuous hand movements, as opposed to ballistic saccades, changes of mind could (occasionally) be observed in the handle traces. Although these findings seem to pose a challenge to ANN (given the previously established stability of the decision-attractors), Albantakis and Deco showed that the attractor picture is entirely consistent with the reported experimental data. This is the case when the system operates close to bifurcation, thus separating a state of categorical decision making from a multistable region. In this region, the existence of an attractor encoding the scenario where all possible alternatives fire at a high rate makes it difficult to reach a decision, thus facilitating changes of mind.

All in all, as has been repeatedly underlined, it is of utmost importance to continue the study of decision-making processes beyond the simplest 2AFC experimental paradigm, both from a bottom-up perspective and from a top-down perspective. The bottom-up approach seeks to generate behavioral and neurophysiological predictions derived from biophysically detailed models, whereas the top-down perspective, starting from expected behavior (like DDM optimality or the mathematical assumptions underlying Bayesian inference models), may be adopted to predict low-level implementations. The integration and cross-talk between these two approaches may substantially push forward our current understanding of decision making.


Spatiotemporal Structure of Noisy Stimuli in Decision Making

The relation between the different research issues that we have addressed in this work becomes more explicit when we consider the central question of how the spatiotemporal structure of sensory stimuli affects the perceptual decision-making process. In order to tackle the various issues that stem from such a question, the RDM discrimination task has received particular attention in this work, due to the large body of relevant experimental results available. Special emphasis has gone to pinpoint some aspects that still remain underconstrained in the current modeling paradigms. Indeed, some of the issues addressed will be of special interest to the modeling community, although definite answers to such questions can only come from the interplay with experimental research.


Challenges in the investigation of decision processes with multiple competing evidences

When we compare 2AFC to AFC tasks with multiple competing alternatives, it is probably the spatial structure of the RDM stimulus that changes the most. In particular, the fact that each of the multiple alternatives receives its evidence simultaneously adds another level of complexity to the problem. This raises certain interesting issues that we will now explore.

A key aspect when modeling decision-making processes is the definition of the inputs to the decision system. One could, for instance, adopt a simplified phenomenological approach whereby the input to each decision integrator linearly increases with the coherence of the motion component to which the integrator is selective.

When considering a RDM, various parameters can be manipulated, and the activity of MT neurons depends on them in different ways. In this task, the activity of MT neurons is commonly regarded (from a modeling perspective) as the most elaborate sensory signal that enters the decisional area LIP. Consequently, it is the signal that has been herein denoted as input to the decisional system.

Of special interest to our discussion are the neurophysiological results, which show that the activity of MT neurons does not linearly depend on the dot density, but, rather, shows a divisive normalization effect. However, such activity is arguably linear with regards to coherence, in RDM visual stimuli with a single coherent component. Moreover, neurophysiological data available for multiple components suggests that the response to the transparent motion of direction-selective neurons in MT can be “approximated by the scaled sum of their responses to the individual motion components” (see, p. 274). On the one hand, this indicates that the linear approximation holds for multiple components. On the other, it implies that one cannot distinguish between two or multiple components if the linear sum of their MT neural activity is the same.

In contrast, based on tests on human participants in a 3AFC version of the RDM task with three coherent motion components, Niwa and Ditterich have provided evidence for a divisive normalization mechanism. In the data of there are three distinct effects that should be accounted for: (1) for the probability of correct responses decreases when the coherence of the two weaker components increases, (2) for the RTs are faster for increasing coherence of the weaker components, and (3) for the RTs are slower for increasing coherence of the weaker components. The authors account for these results using a race model with feed-forward inhibition that receives input from a sensory layer implementing a divisive normalization mechanism.

We note here that, although one could be tempted to seek the origin of such effects in the particular architecture or integration method, the behavior of the model is already shaped by the particular divisive normalization of the input layer in. Indeed, for and increasing coherence of the weaker components, the input to the three integrators increases, speeding up the integration process (this is also true when the divisive normalization is substituted by a linear function). When the input to the integrator associated with the strongest component decreases as a function of the coherence of the weaker components. As a consequence, the first passage time increases. Moreover, the input to the integrators associated with the weaker components increases, thus also increasing their probability to reach the threshold first and lowering, in turn, the probability of correct responses.

Therefore, a closer analysis of the signals obtained in the 3AFC task in when applying a divisive normalization reveals the emergence of a structure which already encodes the decision in the input. In addition, a subsequent work by Ditterich has shown that several distinct architectures can explain these data if provided with the same divisive normalization mechanism in the input stage. However as other mechanisms than a divisive normalization of the MT responses could be responsible for the reported behavioral results (as, for example, an elaboration of the signal in higher cortical areas), we would want to argue that further neurophysiological studies are necessary to establish the response of MT neurons to the type of stimuli employed in multiple-choice decision making for simultaneously competing evidences. Furthermore, one should take into account that qualitatively different behavioral results are obtained across species (human; monkeys). From a modeling perspective, the characterization of the input to the decision system might play a critical role in this regard. In brief, we note here that it is not clear how to treat multiple-component stimuli and that further experimental results are needed to shed more light on this issue.

Other questions arise when considering the choice mechanism in relation to multiple alternatives. By choice mechanism, we mean here the way a commitment to a choice is determined in decision-making models. Historically, DDMs used a threshold to terminate the accumulation process, and this mechanism is compatible with neurophysiological findings in LIP, as was already explained above. And yet, when facing fixed-time experiments, some investigators disregard the threshold and determine the choice based on the sign of the decision variable alone. In ANN models the decision is given by the position of the system in the attractors' landscape. In 2AFC tasks, since the two decision attractors are separated in the 2D space defined by the firing rates of the decision pools, different possible choice mechanisms can be used. The most frequently used is a threshold on the activity of the decision pools (resembling the classical DDM choice mechanism), but a mechanism based on the difference of activity between pools is also sometimes adopted,. When considering multiple alternatives, several functions of the state of the integrators could be used (e.g., difference between the two larger accumulators, between the largest and the mean of the others, etc.). Here again more research is necessary to further constrain the models. The experimental paradigm proposed by Niwa and Ditterich whereby different amounts of evidence can be provided to each of the components seems an ideal candidate to shed some light on this issue. In summary, when considering multiple competing evidences it is important to understand how to extend the models initially developed in the context of 2AFC. In this new scenario, questions such as how to set the decision rules and how to combine the evidences provided by the multiple components acquire special relevance.


The role of spatiotemporal stimulus fluctuations in perceptual decision making

The stochastic behavior that emerges when subjects must make a decision on the basis of uncertain evidence has long puzzled scientists. Much investigation has gone into the mechanisms that underlie the decision-making process when no net evidence for any particular alternative exists (from an experimental point of view see, e.g., and from a theoretical point of view see, e.g.). In this scenario, noise has gained a leading role as a candidate to explain the origin of the stochastic behavior and is, in turn, at the heart of a heated debate in the modeling community.

On the one hand, different theoretical studies, have emphasized the role that noise originating in the nervous system can have in decision making. In these approaches, the importance of a noisy representation internal to brain networks in decision-making processes is prominent and such noise is regarded as the ultimate driving factor of the decision-making process. Indeed, it has been suggested that it is precisely such noise that enables probabilistic transitions between different decision states. The noise is said to originate from the stochastic spiking times of neurons in Poisson-like spike trains in finite size networks. On the other hand, studies rooted in Bayesian theories have pointed out that in complex tasks the main source of behavioral variability is suboptimal inference, while internal noise would only be playing a minor role. It is worth noting that suboptimal inference works as an amplifier of the noise already present in the system and not as a new source of noise. Suboptimal inference arises when noisy information from several sources must be combined, but an optimal selection of the weights has not been achieved. It is in this regard that the two approaches previously discussed are, in fact, complementary. Note that the final variability of the compound response can never be higher than that corresponding to the source with the highest noise. To achieve a complete understanding of the decision-making process these approaches should be considered jointly. In fact, additional sources of neural variability (e.g., variability due to attentional effects or stimulus fluctuations, among others) should also be investigated. Only in this way, both the contribution of each individual source and their joint effect will be fully characterized.

Of special interest to this discussion is the experimental finding that in a RDM 2AFC task, the trial-to-trial variability in MT neuronal responses is correlated to monkey's behavioral performance. To describe such relations, Britten et al. introduced the choice probability (CP) measure. This is defined as the area under the ROC-curve obtained from the distributions of the firing rates of a neuron (or a population of neurons), given the two possible outcomes: correct or error. Together with the conclusion that a certain level of correlation between the responses of MT neurons with similar preferred directions is required to account for the observed CP, this illustrates the importance in perceptual decisions of both variability and correlations in MT neuronal responses. However, this variability might have different origins (e.g., variability emerging at the network level, inherited bottom-up influences such as input fluctuations or suboptimal sensory responses, and top-down modulations).

We will now discuss some of these aspects. More specifically, we will pay special attention to the role of spatiotemporal stimulus fluctuations in perceptual decision making. To this end, we will review previous modeling studies and assess their main implications for our current understanding of the neuronal basis of decision making. A common way to visualize the behavior of a 2AFC ANN model, such as that illustrated in and considered in, is by establishing an analogy with the situation in which a potential energy can be defined. The decision-making process is then treated as the evolution of a particle in an energy landscape. In 2AFC this would lead to a double well potential profile, where a falling particle in the energy landscape represents the decision variable. We suggest that if the input to the network varies in time, the potential energy in the landscape picture can be thought of as being continuously tilted, thus modulating the depth of the wells. Consequently, the profile may eventually become steeper on one side and momentarily bias the decision, in what is known as a biased-competition scenario. For comparison, shows the schema of a DDM receiving a similar fluctuating input. In the DDM the fluctuations of the drift-rate momentarily push the decision variable towards one of the two boundaries, producing a similar effect to the energy landscape modulation. In order to account for the stimulus fluctuations, one should first find a suitable spatiotemporal characterization of such fluctuations, an aspect that will be addressed below.


Encoding the input signals to decision systems

The accurate characterization of neuronal activity from sensory areas in response to the physical stimuli remains a major research issue. This is indeed the case for MT neuronal activity when RDM stimuli are considered. To fully appreciate this aspect, it is worth recalling that trial-to-trial variability in MT neuronal responses were found to correlate with monkey behavioral performance. Thus, a faithful characterization of the MT signal should clearly be sought, in that key aspects of the decision-making processes critically depend on it.

Let us address this issue from the perspective of a phenomenological approach. In particular, let us consider a family of filters that has a long tradition in the motion-perception literature, called the energy motion filters. Some implications derived from their use in decision-making research will be pointed out. The local motion energy associated with visual stimuli moving in opposite directions is calculated by means of two pairs of linear spatiotemporal filters in quadrature. Each pair is responsive for either the coherent motion direction or its opposite direction. Such filters are usually implemented following the seminal work by Adelson and Bergen, whereby each directional filter is defined as the sum of two space-time separable filters whose basic components are Gabor spatial filters and multistage low-pass filters with a small amount of inhibition as temporal filters. The temporal impulse response function (derived to account for human motion perception) is rooted in an early work about the dynamics of photo-receptors. Importantly, these functions define spatiotemporal frequency passband filters that are consistent with the responses observed from MT neurons. In particular, Britten et al. found that the motion energy derived from the filters is modulated by coherence in a similar way to that found in MT cells' responses.

Motion energy has been used to characterize the input to decision-making systems in cases when the temporal evolution of the signal acquired special relevance. It is worth noting that although this family of filters is endowed with a sound biological motivation, one may wonder whether the characterization offered by them is sufficient to capture all aspects of the MT signals that play a relevant role in decision-making processes. Furthermore, it is clear that the parameters of the filters influence the resulting motion energy, but we are still lacking a deep understanding of what the implications are of such changes on predicted behavior. Finally, in order to apply these approaches to the case of multiple targets, a non-trivial extension of the pairs of filters to include further motion directions is required. To the best of our knowledge, this has not been reported in the literature.


The effect of spatiotemporal input fluctuations on perceptual decision making

For any particular coherence level in the RDM discrimination task, the visual stimuli contribute a source of variability. This is due to random spatiotemporal fluctuations that vary from trial to trial, thus potentially increasing the variability of MT neuronal responses. Britten et al., in fact, addressed this issue by recording MT neurons while exact replicates of a given stimulus (i.e., the same spatiotemporal structure of the random dot pattern) were repeatedly shown. These studies found no statistical differences in variance-to-mean ratios (VMR) distributions when comparing responses associated with different (non-replicated) and same (replicated) instantiations of the visual stimuli. Hence, they concluded that the fluctuations in these visual stimuli did not contribute to the variance of the recorded MT neuronal responses. Nonetheless, rather than VMR for the complete duration of the stimulus display (i.e., 2 s), one could also consider the Fano factor (FF) of the underlying random process. Indeed, the FF is the ratio between the variance and the mean of a stochastic, whose value is calculated for different time windows. This point was, in fact, addressed by de la Rocha et al. who found, by re-analyzing Britten et al.'s data, that stimulus fluctuations had a substantial effect on the variance of MT neuronal responses for smaller windows (e.g., 125 ms) in the 0% coherence stimuli. In particular, they found significantly larger FF values for stochastic/non-replicated (FF = 1.35, n = 79) versus replicated stimuli (FF = 1.10, n = 45). In contrast, when the complete duration of the stimulus display was considered (i.e., 2 s), was found in both cases.

From a modeling perspective, Wang had also assessed the effect of small stochastic fluctuations on the decision outcomes. To this end, an ANN model was used. The input to the two decision pools were, in this case, time-dependent, i.e., and. Each (with) represented the rate of the Poisson process that generated the specific spike trains at the discrete steps of 50 ms. Interestingly, one of the conclusions from this study was that no difference could be observed between the cases when (1) equal rates were used as inputs to the network and (2) time-varying rates and drawn from a Gaussian distribution with mean (i.e., same average rate as in the previous case) were used as inputs to the network. Of course, this scenario corresponds to the case when equal evidence is provided to both pools (e.g., 0% coherence).

Indeed, this should be the case when small fluctuations are considered since in both conditions the probability of choosing either direction follows a binomial distribution. Nonetheless, the binomial nature of these processes arises for different reasons. In the first case, both pools have an associated probability of choosing either right or left. In contrast, in the second case, although the spatiotemporal structure and its associated fluctuations could have biased either option, such bias occurs with a probability for either direction. Therefore the process overall shares the same stochastic binomial nature and is indistinguishable from the first case. In order to determine whether the particular spatiotemporal structure of the input has in fact a significant impact on behavioral performance, one must compare the probability distribution associated with a given choice under the two following conditions: stochastic stimuli versus replicated stimuli. Clearly, for sufficiently large fluctuations there should be a difference between the two scenarios since one such large perturbation could effectively drive the system towards a particular choice.

All in all, both de la Rocha et al.'s and our discussion regarding Wang's results suggest that further studies are required to accurately assess the role that small spatiotemporal fluctuations play in perceptual decision making. Note, furthermore, that no other processes such as miniature eye movements or attentional shifts are commonly considered when investigating spatiotemporal fluctuations in the stimuli. However, when dealing with behavioral results, attentional processes are likely to play an important role. Therefore, the final impact of such fluctuations in the decision system might be modulated by attentional processes. Ideally, future experimental results where the concerted action of all these variables (e.g., stimulus fluctuations and attentional mechanisms) are controlled for are likely to shed some light onto this issue. Such experiments would contribute to gain fundamental insights on the effects that different sources of shared variability have in decision making.

A very timely work by Brunton et al. constitutes a first effort to define and conduct experiments that aim at characterizing the possible effect of stimuli microstructure variability on decision making. In their experimental paradigm, subjects are presented with trains of pulses, which can be either auditive or visual, and have to judge whether there were more pulses on the right or on the left. By using a stimulus formed of pulses, they can analyze more precisely the role of stimulus fluctuations and distinguish these fluctuations from noise in the diffusion process. To this end, the authors fit a DDM to their behavioral data. In this fitting, the exact timing of each stimulus pulse is considered. Based on the DDM analysis, the authors can discriminate between stimulus fluctuations (pulses) and diffusion noise. The most relevant observation in their own words is, “The dominant source of variability was thus noise in the evidence associated with each incoming pulse” (p. 96), rather than noise in the diffusion process. This is in contrast to Britten et al.'s data, but in agreement with the results reported in de la Rocha et al.'s, which suggest that stimulus fluctuations could play a significant role in decision making. It is particularly surprising that the authors found a value of the diffusion noise parameter in the DDM indistinguishable from zero in the best fit point. It is, however, possible that their findings are due to the particular paradigm that was used. Note that the stimulus is composed of pulses and strong fluctuations may naturally arise. Whether their results are a general feature of decision-making processes is an interesting issue which deserves further investigation.

To conclude this section, we will briefly recall the possible role that top-down modulations from decisional areas may have on decision making. Interestingly, Nienborg and Cumming have shown that after an initial transient, the CP shows a plateau until the end of the trial. De la Rocha et al. implemented a biologically plausible model accounting for the temporal evolution of the CP shown in. In particular, they introduced a top-down signal from decisional areas into sensory stages. Their results suggest that, to correctly interpret the neurophysiological data, one should take into consideration not only the fluctuations associated with the stimulus but also the fluctuations driven by top-down decisional areas. Top-down modulations of this kind have been demonstrated in multiple experiments, – and theoretically interpreted in the ANN framework by,.


Do different types of spatiotemporal input fluctuations affect decision making in distinctive ways?

Up until now, we have been claiming that spatiotemporal fluctuations in the stimulus may be an important factor in decision making, when this is considered in appropriate time scales. However, an issue that has not received much attention from either the neurophysiological or the modeling perspective is the impact that different types of stimulus fluctuations have on decision making and how to characterize the neuronal responses to them. To illustrate this issue, we will return to RDM discrimination and pose the following two questions: (1) Do different types of RDM implementations lead to different behavioral results? (2) How, from a modeling perspective, do we take these different types of implementations into account?

In what follows, we will discuss two types of RDM instantiations. Firstly, the case of white noise (WN): In the WN instantiation a proportion of points is randomly chosen to move in a direction of motion, i.e., the coherent component. The rest of the dots are randomly relocated within the visual display, thus having a random direction and speed. These dots are the noise component. Secondly, random direction motion (RM) (denoted as Brownian motion in): similar to WN, but the points associated with the noise component show the same speed as those that move coherently. A sketch of the two different types of RDM stimuli is shown in. Interestingly, Pilly and Seitz investigated (from a psychophysical perspective) the ability of human subjects to estimate motion direction in an 8AFC task. In that study, four commonly used RDM implementations (including WN and RM) were considered, and for each implementation some of the parameters defining the RDM visual stimulus were varied. The authors found substantial differences in behavioral performances when certain parameters (e.g., spatial displacement, temporal displacement, or visual contrast) were varied in the various types of stimuli. They related these findings to the spatiotemporal displacement tuning properties of cells in MT. In agreement with the comparative study in a 2AFC task by Scase et al., they reported that subjects discriminated the direction better for RM than WN.

Continuing the previous discussion, which illustrates a prominent role of stimulus fluctuations in guiding behavior, one may wonder whether sensory signals in MT (driven by the different types of RDM stimuli) would also reflect differences that are compatible with the psychophysical results reported in,. To shed more light on this matter we show in the energy motion profiles of the two types of stimuli in a 2AFC, following the implementation by Zylberberg et al..

Although it is beyond the scope of this review to conduct a systematic study to address all of the available results in, and the discrimination task therein used is an 8AFC as opposed to a 2AFC, we would like to pinpoint some inconsistencies that might arise between the experimental results and predictions from current models. In particular, when one compares RDM stimuli with different motion speeds, a large overlap of the energy motion associated with the two directions is found. However, a smaller difference in mean motion energy between the two directions is obtained for the lower speed and RM stimuli. In our illustration, the two velocity of dots considered are and. In both cases the stimuli show a motion coherence in a single component. This might therefore suggest that, at least for these speeds, RM stimuli leads to inferior performances than WN stimuli, something which is in contradiction with the available results,. Moreover, Pilly and Seitz show in one of their experiments that the increase in dot velocity from to (both in high and low contrast displays) leads to an improvement of motion direction discrimination for WN, but not for RM. However, the energy motion profiles (compare to) suggest that both algorithms may benefit from such an increase, as can be derived from an improved separability of the motion energy distributions when the velocity of dots is increased.

As we have previously pointed out, we still lack a deep understanding of how varying the filter parameters (while still conforming to the constraints posed by psychophysical investigations) could influence the resulting motion energy. In this study, motion filters were not intended to function as a complete model of MT activity but only as a first step to characterize the spatiotemporal variability associated with different types of RDM stimuli. The previous discussion suggests that further neurophysiological data considering different types of stimuli would surely shed more light on the suitability of the energy motion filters to characterize MT activity.


Final Remarks

In this article we have reviewed some of the recent progress made in decision-making research. We deliberately restricted its focus by adopting a computational perspective and have only discussed those studies that investigate the neural basis of decision making. We have critically reviewed both neurophysiological and modeling literature with the purpose of trying to determine the role that the spatiotemporal structure of stimuli has in perceptual decision making. This has allowed us to pinpoint a number of important issues that thus far remain open. Furthermore, we have also raised certain other questions pertinent to the understanding of the mechanisms that underlie the decision-making process. In particular, special attention has gone to the following three issues: (1) the types of responses that are found in sensory areas, when stimuli with multiple competing evidences are taken into consideration (i.e., divisive normalization versus linear summation of independent components), and the new challenges this poses for modeling; (2) the role that fluctuations in the stimulus play as sources of uncertainty within decision making; and (3) the effect on perceptual decisions of different types of noise in the stimulus and how this is treated by certain commonly used phenomenological models.

We have illustrated these aspects by taking examples from visual perception, and more specifically, the RDM discrimination task. The reasons for this were manifold. Firstly, there is a large body of literature that deals with this task. The amount of this literature can only be rivaled by that available on the vibro-tactile frequency discrimination task. However, the vibro-tactile frequency discrimination task generally ignores the spatial dimension inherent to RDM visual stimuli. Moreover, several neurophysiological studies, that use RDM stimuli to investigate the role of stimulus fluctuations in decision making exist, and this was an aspect central to our approach. Secondly, for the task used in the literature concerning somatosensory studies in order to make a decision in the vibro-tactile task, the brain must compare two frequencies (i.e., with). This comparison can only occur after has been applied. Thus, information about must be held in working memory. This participation of the working memory adds a further complexity to the modeling task. As, however, this element is something that is not shared by other tasks, we have preferred to keep our focus on more elementary aspects.

Nevertheless, we would like to argue that the issues raised in this article may be extended to other sensory modalities. As discussed earlier, Brunton et al. have recently presented research where the role of stimulus fluctuations is assessed in both the auditory and the visual sensory modalities. An extension of their experiments may be easily imagined to include multiple competing evidences (e.g., by presenting trains of pulses coming from multiple directions). Moreover, the vibro-tactile frequency discrimination task could be revisited in a way that complemented the results reported there. Specifically, the periodicity of the signals and could be slightly broken (i.e., by not keeping the same time interval between two consecutive touches of the fingertip) while maintaining the same overall frequencies. With the advent of these and future experimental results, the influence of the spatiotemporal structure of noisy stimuli in decision making will be further clarified, and with it, our understanding of the mechanisms that underlie the decision-making process.

In this work the neurophysiological data that has been mostly selected and described is that obtained from single-cell recordings in perceptual decision-making experiments. This imposes a particular level of description for our system, which has, in turn, been characterized from different perspectives, i.e., those provided by the various models. Indeed, an effort has been made to critically read the models and their associated interpretations. Our objective has been 2-fold. On the one hand, we have intended to identify those modeling aspects that remain underconstrained and we have pointed out how new experiments might help to better constrain them. On the other hand, we have also aimed to propose specific ways in which the current models could be used to generate new predictions that should be subsequently experimentally tested. It is with this perspective that we want to conclude, i.e., by highlighting the importance of the synergistic interplay between experimental and theoretical work. An excellent example of this joined effort is illustrated by Churchland et al.. The cooperation evidenced by this study can be summarized in three steps. First, experimental data are used to guide and constrain the alternative models. Then those models, which explain equally well the experimental data, are further analyzed to generate predictions that are both testable and crucially different for the various models. This thus allows for the discrimination among the different alternative models. This approach goes beyond the selection criterion of choosing the simplest model. Indeed, as described in, the parsimony principle might not be the best way to choose among alternative models when it comes to the biological sciences. What we are recalling here is nothing other than the idea of the virtuous loop, “experiment-model-experiment.”


Funding Statement

AI acknowledges funding from the SUR, DEC of the Generalitat de Catalunya and FSE. LDM is a Ramon y Cajal Fellow and acknowledges funding from the Ministry of Science and Innovation through the Ramon y Cajal programme. She also acknowledges financial support from the research project TIN2010-21771-C02-02 funded by the Ministry of Science and Innovation. MP was supported by the CONSOLIDER-INGENIO 2010 Program CSD2007-00012. GD was supported by the ERC Advanced Grant: DYSTRUCTURE (n. 295129), by the Spanish Research Project SAF2010-16085 and by the CONSOLIDER-INGENIO 2010 Program CSD2007-00012, and the FP7-ICT BrainScales and Coronet. RR was supported by grants from the Dirección de Personal Académico de la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México and the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología. The funders had no role in the preparation of the manuscript.


From perceptual to language-mediated categorization

Gert Westermann, Denis Mareschal — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2014. PMC3866421, CC BY 3.0.

From at least two months onwards, infants can form perceptual categories. During the first year of life, object knowledge develops from the ability to represent individual object features to representing correlations between attributes and to integrate information from different sources. At the end of the first year, these representations are shaped by labels, opening the way to conceptual knowledge. Here, we review the development of object knowledge and object categorization over the first year of life. We then present an artificial neural network model that models the transition from early perceptual categorization to categories mediated by labels. The model informs a current debate on the role of labels in object categorization by suggesting that although labels do not act as object features they nevertheless affect perceived similarity of perceptually distinct objects sharing the same label. The model presents the first step of an integrated account from early perceptual categorization to language-based concept learning.


Introduction

During their first 2 years of life, infants move from the vast array of seemingly disconnected sensory experiences towards a sophisticated knowledge of objects, people and events, including the ability to group perceptually different objects into common categories, and to understand and produce the names for many of them. Two closely related areas of research have addressed infants’ developing knowledge about individual objects, and the ability to form object categories, respectively. Research on object knowledge has investigated the progressive increase in the complexity of infants’ representation of objects, for example the developing ability to encode correlations between object features, and the ability to link information from different sensory domains. Work on object categorization has asked how infants group perceptually distinct objects together and how the basis for these categories changes across development.

Research on early word learning has likewise proceeded along separate strands. One strand, usually concerned with infants and toddlers from 14 months of age, has focused on when and how words are learned, how they are linked to objects, how they are used and extended to novel objects and how knowledge of a label affects children's inferences about an object's hidden properties. A second strand, usually focusing on younger infants around 10–12 months of age, addresses the question of how labels affect infants’ categorization of objects that share the same label or that are labelled differently.

A coherent account of early semantic development should encompass all of these research fields. Furthermore, it is important to acknowledge that, while many studies test infants’ abilities to acquire object knowledge in laboratory-based experimental settings, the knowledge shown by infants in such settings arises from an interaction between what was learned in the laboratory and prior knowledge acquired outside the laboratory. In this paper, we aim to present a first step towards an integrated account of semantic development in the form of a computer model that accounts for phenomena in early prelinguistic categorization as well as for the role of word learning on category structures. Computational models are useful tools for developing and testing hypotheses of the mechanisms underlying development and for linking individual observations of developmental abilities into a coherent trajectory of developmental change.

In the rest of this paper, we first review the development of object knowledge and categorization, characterizing both as shaped by a progressive development in the ability to integrate aspects of information leading to the enrichment of category representations. In the second part of the paper, we then present a computational model that has previously been used to account for apparently contradictory results in early object categorization, and we enhance it to account for the transition from prelinguistic to language-mediated object categorization.


The development of object categorization

The ability to categorize lies at the heart of semantic development. Knowledge of categories not only carves up the world in meaningful ways, but it also enables us to infer and predict properties of newly encountered objects. For example, by possessing the category ‘dog’ and being able to recognize a never before seen animal as a member of this category, we know to expect that it makes barking sounds, chases after cars and may come to lick our hand while wagging its tail. We are also able to name this new animal as ‘dog’.

Given its importance for cognition as a whole, over the past 30 years a considerable amount of research has been devoted to the development of categorization in infancy. Much of this work is based on the familiarization/novelty-preference procedure that examines infants’ abilities to rapidly form categories in laboratory-based settings. This method relies on the fact that infants tend to spend more time looking towards novel than towards familiar stimuli. In a typical categorization study, infants are familiarized to a sequence of objects from a single category and are then tested with two new objects, one from the familiarized category and one from a different category. When infants show a looking preference to the object from the new category it can be concluded that during familiarization they have formed a category that includes the new within-category object but excludes the object from the different category. For example, in a seminal study that examined the earliest perceptual categories, Quinn et al. familiarized three- to four-month-old infants on a sequence of cat pictures and found that in the test phase they looked longer at pictures of dogs, horses and humans than at pictures of novel cats. This and related work has shown that infants as young as two months can form perceptual categories for many objects at both the basic (e.g. dogs, cats, chairs, couches) and global levels (e.g. animals, vehicles, furniture), although global-level categories typically precede basic-level categories when compared directly.

Subsequent work has verified that the way in which these early categories are formed is contingent on the specific perceptual properties of the stimuli and even on the order in which they are presented during familiarization. It has also become clear that previous experience interacts with the stimuli presented during testing in the laboratory. For example, Kovack-Lesh et al. found that four-month-olds’ category formation for cats and dogs was affected by whether they had these pets at home or not.

Other work has shown that infants extract information about category prototypes from the images used during familiarization. For example, when trained on distorted triangles three- to four-month-old infants subsequently treated a prototypical triangle as more familiar than previously seen atypical triangles. For more complex shapes only seven-month-olds showed the same effect. However, the higher familiarity of a prototype after familiarization exists in parallel with item memory for atypical category members.

With increased age, infants’ ability to process objects becomes progressively more sophisticated, with a developing sensitivity to the correlations between object features between seven and 10 months of age. For example, Younger & Cohen familiarized infants on two animal line drawings where each animal had a characteristic body shape, tail and feet. Infants were then tested on a previously seen animal, a completely novel animal and an animal that was composed of a novel combination of previously seen features (e.g. the body and feet of the first animal with the tail of the second animal). Younger and Cohen found that four-month-old infants did not look longer at this animal than at one they had seen during familiarization. By contrast, seven-month-olds looked at this new animal as long as at the animal made from completely novel features. When only two out of the three features were correlated, only 10-month-olds were sensitive to violations of feature correlations, suggesting a progressively developing sensitivity to feature correlations.

From the second half of their first year of life, infants become able to integrate different object features such as visual appearance, sounds, function and motion. For example, although infants are sensitive to biological motion information from birth and three-month-olds can discriminate familiar and novel motion paths even after a delay of one month, the ability to link motion information with static visual features seems to arise later in development. In fact, in one study, object movement was found to interfere with infants’ learning of shape–colour compounds up to the age of 10 months. More global features indicating animacy such as eyes and fur, on the other hand, were linked to animate-like motion in seven-month-old infants, perhaps indicating that real-world experiences with a richer stimulus set enables learning of such associations earlier than found in the laboratory.

In a study by Madole et al. on object function, 14-month-olds were sensitive to an object's change in function, but only by 18 months were infants able to link function with an object's static visual features. However, in other studies 11- to 12-month-olds already detected the functional relevance of object parts and categorized objects based on these parts when the function had been demonstrated to them, again providing evidence for a developing ability to integrate different aspects of an object and an earlier development of this ability under more ecologically valid conditions. In a related study, it was found that 10-month-olds were able to learn the relationship between an object's visual appearance and its function, but not between visual appearance and sound or between function and sound.

In a recent study investigating infants’ ability to learn complex crossmodal associations, Chen & Westermann familiarized 10- and 12-month-old infants on two animated cartoon animals, each of which produced a characteristic unfamiliar sound. At test, both animals were shown side-by-side and one of the sounds was played. Twelve-month-olds, but not 10-month-olds, looked longer at the animal associated with the played sound, indicating that the ability to rapidly link novel objects and semantically meaningful sounds arises around 12 months of age.

Together, the described work suggests an unfolding ability of infants to learn about different aspects of objects and associate different static and dynamic features to form a complete object representation. In this way, categories in infancy are based on progressively enriched representations that integrate information from multiple sources, starting with the ability to represent individual object properties and followed by the ability to integrate these properties to form more complex representations and to detect correlations between features in one or across several sensory domains.


Word learning and categorization

In the second half of their first year, infants begin to learn their first words. From six months onwards, they look at the referent for some familiar nouns when spoken by their parent, and there is neurophysiological evidence that this understanding is referential by nine months of age. In laboratory studies, infants from 13 months onwards can learn to associate novel labels with novel objects after a few familiarization trials. A number of studies have asked how this emerging language affects category formation. There has been considerable debate on how early word and category learning interact. Early work by Waxman & co-workers argued that labels act as ‘invitations to form categories’ by highlighting the common features of objects sharing a label. In several studies, infants from six to 15 months of age were familiarized on one category (e.g. dinosaurs) while either hearing a labelling phrase (‘Look, it's a toma!’), a non-labelling phrase (‘Look at this!’) or a tone sequence. At test, only infants who had heard the labelling phrase looked longer at an out-of-category item (e.g. a fish) than at a novel within-category item. However, since other studies described above had found that infants can already form perceptual categories when viewing objects in silence, it is unclear what additional role the labels played in these studies. An alternative account of these results was therefore provided by Robinson & Sloutsky, who argued that auditory information interferes with the processing of visual information but that familiar sounds such as labels disrupted visual processing less than unfamiliar sounds such as tone sequences. Nevertheless, more recent work involving a silent control condition has shown that labels can indeed override visual similarities and re-shape categories to correspond to how objects are labelled. In one study, 10-month-old infants were familiarized on a continuum of eight morphed cartoon animals. Looking times at test revealed that when the stimuli were presented in silence or with a single common label, infants formed a large category comprising all eight stimuli. However, when half of the animals were labelled with one name and the other half with another, infants separated the animals into two categories according to the labels.

There has also been substantial debate over how labels affect perceived similarity in development, linked to the role that labels play in object categorization. One view holds that labels from early on act as category markers that stand as a placeholder for a concept and enable language-based inference of deeper conceptual structure. A different view argues that early labels are merely another object feature in line with, for example, visual perceptual properties, and that shared labels contribute to the overall similarity between objects with the same (or indeed, similar) labels. These two views make contrasting predictions about the interactions between visual properties and labels: according to the label-as-feature view, but not the label-as-category-marker view, shared labels should affect similarity judgements between items.

Circumstantial evidence for the label-as-feature view comes from a series of studies by Sloutsky and co-workers, but see. For example, Sloutsky & Fisher presented 4- to 5-year-old children (much older than the infants discussed so far) with picture triads containing a target item and two test options (A and B). Test option A was perceptually more similar to the target than option B. However, when target and test option B shared a label, the children judged B as more similar to the target than A.

In sum, it has become clear that labels can affect early categories by aligning category boundaries with shared labels. It also seems to be the case that shared labels affect perceived similarity of objects. However, whether labels act on the same level as visual object features or whether they are separate from visual features and act on perceptual object representations as a whole is an unresolved question.


A dual-memory model of infant categorization

As described above, many studies using the familiarization/novelty-preference procedure have found that infants can form perceptual categories at least from two months of age, and that the level of categories—basic or global—is dependent on the similarity between the specific stimuli. However, other methods that do not involve familiarization but instead assess spontaneous categorization to tap into infants’ background knowledge have often yielded quite different results. For example, in the sequential touching paradigm, a set of toy objects from different categories is placed in front of the infant. The order in which the infant touches the toys is recorded, and above-chance touching of objects from one category is taken as evidence that the infant has categorized the objects. Using this procedure, it was found that 12- to 20-month-olds formed categories on the global level, and that basic-level distinctions within a global category were not made before 20 or even 30 months of age. Similar results were found using the generalized imitation technique. In this method, a certain action is modelled for the infant with a toy figure, for example, giving a dog a cup of liquid to drink. Infants are then asked to perform the same action with different toys, such as another dog, a cat or a plane. Categorization is assessed by the new toys to which the infant is extending the modelled action. It was found that 14-month-olds successfully generalized the actions to members of the same category (animals or vehicles). These results were taken as evidence that categorization is not tied to perceptual properties of objects but that it is based on conceptual knowledge and that infants generalized the modelled action to members of the same category (e.g. for a dog, another dog or a cat), rather than of the same appearance.

Given the different results from familiarization-based and non-familiarization-based studies, there has been intense debate on whether deeper concepts arise from perceptual categories through a process of enrichment, or whether perceptual categorization and concept learning are separate processes or indeed, whether early perceptual processes are already based on conceptual object analysis. We presented a connectionist neural network model of infant categorization that aimed to integrate the different results from looking-time and sequential-touching/generalized-imitation-type studies. The model was based on the idea that a coherent account of this body of work could be provided by considering the unfolding interactions between two developing memory systems in the brain. In the adult literature, the view that memory formation and consolidation depend on multiple interacting neural systems is widely accepted. One influential idea is that whereas the hippocampus is responsible for rapidly acquiring new memories, cortical networks learn slowly and extract regularities from the environment. Our model was inspired by this distinction between hippocampal and cortical processing. Furthermore, it was based on the developmental literature which suggests that novelty preferences observed in infant looking-time studies are driven by the hippocampal memory system, whereas categorization behaviour displayed in imitation and object examination studies depends on a later-maturing memory network that involves inferior temporal regions. The fact that different experimental methods tap into different memory representations can explain why the results in infant categorization depend on the methodology used.

Consequently, the model consisted of two interacting components: a fast-learning hippocampal/striatal system and a slower learning cortical system. Each component consisted of an auto-encoder neural network: a three-layer network that receives the representation of an object as input and that learns to recreate the input on the output side. Because the hidden layer is smaller than input and output layers this creates a bottleneck, forcing the network to extract regularities from the input to solve this task. Single auto-encoder models have previously been used to model looking-time data in infant categorization.

In the dual-memory model (see appendix A for implementation details) the hippocampal system was used to simulate looking times in experimental situations where categories are formed online in a familiarization/novelty-preference study. The cortical component modelled the gradual development of representations that drive non-familiarization-based responses. The two systems differed only in their learning rate, that is, the rate at which weights were adapted in response to exposure to objects, with the hippocampal system adapting its connection weights at a higher rate than the cortical system. Interactions between the components were modelled by connections between the subsystems’ hidden layers. Together these architectural constraints embody a minimal set of assumptions about how the dual-memory systems can interact.

The model was trained in two ways. In background training objects were randomly presented to the model for random amounts of time. This training aimed to simulate infants’ experiences with objects in the real world. Modelling of category formation in familiarization studies was achieved through familiarization training where sequences of related stimuli were presented for fixed amounts of time. Looking times were modelled by the output of the hippocampal component: the more different the output was from the input, the longer the looking time at the stimulus. Developing cortical representations were modelled by the activation patterns in the hidden layer of the cortical system.

The model was able to account for a range of results from infant category learning: in its cortical component, it learned perceptual categories that became progressively differentiated with increased exposure to exemplars, showing the global-to-basic shift that is also found in infant categories. The model could further account for the fact that background experience affects infants’ looking behaviour in an experimental setting. This was because previously learned representations in the cortical system facilitated online category learning of related items in the hippocampal component through feedback connections. More recently, we used the output of the cortical system to model infant event-related potential (ERP) data in early object categorization.

In sum, the model covered a range of phenomena from early, prelinguistic object categorization, accounting for data from different experimental paradigms and data from behavioural and neurophysiological studies. Here, we want to extend this model to simulate the shift from prelinguistic to language-mediated categorization.

The extended model had the same architecture as the original one, but in order to model the transition from prelinguistic perceptual categorization to language-mediated categorization we extended the model with task/label units linked to the hidden layer of the cortical memory system. The idea here was that these units could potentially encode a variety of functions and object properties that go beyond perceptual feature information, such as representing affordances and specific ways of interacting with an object or knowledge of an object's hidden properties. Because we aimed to model the role of first words in object categorization here these units were used to encode object labels both at the basic and global levels of categorization.


Stimuli

In order to model the development of basic- and global-level categories under varying labelling conditions, eight photographs each of objects from 26 basic-level categories were chosen. The basic-level object categories were (human) male, (human) female, dog, cat, rabbit, horse, elephant, giraffe, cow, squirrel, fish, eagle, songbird, duck, bicycle, forklift, bus, car, plane, ship, desk, table, bed, sofa, chest of drawers and chair. They fell into the four global-level categories humans, animals, vehicles and furniture that have all been previously used to test infant category formation. Exemplars varied in their within-category perceptual similarities (see appendix A).

Each of the 208 objects was represented by 18 general (geometric) and object-specific (facial) features: maximal height, minimal height, maximal width, minimal width of base, number of protrusions, maximal length/width of left, right, lower and upper protrusion, minimal width of lower protrusion, texture, eye separation, face length and face width. Feature values were scaled between 0 and 1. For each basic-level category, a prototypical object (not included in the training set) was created by averaging the feature values of all of its members.

In order to simulate an infant's general experience with the world, objects were presented in background training to the model in random order for random exposure lengths (between 1 and 1000 epochs). In simulations that explored the effect of labelling, each object had a 50% chance of being labelled, either with a global-level or a basic-level label (depending on the simulation). In these cases, the object label was presented on the task layer and connections from the hidden layer to the task layer were updated. Thereby, through training, the labels led to adjustment of the connections from the hidden to the task units. When no label was presented these connections were not updated. In the simulations reported here, each object label was represented by a single unit on the task layer. Training the model on an object proceeded as follows (for details, see appendix A): the object was presented to the input layer and activation propagated to the hidden layers. Activation then flowed between the hidden layers until they settled in a stable state. Next, hidden activations flowed to the output and, if applicable, task layers. Output values were compared with target values (the input values for the output layers and the correct label for the task layer) and all weights were updated using the backpropagation rule. Weights were updated at each presentation of an object (online learning).


Results


Modelling the effects of labels on object representations

The first simulation explored the effect on object representations when labelling objects with their global-level label (human, vehicle, animal, furniture). shows the hidden representations in the cortical system without (a) and with (b) labelling of global categories. This is a projection of the activation patterns for each category prototype of the 15 hidden units onto two dimensions using principal component analysis. When the objects were not labelled, the representations clustered on the basis of the objects’ perceptual similarities that sometimes corresponded to global-level categories: a cluster for mammals comprised cats, dogs, cows, elephants, horses and rabbits; a furniture cluster contained tables, desks, chairs and chests of drawers; fishes were distant from other objects but were closest to the mammals cluster. Idiosyncratic clusters such as that of plane, bicycle and eagle can be explained by the perceptual properties of these objects: in this case, each had two long, thin protrusions, wings and handlebars.

When the objects were labelled with their global-level category name (human, animal, vehicle, furniture), the internal object representations in the model were modified to separate clearly along these categories. Learning the objects’ global-level labels therefore warped the cortical representational space to reflect both perceptual similarity and the membership in different global categories. (Note that we used global-level names here for illustrative purposes to show the separation into global-level categories; infants are more likely to hear basic-level than global-level names.)

This initial result models an interaction between perceptual and language-mediated categorization: labels act on the perceptual similarity structure and warp the similarity space so that it corresponds to the labelled categories while still maintaining internal category structure. The model therefore predicts that objects sharing the same label will develop more similar representations, and thus, also be perceived as more similar. Although this result has received empirical backing our model offers a different explanation to the one in the literature. As described above, a long-standing debate on this issue has yielded two conflicting accounts: according to the label-as-feature hypothesis, a category name is merely another object feature on the same level as visual perceptual features. On this view, common labels affect the perception of overall similarity between members of a category because a shared label-feature increases the overlap between their representations. By contrast, the knowledge-based view of labels maintains that labels act as markers for objects and do not affect perceived similarity. In attaching the label on the output side of the model, the model presented here takes a middle ground between these two accounts. Here, the label is not merely a feature of the same kind as, for example, geometric extent of the object (as it is not an additional input feature). Instead the model learns a mapping between the perceptual features and the label. In this sense, the label is a concept marker and each of the members of the category evoke the label (see for evidence that infants implicitly name visually fixated objects). However, differing from the knowledge-based approach, the model suggests that, to achieve this mapping, the perceptual representations of the objects are nevertheless modified and the perceptual space is warped as a consequence. Therefore, objects sharing the same label do not become more similar by virtue of merely sharing another common input feature, but because perceptual representations must be re-structured in a way that allows for the mapping between perceptual features and labels to be learned. This re-representation results in a nonlinear warping of the visual similarity space that maintains to some degree the topological relationship between the appearances of objects but reduces intra-category distance by moving objects closer to the category prototype.


Effect of word knowledge on object familiarization

In, we showed that, in agreement with empirical research, the model predicted faster familiarization for objects with which infants have had prior experience. Here, we investigated whether the model also predicts that knowledge of the label for a category facilitates familiarization over and above prior experience with the objects. For such background knowledge to have an effect on familiarization time, representations from the cortical component have to interact with the hippocampal representations when familiarization stimuli are presented. Depending on the developed structure of cortical representations, these could affect hippocampal processing in different ways.

We trained three models in different environments. The first model was not given experience with any background knowledge. The second model, replicating the results reported in, was trained on all objects from the 26 categories, but only two of the eight rabbits were used, and no object was labelled. The third model was trained like the second, but this time there was a 50% chance for each object to be labelled with its basic-level name. After training these models for 4000 object presentations, they were familiarized on the remaining six rabbits. This was done by presenting each of the rabbits to the model repeatedly until the output error of the hippocampal system fell below criterion. The results of these simulations are shown in.

Replicating the result from, familiarization time to the rabbit category was significantly shorter when the model had previous experience with objects (including other rabbits) than when it did not. Importantly however, when the previously experienced objects were labelled familiarization time was again significantly shorter than when they were merely presented without labels. This result predicts that infants will familiarize faster to novel exemplars of familiar objects for which they know the label than to those that are familiar but for which the label is not known. To our knowledge, this has so far not been tested with infants.


Discussion

In this paper, we first reviewed evidence of infant category development as a process that is driven by infants’ emerging abilities to integrate information about objects such as feature correlations, dynamic and animacy cues, sounds and labels. We then extended an artificial neural network model that had previously been used to simulate prelingusitic category learning to model the effect of labels on categorization. The model suggested that labels warp the visual representational space so that objects from the same category are represented as more similar to each other. The model further predicts that through the interaction between cortical and hippocampal memory systems, knowing the label for a familiar object will speed up familiarization to other exemplars of this object category in looking-time tasks compared with a familiar object for which the label is not known.

The model makes a number of contributions. First, it provides a new perspective on the debate surrounding whether labels act as object features or as category placeholders. Although in the model shared labels increase the similarity between objects, which has been a prediction of the label-as-feature view, in the model the label is not a feature but acts more like a category marker. The model, which implements the view of category learning as a continuous process based on the progressive enrichment of object representations, therefore suggests how labels as category markers, which have in experimental studies been found to affect category formation, can interact with and reorganize prelinguistic representations.

Second, the model offers an integrated view of prelinguistic categorization, where it has accounted for looking time data from infant studies and the global-to-basic shift, and the effect of labels on categorization, where it simulates results showing that labels can shape category structure and that a common label makes objects appear more similar.

Several related models have addressed early categorization and word learning. For example, a recent connectionist model of word learning consisted of two maps, one visual and one for labels, and learning label-object mappings was achieved by linking units between the maps. Although the model was able to account for phenomena from word learning such as taxonomic responding, a vocabulary spurt and overextensions, it had to make a number of assumptions that are in contrast to empirical evidence. The model required that both word and visual maps were fully established before mappings between them could be formed, and the associations did not affect the representations on each map. It is, however, unlikely that infants have achieved a considerable vocabulary prior to linking any words to objects. Furthermore, as described above, there is considerable evidence that mappings between objects and labels affect their representations. This model therefore accounted neither for prelinguistic categorization nor for the effect of labels on categories.

A related model took the opposite label-as-feature approach so that visual features and labels together fed into a common category map. This model was successful in accounting for data from the effect of labels on category formation, but the dual-memory model goes beyond that model in that it can additionally account for looking-time data in prelinguistic categorization as well as for the global-to-basic shift in non-familiarization-based categorization studies.

Our model is perhaps most closely related to that of Rogers & McClelland. This model maps between objects and their perceptual and non-obvious properties. When being trained on objects from multiple global- and basic-level categories, the model showed a global-to-basic shift in category differentiation as well as aspects of word learning such as label overextensions. However, their model focused on learning in what in our model is the cortical component and it did not attempt to provide an integrated account of real-world learning and online learning in looking-time tasks. Instead it focused on those categorization studies that do not involve familiarization. The model therefore could not account for effects of labels on category structures found in the described laboratory-based studies. In contrast to our model, however, this model accounted for several aspects of adult categorization and of semantic dementia.

Clearly, these models are complementary in the phenomena they address, and an integrated model should account for different aspects of acquisition together with normal and impaired adult performance (for a related point). Furthermore, following a neuroconstructivist approach that views typical and atypical development within the same framework, a comprehensive model should also aim to account for categorization in children with developmental disorders. Studies on different disorders suggest that the early processes described in this paper might be disrupted, leading to cascading deficits that manifest later in life. For example, one study with 4- to 6-year-old children with Williams syndrome (WS) found that these children were able to categorize objects based on similarity, but they were unable to categorize on the basis of shared labels, despite having developed large vocabularies. This deficit to use verbal labels as category markers might itself be a downstream consequence of WS children's difficulty in planning visual saccades and thus, triadic interactions. In WS, therefore, at least the saliency of the inputs to our model would be altered to reduce the ability to link object representations with labels.

Evidence for atypical categorization and word learning has also been found in studies with children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Children and adults with ASD respond more slowly to atypical category members in categorization tasks than healthy controls do. Furthermore, individuals with ASD may have difficulty in forming prototypes when shown varying exemplars from a category, an ability that is already evident in typically developing three-month-olds. These results suggest a perceptual processing deficit that goes beyond attending to stimuli differently. In our model, categorization and prototype formation are automatic processes that arise from the type of learning in connectionist models. A model of categorization in autism would therefore need to modify the central aspects of information processing in the model. Several accounts of the observed perceptual deficits in ASD that rely on abnormal neural processing have been put forward that could beneficially be explored in extensions of the current model.

Finally, children with word-finding difficulties (WFD) present an interesting case to the model. These children have dissociations between word comprehension and production, with more difficulty in production compared with age-matched peers. There is a debate over whether the core deficit in WFD is a semantic one (such as weak links between semantically related concepts) or a phonological one (such as impoverished phonological representations). In our model, there are multiple loci where impairment could be simulated: sematic deficits can arise from imprecise featural object descriptions as input to the model or from impaired semantic processing, for example, through noisy connections in the network. The most direct simulation of WFD without semantic deficits would consist in damaging connections between the cortical hidden layer and the task/label units. The challenge is to build a developmental model that can provide insights into whether damage to the different parts of the model leads to performance deficits that are comparable to those in WFD.

Our model as presented here is only the first step of an integrated view of category and concept development. We have focused on early categorization from two months to around 2 years of age. However, in the transition from categorization to concept formation, labels can take a role above merely re-shaping perceptual categories. Many studies have shown that labels can serve as the basis for inferences about an object's non-obvious properties where they can override perceptual similarities. Furthermore, recent priming studies have shown that at least from 18 months onwards there are close links between category representations and the phonological representations of their labels, as well as semantic representations and labels. We do not believe that our model is incompatible with this research and we plan to extend it in this direction to provide a comprehensive account from early categorization to concept formation.


Funding statement

G.W. was supported by ESRC grant RES-000-22-4470 and by a Lichtenberg Fellowship from the University of Göttingen, Germany. D.M. was supported in part by a Royal Society-Wolfson research merit award.


Sources of variation in developmental language disorders: evidence from eye-tracking studies of sentence production

Courtenay Frazier Norbury — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2014. PMC3866423, CC BY 3.0.

Skilled sentence production involves distinct stages of message conceptualization (deciding what to talk about) and message formulation (deciding how to talk about it). Eye-movement paradigms provide a mechanism for observing how speakers accomplish these aspects of production in real time. These methods have recently been applied to children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and specific language impairment (LI) in an effort to reveal qualitative differences between groups in sentence production processes. Findings support a multiple-deficit account in which language production is influenced not only by lexical and syntactic constraints, but also by variation in attention control, inhibition and social competence. Thus, children with ASD are especially vulnerable to atypical patterns of visual inspection and verbal utterance. The potential to influence attentional focus and prime appropriate language structures are considered as a mechanism for facilitating language adaptation and learning.


Introduction

Speaking in sentences is a momentous developmental milestone that marks the beginning of a child's ability to communicate an infinite array of ideas, feelings and experiences, past and present, real or imagined, to other people. Intuitively, this seems an effortless development for most children, yet producing a fluent and meaningful utterance is a complex process. Models of skilled, adult sentence production outline at least three key processes: conceptualization, formulation and articulation. Conceptualization is the stage at which speakers decide on the message to be conveyed. Formulation requires that speakers map that intended message onto word forms (lexicalization) and particular word orders (syntactic planning). Finally, the speaker must plan and make the motor movements necessary to articulate the message. The vast majority of children will begin to master this complex process in the preschool years. For those with neurodevelopmental disorders, however, language production may present lifelong challenges. Until recently though, we have known little about where in the processing chain language breaks down and how identifying points of difficulty may inform potential intervention strategies.

Traditionally, psychologists and linguistics have had to rely on the product of this processing chain to infer the prerequisites needed at each stage for successful production. What skilled speakers say, and importantly the timing of production elements and the errors that speakers make, have provided insights into processing mechanisms and informed computational models of how meaning is translated into the syntax of a particular language. Such models have also made inroads into our understanding of how children become competent syntactic speakers. These models highlight the importance of experience-dependent and error-based learning mechanisms that are shaped by the innate (neural) architecture of the developing system. For most young children, experience is socially mediated; children learn from their interactions with caregivers and very quickly can adapt their language production to their listening audience. Thus, typical children become competent speakers by evaluating their actual or intended outputs against expectations derived from linguistic input and the social conventions shared by interlocutors.

What speakers say, however, will only take us so far. Analysing speech output tells us relatively little about the process of conceptualization, for instance, how do people decide what to talk about and how do children learn to create utterances that are relevant to context and to listener need? How is the form of the intended message constrained by individual differences in the developing system, by for instance, limited vocabulary or reduced memory capacity? This question assumes particular relevance when considering language development in atypical populations; similar output may arise from qualitatively different underlying processing mechanisms. Recent advances in eye-tracking technology may elucidate these processes in new ways, by taking advantage of the fact that eye-movements are temporally linked to verbal output, and thus can reveal more about the processes involved in conceptualization, formulation and articulation of utterances, as they occur. This paper therefore considers the application of eye-tracking paradigms to investigate language production in two common neurodevelopmental disorders, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and developmental language impairment (LI). The goal of the research programme is to elucidate any qualitative differences between these two populations in the conceptualization and formulation of sentences. The work builds extensively on adult models of sentence processing, but yields novel insights into the multiple factors that contribute to language development and disorder. The paper begins by considering what is known from previous eye-tracking studies about language production processes in skilled adult speakers and young typically developing speakers. Then, language production in ASD and LI and the potential advantages of using eye-movements to reveal continuities and discontinuities in the language processing of these populations is discussed. Finally, four case studies of eye-movements and language production in children with typical development (TD), ASD and LI are provided, highlighting possible sources of language breakdown and hinting at future intervention strategies.


Eye-tracking as a window on the ‘process’ of language production

Consider the image in, taken from a well-known children's picture book, Frog, Where Are You?. There are numerous ways to describe this scene, among them: (1) The boy and the dog are looking at the pet frog.(2) There is a frog in a jar and the boy is smiling at him.(3) The boy is sitting with his pets.

Extensive research using this book to elicit narratives from children and adults across a range of language communities has shown that the vast majority of speakers begin their story with reference to the boy and one or both of the animals. However, a study of narrative production in children with developmental disorders produced some more unusual opening gambits, the most memorable one from a nine-year-old boy with ASD who started his story with, ‘There is a moon’. While grammatically and factually correct, such a statement violates the social expectation that the story will start with a focus on the main protagonists and may contribute to the higher rates of ‘bizarre’ or ‘irrelevant’ utterances reported to characterize the narrative of individuals with ASD.

The question is why did this particular child choose to start his narrative with reference to the moon and what does this tell us about the conceptualization process in developmental disorders? Did he fail to note the social elements of the scene, or did he see them but choose to avoid them owing to social deficits associated with ASD? Was the moon the first thing he saw and was he unable to inhibit mention of it? Did he see both elements of the scene but choose to start with the moon, perhaps as an attempt to provide some setting information about the event? Considering an utterance in isolation does not enable us to determine how speakers decide what to talk about nor how they determine the ultimate form and content of the utterance. Recent developments in eye-movement research using the visual world paradigm provide an opportunity to observe how and when speakers acquire the visual materials needed to generate a message, and how this information relates to the timing, content and form of their utterances.

In the visual world paradigm, speakers are presented with a visual image, either of a coherent event or a structured object display and are asked to describe it. Eye-movements and verbal output are recorded, revealing where in the scene speakers were gazing relative to when they mentioned the gazed-upon aspects of the scene in their speech. Griffin and Bock were the first to use this methodology to study sentence generation in skilled adult speakers. They asked speakers to describe simple cartoons depicting transitive events (‘the woman is shooting the man’) and demonstrated a highly consistent pattern of visual scanning, temporally linked to verbal output. Specifically, speakers initially surveyed key aspects of the scene for approximately 300 ms, after which gazes to the agent and patient characters began to diverge. In general, looks to the agent increased and this was invariably the first character to be mentioned in verbal output. As the name for the agent was articulated, gaze shifted to the patient. By contrast, when speakers were asked to simply identify the recipient of the action, looks focused almost exclusively on the patient. Griffin and Bock argued that the pattern of eye-movements supported at least two distinct phases of sentence production: a rapid period of event apprehension, during which speakers comprehend the event, and a longer period of utterance formulation in which the specific lexical items and syntactic forms needed to describe the event are accessed and articulated. Importantly, in the formulation phase, objects are fixated in the order in which they are mentioned, looks at the object occur slightly in advance of articulation, and duration of looking time to objects appears to reflect the ease with which objects may be identified and names retrieved.

Gleitman et al. extended these findings by exploring the extent to which directing attention to aspects of the visual scene influenced how speakers described the scene. Participants were asked to describe similar cartoon events; however, on the majority of trials, a brief, implicit visual cue appeared prior to trial onset in the spatial location occupied by one of the scene protagonists. Cueing successfully directed attention in the majority of trials, such that the first fixation corresponded to the cued location. In addition, cued characters were significantly more likely to be mentioned first in utterances affecting syntactic construction. For example, if the patient was cued, participants were more likely to produce passive constructions (e.g. ‘the boy was chased by the dog’) relative to the uncued condition. The tight link between visual attention and verbal output has been more directly assessed by Coco and Keller, who demonstrated that for skilled adult speakers, it is possible to predict which objects in a cluttered visual display will be mentioned in an utterance, and the order in which they will be mentioned, by examining the speaker's visual scan patterns.

Few studies of sentence production in younger, typically developing children have employed eye-movement paradigms. Bunger et al. asked 4-year-old children and adults to describe short film clips depicting motion events that included an agent, an instrument and an end path (e.g. ‘the boy skated into the net’). In the initial stages of event apprehension, both children and adults fixated the instrument and path regions of the screen to a similar extent. However, the children were less likely to mention both elements of the scene in their utterances, reporting for example ‘the boy went into the net’ or ‘the boy skated.’ Young, typically developing children did not necessarily mention all aspects of a visual scene, even if those regions of the scene were fixated. Bunger et al. argued that this reflects a limited capacity linguistic system, rather than developmental differences in attentional processes.

Eye-movement studies of language production in skilled adults and younger typically developing children highlight the potential applications of this methodology to elucidating qualitative differences in developmental disorders. Exploring eye-movements before the onset of speech can reveal group differences in the initial apprehension of events, and allows us to identify which aspects of a scene attract visual attention and are therefore available to speakers. Examining the order of fixations and the order in which scene items are mentioned as the sentence unfolds can reveal more about formulation processes. These paradigms also allow detailed investigation of timing; longer eye–voice spans (the amount of time between fixating an object and articulating the object name) may reflect greater challenges with lexical access, whereas fixating objects prior to articulation may contribute to more fluent utterances. Furthermore, we can also determine whether individual differences in visual attention affect output, and whether this can be externally modified, by cueing participants to relevant scenes. Thus, eye-movement paradigms provide a unique opportunity to explore why and when language production breaks down, and whether the source(s) of breakdown overlap in apparently distinct clinical populations.


Heterogeneity in the expressive language skills of children with developmental disorders

Computational models of sentence production have been derived from observations of typical and atypical adult speakers, and thus represent the end state of a developmental process. While these models have recently been applied to language acquisition, modelling the enormous heterogeneity in development is just beginning. This heterogeneity is perhaps most pronounced in developmental disorders, where language acquisition often follows a protracted, and qualitatively different, trajectory. However, such disorders can elucidate potential constraints on the typically developing system. Two disorders provide a compelling example. ASD affects approximately 1% of the school-aged population and is characterized by pronounced social-communication deficits and a restricted and repetitive repertoire of interests and behaviours. Specific LI, on the other hand, affects approximately 3–7% of school-aged children and is characterized by pronounced impairments in grammatical production which are often, but not always, accompanied by weaknesses in grammatical comprehension and vocabulary development. There is a great deal of controversy concerning the potential behavioural, cognitive and aetiological overlap between these two disorders and an urgent need to establish whether quantitative similarities in performance on linguistic tasks in the two clinical populations is underpinned by qualitative differences in language processing.

The picture is complicated by the extent of language variation within ASD, which is not easily reconciled by theories attempting to explain the locus of LI within this population. LI within ASD is most often attributed to deficits in social interaction and social understanding, which disrupt the input experienced by young children with ASD. For instance, the degree to which toddlers with ASD preferentially attend to child-directed speech predicts both concurrent vocabulary scores and vocabulary growth one year later. The amount and quality of interaction and the child's ability to engage in joint attention behaviours are also significant predictors of language outcome in this population. Impairments in the ability to impute speaker intention have been implicated in word-learning deficits, with later implications for the development of syntax and discourse comprehension. Social deficits should also compromise aspects of language production; for instance, reduced understanding of listener needs could contribute to utterances that were underspecified or less relevant to the task at hand.

However, any social theory of LI in ASD must explain why a significant proportion of children with ASD acquire age-appropriate (or indeed, exceptional) vocabularies and go on to develop abstract grammar. Individual differences in social engagement may explain some of this variance, yet numerous studies have demonstrated that children with similar ASD symptom profiles may nevertheless differ dramatically in language outcome. This raises the possibility that children with ASD who develop structural language skills within the normal range (‘autism language normal’ or ALN) may rely on non-social cognitive strengths to compensate for fundamental social weaknesses. For example, verbally able individuals with ASD are reported to have enhanced perceptual and/or attentional abilities, particular facility with phonological processing and enhanced aspects of declarative learning, that support lexical and semantic development; see also for review.

A substantial proportion of children with ASD, however, have structural language attainments that are significantly below chronological or mental age expectations, while a significant minority fail to develop meaningful phrase speech. While these children may have poorer social abilities, at least early in development, it is also possible that they experience co-occurring deficits in those aspects of perception, attention, phonological processing and learning that protect their ALN peers from more widespread LI. There is debate regarding whether children with ‘autism and language impairment (ALI)’ constitute a distinct neurocognitive phenotype, in which LI is a co-morbid deficit with similar origins to that seen in specific LI. For example, at a group-level children with LI and ALI have difficulties with non-sense word repetition, tense-marking of verbs and resolving ambiguities during sentence comprehension, though qualitative differences between groups in error profiles are often evident. These qualitative differences in output raise questions about whether language deficits in ALI arise from the same cognitive constraints thought to characterize LI or whether they arise from different underlying mechanisms.

In general, any social difficulties that exist within LI are thought to be a consequence of negotiating the social world with LI, which may disrupt social interactions and peer relationships. Theories of LI have focused on reduced processing capacity or generally slowed processing, in which lexical access and syntactic planning are slow and effortful, resulting in reduced ability to learn rules from the relevant input. Alternatively, the procedural deficit hypothesis posits that impaired development of the neural circuits that support procedural learning prohibits the implicit learning of rule governed behaviour, including grammar.

Thus, children with ALN, ALI and LI have patterns of linguistic and social behaviour that overlap in some domains, but differ in others. There are hints that similarities in language performance arise for qualitatively different underlying reasons, but little direct evidence that this is the case. Eye-movements may therefore further elucidate diagnostic distinctions among these clinical populations. Few eye-tracking studies of language processing in ASD exist, and those that do have focused on monitoring of social cues, such as eye gaze and gesture in communicative contexts. One study has investigated online language comprehension in children with ASD and peers matched for language ability. Adolescents observed four items in a display (e.g. hammer, hamster, candle and cannon) while listening to sentences that were either neutral (‘John chose the … ’) or biased one of the objects (‘John stroked the … ’). In the neutral condition, there is an equal probability of gazing at any of the four objects at the point the verb unfolds. When ‘ham … ’ is uttered, we expect looks to increase to both the hammer and hamster, yielding a temporary ambiguity until ‘ … ster’ is processed and looks increase to the target hamster. By contrast, the biased condition ensures early gaze to target and minimal looks to any of the distracters, including the hammer, because the hamster is the only strokeable object in the display. Indeed, Brock et al. found that all groups demonstrated anticipatory gaze toward the target in the biased condition. However, when the target hamster was not visually displayed, participants with LIs were unable to use the biasing context to inhibit looks to the hammer, a phonologically similar competitor. In other words, children with LI and ALI increased fixations to the hammer when they heard ‘John stroked the hamster’ even though it was not contextually appropriate to do so, whereas ALN and TD peers did not. In this experiment, ALN and TD peers did not differ on any eye-movement variable. However, differences between children with an ALN profile and TD peers have been reported when participants must use experiential knowledge to guide visual search. Loth et al. recorded eye-movements as participants gazed at a cluttered visual scene. Prior to the picture display, participants heard a story that described an event that could be relevant to the scene, for example a picture of a sitting room paired with a story about a burglary or a birthday party. During the first fixations to the visual scene, TD individuals were more likely to fixate scene items that were directly related to the story they had heard, whereas peers with ASD gazed more at neutral items that had little bearing on the narrative context. The authors concluded that top-down attentional control mechanisms may be diminished in ASD.

At the time of writing, no eye-tracking studies of language production in these clinical populations exist. However, combining evidence from studies of skilled adult speakers with what we know about the profiles of strength and weakness across clinical groups leads to some novel hypotheses about processing in these groups. Specifically, a core social deficit and differences in attention control are likely to have a more pronounced effect at the conceptual level of event apprehension and message planning, the ‘what’ of sentence production. Thus, at this stage of language production, children with ASD, regardless of language phenotype, are predicted to resemble one another and show significantly different fixation patterns relative to TD and LI peers. However, once a message has been selected, differences between language phenotypes should become more pronounced. To the extent that ALI and LI represent overlapping aetiologies, we might expect similar difficulties with language formulation. One might predict that generalized slowing will negatively impact on accessing known lexical and syntactic information, resulting in longer speech latencies and disruptions to the timing of sentential elements relative to eye-movements.


Eye-say: investigating language production processes in typical and atypical development

These predictions are currently being tested in a series of experiments that directly compare language production in children with ALI, ALN, LI and TD. Our first experiment considered potential group differences in volitional control of eye-movements. Previous research has provided conflicting evidence of oculomotor deficits within ASD, though increased variation in saccade accuracy has been reported in only those individuals with ASD who also have LI. In our sample, when tasks simply required reflexive orienting to a visual cue, there were no group differences in speed or fixation accuracy. However, when volitional control of eye-movements was required, both the ALI and the LI groups made more errors than ALN or TD peers. For example, in an antisaccade task, in which viewers must inhibit looks to the salient cue and instead fixate the contralateral location, children with ALI and LI looked more at the salient cue. In addition, when asked to maintain fixation on a target, children with LIs were more likely to fixate distracter items. The source of these errors is uncertain; while in our study language may serve to enhance executive control of eye-movements by providing a mechanism for refreshing rules or task goals in working memory, there is a rich literature suggesting that anomalies in eye-movement control are present in infants and toddlers who are at high risk of developing ASD, and their unaffected, first-degree relatives. It has been suggested that early disruptions to visual attention processes may disrupt the development of joint attention, with cascading effects on language development.

Could variations in visual attention control affect scene scanning and scene description? The majority of eye-tracking studies of language production have presented an event against a plain background, devoid of any extraneous visual context, as illustrated in a. An interesting question, therefore, is whether the same intimate links between visual fixations and verbal output hold when there is more competition for visual attention. Although Coco & Keller presented viewers with cluttered scenes, they provided overt cue words prior to sentence production, which likely guided top-down attention processes. Bunger et al. presented cartoon films which included a rich visual context; however, the movement in these films will have increased the salience of the relevant features for description.

With regard to ASD, an inability to maintain fixations in the presence of competing stimuli could increase looks to irrelevant objects in the background. Huettig et al. suggest that fixating visual objects automatically activates the relevant semantic structures and phonological forms for such objects, thus increasing competition for items to be named in output. Such difficulties should be most evident in unconstrained viewing tasks in which scenes include background information, for example, the image in b. Huettig et al. argued that such a relatively unconstrained task may influence visual selection; if there is no a priori target to guide scene inspection, irrelevant information may come to the fore. This may be especially detrimental to individuals with ASD, who have ‘enhanced’ perceptual capacity to become aware of items in the background, coupled with a reduced preference for socially salient stimuli and difficulties suppressing irrelevant linguistic activations. Together, these propensities may increase both fixations to visually salient items in the background and the likelihood that such items will be mentioned in output. This could help to explain why the child with ASD described unusually as ‘There is a moon’.

describes four case studies, one for each of the groups of interest. These participants were asked to describe 15 images of transitive events embedded in a contextually appropriate background, as illustrated in b, while their eye-movements were recorded binocularly at a sampling rate of 60 Hz using a Tobii T120 eye tracker. Verbal descriptions were coded as ‘canonical’ or ‘non-canonical’ and the timing of each sentential element was recorded relative to the start of the trial. Canonical utterances were those that described the transitive event and mentioned both the agent and the patient. Utterances that included hesitations, false starts and repetitions were also included in this group. Utterances that contained conjoined noun phrases (‘the boy and the girl are playing on the beach’), passive constructions (‘the girl was soaked by the boy’), or only one character noun phrase (‘someone has a water gun on the beach’) were coded as non-canonical. Timing of sentential elements was then compared to the eye-movement record. Fixations were categorized as occurring prior to speech onset, after speech onset but prior to mention of the sentential subject and after articulation of the subject noun phrase. Fixations were also allocated to one of four scene regions: the agent, the patient, the event core (the area of the image that signalled the event; in b this would be the water gun) and the background (everything else).

illustrates where the four children were looking as the sentence unfolded. The TD participant demonstrates a pattern of eye-movements that is consistent with the skilled adult speakers reported by Brock & Griffin; prior to subject onset there are a greater proportion of fixations to the agent (who then becomes the sentential subject). As the subject is articulated, fixations shift to the patient, the latter mentioned character in verbal output. Thus, to some extent fixations mirror verbal output. However, it is notable that 27% of the TD participant's fixations are to items in the periphery, yet these are never mentioned in output. Thus, typically developing individuals may fixate items in the background, but inhibit mention of these items if they are not deemed relevant to the task at hand.

By contrast, all three children with a clinical diagnosis were more likely to fixate the background, and then mention items peripheral to the central event. This is consistent with recent work demonstrating that once linguistic information is activated, it is difficult for verbal individuals with ASD to inhibit items that are less relevant to the given task. The less typical viewing pattern is mirrored here by an increase in non-canonical utterances. As can be seen from the examples in, these utterances are not necessarily wrong, but do arguably violate our social expectations that speakers provide optimal, relevant and accurate information. The nature of the non-canonical utterances is also revealing. For the child with ALN, 40% of errors were either passive constructions, or cast the patient as the sentential subject. By contrast, 85% and 100% of the non-canonical utterances made by the children with LI and ALI, respectively, involved the omission of a key sentential element, either the verb or the patient. For the child with LI, if an item in the periphery was mentioned, other elements of the sentence were likely to be omitted, yielding utterances that were more like a list of objects rather than a coherent event. This result is reminiscent of Bunger et al. and suggests that for these children, a limited linguistic capacity is a constraint on verbal output. What tips the balance such that more peripheral items are mentioned at the expense of core information is an empirical question, but may be influenced by the visual salience of competing stimuli or the ease with which different lexical items may be accessed and articulated.

Neither child with ASD prioritized fixations to the agent or patient at any time point, in stark contrast to the TD child. This may reflect the consistently reported finding of diminished gaze to socially salient stimuli in individuals with ASD, but may also be influenced by poorer visual attention control. The child with LI shows a similar predominance of fixations to the background but does not have the same profile of social impairment that characterizes the peers with ASD. An interesting question is whether fixating the background affects event apprehension and message conceptualization, or whether these distractions exert a greater influence on message formulation. In truth, it is likely to be both. Clearly, differences in viewing patterns between these ASD participants and the TD child are apparent prior to the onset of speech. However, most fixations occur after speech onset, and as seen in the ALI example, mention of background items appears to be ad hoc, occurring as these items are fixated. It therefore seems unlikely that for these children, the entire message is conceptualized prior to starting the utterance, but rather evolves as they continue to scan the scene.

These examples suggest that children with neurodevelopmental disorders scan complex visual scenes differently to typical peers. Scanning patterns may be influenced by social preferences and variations in attention control. Notably, in this example although the TD child did fixate objects in the background, they were never mentioned in output. Given that fixating items likely activates lexical information about those items, this would suggest that inhibitory control is also an important factor in language production, and one that is also likely to be vulnerable in developmental disorders. If this is the case, guiding children's attention to the relevant aspect of the scene for description may facilitate message formulation. Gleitman et al. demonstrated that it was possible to cue visual attention by presenting a brief flash in the relevant spatial location prior to image display. Cueing a particular entity increased the likelihood that this character would become the sentential subject, thus altering preferred syntactic constructions. Specifically, if the patient was successfully cued, the number of passive constructions increased. In our current work with children, spontaneous passives were extremely rare; only 15 out of 1170 utterances were passives. Our laboratory is currently investigating whether directing attention alone would alter syntactic structures for children with developmental disorders.

Computational models of language acquisition suggest that priming and implicit learning are a key mechanism for learning new syntactic forms. Thus, there is potential to direct child's visual attention to relevant aspects of a visual scene, and then provide the child with relevant language input. This should prime more syntactically complex or semantically relevant verbal descriptions of social events. There is evidence that children with specific LIs and children with ASD can be primed to use particular sentence structures, though it is not clear that this extends to syntactic structures that are not already spontaneously used (i.e. passive sentences). In addition, no previous work has explored whether cueing attention and providing targeted language input can increase relevant utterances while at the same time decreasing mention of extraneous items in the periphery. If this were possible, attention cueing and priming in combination could provide a powerful intervention strategy for developing syntactic and narrative skills.


Summary and conclusion

Adult models of language production have delineated different stages of processing in which potential messages are conceptualized, the lexical and syntactic forms required to encode the message are selected, and the utterance is articulated. Computational models of language acquisition postulate that learning occurs when verbal output is evaluated against linguistic and social expectations and adapted accordingly. Adult studies of language production using eye-movement paradigms have demonstrated the ability to observe the processes that underlie message conceptualization and formulation; application of these methods to developmental disorders can elucidate qualitative differences between clinical populations at the different stages of language production. The example case studies described here suggest that any model of typical and atypical language production will need to take non-linguistic factors, such as attention control, inhibition and social motivation, into account. Such deficits may lead a child to perceive the world differently, resulting in qualitative differences in language input. Children with multiple deficits may therefore find it difficult to learn what is socially relevant, what semantic information is most important to convey and what syntactic forms convey meaning in an unambiguous way. While it may be possible to direct children's attention to relevant features for description, children may not alter their descriptions spontaneously. However, combining attention cueing with sentence priming may provide a powerful mechanism for facilitating language development in clinical populations.


The interface between spoken and written language: developmental disorders

Charles Hulme, Margaret J. Snowling — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2014. PMC3866425, CC BY 3.0.

We review current knowledge about reading development and the origins of difficulties in learning to read. We distinguish between the processes involved in learning to decode print, and the processes involved in reading for meaning (reading comprehension). At a cognitive level, difficulties in learning to read appear to be predominantly caused by deficits in underlying oral language skills. The development of decoding skills appears to depend critically upon phonological language skills, and variations in phoneme awareness, letter–sound knowledge and rapid automatized naming each appear to be causally related to problems in learning to read. Reading comprehension difficulties in contrast appear to be critically dependent on a range of oral language comprehension skills (including vocabulary knowledge and grammatical, morphological and pragmatic skills).


Introduction

In this review, we will consider a wide range of evidence about the inter-relationships between developmental disorders of reading and spoken language. When talking about spoken and written language development and their disorders, it is important to distinguish between the different component skills of both. For spoken language, it is common to distinguish between four domains: phonology, grammar, semantics and pragmatics. When we consider written language, we need to distinguish between reading and spelling. Within the domain of reading, it is important to make a further distinction between decoding (usually assessed by the accuracy or fluency of reading aloud) and comprehension (the adequacy of understanding text, usually assessed by questions about the meaning of a passage).

Mattingly [p. 133] famously proposed that ‘reading is parasitic on speech’. He was correct in the sense that a child's ability to learn to recode print (which was the topic of his chapter) is critically dependent on their phonological, or speech sound, skills. If, however, we accept that reading comprehension depends on both decoding and language comprehension skills (Gough & Tunmer's simple view of reading), there is no doubt that broader oral language skills (including grammar, semantics and pragmatics) are also important for reading comprehension. In short, reading for meaning depends on all four domains of oral language.

The intimate relationship between spoken and written language skills has been long accepted in studies of development, but perhaps less so in studies of acquired disorders of these skills. However, the primary systems hypothesis sees adult cases of reading disorders, just like developmental cases, as reflecting impairments to underlying primary brain systems (systems concerned with different aspects of oral language as well as visual processing mechanisms). This view suggests that models of acquired and developmental disorders of reading already show a good degree of alignment.


Models of reading development and reading disorders

Understanding a disorder of development depends on having a model of normal development for the skill in question. More broadly, any complete model of cognitive performance in adulthood needs to be compatible with evidence about how the process in question developed. Studies of development can, in turn, inform and constrain theories of adult psychological functioning. To quote Baldwin [p. 5], ‘the study of children is often the only way we have of testing our mental analyses. If we decide that a certain complex product is due to the union of simple mental elements, then we may appeal to the proper period of child life to see the union taking place’.

The argument that is at the heart of this review, that language problems are the predominant causes of problems in learning to read, rests upon two different models of how language processes operate to determine the course of normal reading development: the triangle model of word reading and Gough & Tunmer's simple view of reading.

Currently, there are two influential classes of model of adult word reading: dual-route and connectionist models. Dual-route models conceptualize adult word recognition as depending upon independent lexical and sublexical routes from the written form of a word to its pronunciation. These theories are essentially ‘static’ models of adult performance and do not provide any account of how the systems they postulate develop. By contrast, connectionist theories of word reading are explicitly developmental and see word reading as being dependent upon the integrity of phonological and semantic representations that exist in the language processing system before reading develops. Among connectionist theories, the main variant is often referred to as the ‘triangle’ model and provides an extremely productive framework for thinking about disorders of reading development.

According to the triangle model, learning to read essentially consists of creating mappings or associations between visual representations of the letter strings that constitute words (orthographic representations) and the phonological and semantic representations of spoken language that correspond to those words. As a result of training (simulating learning to read), such a model develops two interacting ‘pathways’ that work together to read individual words. The ‘phonological pathway’ maps orthography onto phonology: that is, given a written word as input, it can be translated into its corresponding spoken form. The ‘semantic pathway’ maps orthography onto phonology via semantics: a written word as input produces direct activation of the word's meaning, which in turn activates pronunciation.

An assumption of one variant of the triangle model is that at the beginning of reading development, the child's cognitive resources are devoted to establishing the ‘phonological pathway’ (the system for mapping letters on to sounds) but that later, reading comes to rely increasingly on the ‘semantic pathway’. The use of the semantic pathway may be particularly important for the reading of exception words that the phonological pathway does not handle efficiently. Indeed, as training of the model proceeds, there is a ‘division of labour’ such that the semantic pathway begins to favour exception word reading, whereas the phonological pathway becomes specialized for reading novel words that the system has not encountered before.

As noted earlier, it is important to distinguish between the ability to read words accurately and fluently and the ability to comprehend text. Accurate and fluent word reading are essential for good reading comprehension. Gough & Tunmer's simple view of reading underlines the fact that reading comprehension is the product of both decoding skill and oral language comprehension (reading comprehension = decoding × listening comprehension). It follows from this model that problems with reading comprehension can arise from two different sources (problems with decoding or problems with oral language comprehension). Children with decoding problems are usually referred to as having developmental dyslexia. Children with adequate decoding but problems purely with reading comprehension are usually referred to as having reading comprehension impairment (or more simply as ‘poor comprehenders’). The existence of both of these groups of children, who will be discussed below, is exactly what we would expect from the simple view of reading.

In summary, both the triangle model and the simple view of reading, see the development of reading skills as ‘parasitic’, not specifically on ‘speech’ but rather on earlier developing oral language skills. This will be the main focus of this review.


Developing and testing causal theories of developmental disorders

The issue that lies at the heart of developmental psychology is an attempt to establish the causes of development. The idea that learning to read is parasitic on earlier developing oral language skills is a broad and non-specific causal theory. In the sections that follow, this general theory will be fleshed out. Before doing so, it is useful to reflect on the sorts of evidence we can use to test causal theories in this area.

Ultimately, all developmental disorders can be conceptualized as the product of interactions between genetic and environmental risk factors. For present purposes however, we will focus on a cognitive level of explanation that links brain mechanisms to behaviour. In relation to reading disorders, this approach essentially focuses on trying to establish causal links between deficits in specific aspects of oral language skills and aspects of reading development. The approaches that have been developed to evaluate putative causal relationships involve a number of steps. Any hypothetical cause must exist prior to its proposed consequence (the ‘logic of causal order’;). Establishing that variations in a given oral language skill (e.g. phoneme awareness, PA) that exist prior to learning to read are strong correlates of later variations in word reading skill suggests, but does not establish, that a causal effect exists. In some cases where training studies are not practicable or ethical our only way of testing causal theories may be to conduct longitudinal studies and evaluate alternative interpretations for putative causal links. The approach, essentially, is to show that the relationship between a potential cause (e.g. phonemic awareness) and its consequence (word reading skill) cannot be explained by other confounding variables (a child's IQ, or their educational background, for example).

Ultimately, however, to provide convincing evidence for causal hypotheses, we need to conduct training studies. If we can show in an experiment that training a particular oral language skill (e.g. phonemic awareness) leads to improvements in later reading skills, then we have much better evidence of a causal relationship. Finally, if we can measure the functioning of a hypothetical mechanism (levels of phonemic awareness) that is believed to be responsible for producing improvements in reading outcomes, then we can assess the extent to which changes in an outcome (reading) are directly proportional to changes in the intervening mechanism (PA) in a mediation analyses. Put simply, if an intervention produces effects via an intermediate mechanism, then variations in the effectiveness of the intervention across individuals should be proportional to variations in the changes brought about in the hypothetical mechanism (if reading improves because PA has improved, then improvements in reading should vary across individuals in line with improvements in PA).


Possible causal relationships between impairments of spoken and written language


Disorders of reading accuracy and fluency

A necessary step towards becoming a skilled reader is the acquisition of efficient decoding skills: an accomplishment that represents a significant obstacle for children with dyslexia. However, because reading skills, including decoding abilities, show continuous variation within the population, where the cut-off for dyslexia is set is to some extent arbitrary; current estimates suggest that somewhere between 3 and 7% of the population experience educationally significant difficulties in this area (see, for further details).

If we accept that dyslexia represents the lower end of a continuous distribution of decoding skills in the population, then to explain dyslexia, we need to understand the cognitive mechanisms that are causally linked to variations in decoding skills. There is now good evidence that there are three main predictors of individual differences in the early stages of learning to decode in alphabetic languages: letter knowledge (LK), PA and rapid automatized naming (RAN). Arguably, most research has sought to understand the role of PA and whether it is a cause or a consequence of learning to read. Current evidence is consistent with the notion that variations in PA, and letter–sound knowledge, are two factors that have a causal influence on the development of decoding. RAN appears likely to be another causal influence on decoding skill although here the evidence for causation is more equivocal. Evidence from studies of children at familial risk of dyslexia indicates that early in development children who go on to develop dyslexia have relatively broad oral language weaknesses that affect vocabulary knowledge and naming skills as well as phonological oral language skills.


Phoneme awareness

Measures of PA involve children manipulating or making judgements about the phonemic units in spoken words. Many concurrent and longitudinal studies have assessed the relationship between PA and children's reading ability. In a meta-analysis of these studies, which included both extreme group comparisons (comparing dyslexic with typically developing children) and correlational studies of unselected samples, children with dyslexia showed a large deficit in PA in comparison with typically developing children of the same age (pooled effect size estimate d = −1.37) and younger children matched on reading level (pooled effect size estimate d = −0.57). Analyses of studies of unselected samples showed that phonemic awareness was a strong correlate of individual differences in word reading ability, and that this effect remained reliable after controlling for variations in both verbal short-term memory and awareness of the onset-rime components of words.


Letter knowledge

LK is also a predictor of variations in children's word reading ability. Moderate correlations have been reported between LK assessed at the start of formal reading instruction and word reading skills measured later that year or early the next year. In different studies, LK has been assessed using measures of either letter–sound knowledge, letter–name knowledge or both. These two measures are typically moderately correlated with each other. Theoretically, however, it is letter–sound knowledge which is likely to be a critical determinant of variations in children's ability to learn to read, because it is one of the foundations of the alphabetic principle.


Phoneme awareness and letter knowledge: issues of causation

There are close associations between PA and LK and learning to read. Both these effects operate longitudinally from an age when reading skills are very limited suggesting that they may reflect causal influences on learning to read. Direct evidence for causation requires training studies. There is evidence that training phonemic awareness in children is effective in helping to improve word reading skills, especially when such training is coupled with appropriate phonically based reading instruction. For example, a meta-analysis reported an effect size of d = 0.67 (based on seven studies) for training phonemic awareness on word reading.

A study by Bowyer-Crane et al. provides further evidence for the causal role of PA and letter–sound knowledge in learning to read. This study delivered a phonology with reading intervention programme (which trained letter–sound knowledge and PA alongside book work) to young children selected for having weak oral language skills at school entry. This ‘phonology with reading’ intervention produced significant improvements (in comparison with a control group who were given an oral language intervention) in later word-level reading and spelling skills. A re-analysis of data from this study showed that improvements in letter–sound knowledge and PA measured at the end of the intervention fully accounted for (mediated) the improvements seen in the children's reading and spelling skills measured five months after the intervention had finished.

Because this study randomly assigned children to two different interventions (a phonology and reading versus an oral language intervention programme), we have good evidence that the improvements seen in letter–sound knowledge, PA and literacy skills are causal effects. However, perhaps more critically, the results of the mediation model provide support for the theory that motivated the intervention. The mediation model provides evidence that weaknesses in two underlying skills (PA and letter–sound knowledge) are two causes of difficulties in learning to read. An intervention that targeted these two skills was effective in improving reading, with the improvements observed in reading being proportional to the improvements seen in these two underlying skills.


Rapid automatized naming

One other important predictor of variations in reading development is RAN. RAN tasks require a child to name as quickly as they can a list of pictures, colours, letters or numbers. Children with dyslexia perform poorly on RAN, and in unselected samples of children, there are reliable concurrent and longitudinal correlations between RAN and children's reading skills (see, for reviews). The fact that even RAN for pictures and colours, measured before children can read, is predictive of later variations in reading skills indicates that this effect cannot just be a consequence of differences in LK. The fact that RAN predicts reading accuracy as well as fluency suggest that this effect does not simply reflect general variations in speed of processing. Furthermore, whatever RAN taps, it is statistically independent of LK and PA as a predictor of decoding skill. However, we would emphasize that there is no evidence from a training study to clinch the argument that RAN plays a causal role in constraining the rate of reading development; on the contrary, training in rapid letter naming appears to affect neither RAN nor reading reliably.


The role of rapid automatized naming and letter knowledge as putative causal influences on the development of word decoding

At the moment, the relationship between RAN and LK and their possible causal roles in learning to read is a little uncertain. It has been argued that RAN is an index of the efficiency of a left-hemisphere brain circuit that underlies object naming and that this circuit is recruited to form the basis of the visual word recognition system. However, in cognitive terms, it seems that measures of both LK (giving the sound for a letter in the absence of time pressure) and RAN (saying the names of a list of objects, colours, letters or digits as quickly as possible) must depend upon a form of cross-modal associative learning (associating what is seen with a name). This raises the possibility that the reason both RAN and LK correlate with word reading skill is that they both tap the integrity of a cross-modal visual–verbal associative learning mechanism (and such a mechanism is obviously likely to be critical for learning to read as well).

There is evidence that variations in verbal associative learning are related to variations in learning to read. Hulme et al. showed that a measure of visual–verbal paired-associate learning (associating abstract shapes with a nonsense word) was a concurrent predictor of individual differences in word reading skill, which was independent of PA (which was also a predictor of reading skill). In a further study, it was shown that the same measure of visual–verbal paired-associate learning was also a significant concurrent predictor of reading ability in slightly older children, even after controlling for PA and RAN (which were also unique predictors). Moreover, a further striking finding was that the variance in common between two measures of paired-associate learning (visual–verbal and verbal–verbal) was a unique concurrent predictor of reading skill, as were RAN and phoneme deletion ability. In summary, it is clear that verbal paired-associate learning (PAL) ability is a concurrent correlate of reading skills in the early to middle school years. Similarly, studies of children with dyslexia have shown them to have impairments on such paired-associate learning tasks.

One clear limitation of these studies of PAL, however, is that they all have a concurrent rather than longitudinal design. Lervag et al. reported a large-scale (N = 234) longitudinal study of Norwegian children starting before formal reading instruction had begun. Strikingly, PA, RAN and LK measured at time 1 (roughly nine months before formal reading instruction began) were significant unique predictors of reading ability assessed at time 2 (roughly three months after formal reading instruction had begun). However, paired-associate learning ability was not a predictor of reading ability here (and nor were measures of verbal short-term memory, verbal ability or non-verbal ability).

The hypothesis explored in this study was that RAN may share variance with visual–verbal PAL because it taps the efficiency of name retrieval; in turn, efficient name retrieval depends on the ability to learn the names of objects and symbols—that is, on successful associative learning (poorer or less complete learning of the association between a visual stimulus and its name would lead to slower name retrieval). In their study, however, RAN correlated only modestly with PAL (0.32), and RAN's predictive relationship with reading remained after controlling for the effects of PAL. Furthermore, PAL was not a significant predictor of reading ability longitudinally even if RAN was excluded as a predictor, suggesting that RAN is tapping a different construct to paired-associate learning. Together, these findings imply that PAL itself does not explain variations in the rate of learning to read within the general population. These findings also suggest that there is something highly specific about the speeded retrieval of the names of visual stimuli that is tapped by RAN, that is a critical aspect of the processes involved in learning to read. In line with this, it was found that the duration of pauses between naming successive items (rather than the duration of articulating the items themselves) was the critical component of RAN that predicted later variations in reading skill.


Does word reading develop in similar ways in different alphabetic scripts?

English is more inconsistent in its mappings between letters and the sounds in words than other alphabetic orthographies that have been studied. This has led some to argue that the relative importance of variations in letter–sound knowledge, phonemic awareness and RAN as predictors of reading ability would differ in English in comparison with languages whose orthographies have more consistent spelling–sound correspondences. Some have argued that in consistent orthographies, RAN is the predominant predictor of variations in reading ability (which is usually measured by measures of reading fluency), whereas PA and letter–sound knowledge are much less important. A wide range of studies have examined the predictive relationship between RAN and reading in different languages with rather complex and inconsistent results (for reviews). These inconsistencies likely reflect the fact that different studies have used different measures of reading and RAN.

To try to reconcile these apparent inconsistencies a group of us conducted a large-scale longitudinal study of learning to read, using directly comparable measures, in four languages (English, Spanish, Slovak, Czech). The study began just before or soon after the start of formal reading instruction in all languages and assessed the relative importance of PA, letter–sound knowledge, RAN and verbal memory span measured at the beginning of the study as predictors of reading ability some 10 months later. The findings revealed a remarkably clear pattern with PA, letter–sound knowledge and RAN (but not verbal memory span) being reliable predictors, with equal relative importance, of later reading skills in all four languages. Furthermore, PA was at least as strong a predictor of both reading and spelling development as RAN in this study, even when reading was measured by speeded tests. In sum, this study suggests that the cognitive processes involved in learning to decode print are essentially identical in English and the three other much more consistent European orthographies studied. More generally, there is growing evidence that these three skills might be considered universal markers of the cognitive prerequisites for learning to read across different writing systems—namely symbol knowledge, awareness of the sound units involved in creating mappings between orthography and phonology and RAN.


The role of non-phonological language skills in learning to decode print

The focus so far has been on the role of phonological skills as causal influences on the development of decoding skills. Phonological skills appear to play a dominant role in shaping the early development of decoding skills, but there is evidence that broader oral language skills may also play a role in influencing decoding, particularly in older children.

One such language skill is morphological awareness (awareness of the morphological constituents of spoken words). Several studies have identified morphological awareness as a unique concurrent predictor of variations in word reading ability in older children. For example, one study found that morphological awareness in a sample of 4, 6 and 8 Grade children predicted variations in word reading ability, after controlling for age, phonological awareness and naming speed. There is also evidence that morphological training may be effective in improving word decoding skills. A meta-analysis of training studies showed that interventions, including substantial morphological awareness training, produced moderate improvements (d = 0.41) in word reading skills (with evidence of larger effects in less-able readers).

Another oral language skill that seems likely to be related to learning to decode print is vocabulary knowledge. Current evidence, however, suggests that vocabulary knowledge is only weakly related to learning to decode print, at least in the early stages of learning to read. For example, the longitudinal study of Lervag et al. found no unique relationship between a latent verbal ability factor (defined by vocabulary and similarities subtests from the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence test) and reading ability measured after three months in school. Similarly, a large-scale longitudinal study in England found no unique relationship between receptive vocabulary skills measured at school entry and decoding skills measured after 1 and 2 years of formal instruction (though vocabulary and grammatical skills were unique predictors of reading comprehension skills measured after 2 years in school). It seems likely, however, that vocabulary skills will be more important in older children once they have made progress in understanding the alphabetic principle. There is also evidence from small-scale experimental studies that knowledge of specific word meanings may be important for children learning to read those words. One interpretation of such findings is that word-specific knowledge may be important for learning to read a word (in line with the division of labour idea embodied in the triangle model discussed earlier), but that general measures of the breadth of vocabulary knowledge are relatively insensitive as indices of the word knowledge that are relevant on a given reading test.


Disorders of reading comprehension

‘Poor comprehenders’ show a marked deficit in reading comprehension in relation to their level of reading accuracy. Given a continuous distribution of reading scores in the population, as in the case of dyslexia, where the cut-off for identifying this type of reading difficulty should be placed is to some extent arbitrary. Hulme & Snowling suggested that children whose reading comprehension standard score is equal to or below 90 and have a reading-accuracy standard score of 90 or above, coupled with a deficit of at least 1 s.d. in reading comprehension standard scores in comparison with reading-accuracy standard scores, should qualify for such ‘diagnosis’. Using this criterion, 3.3% of a nationally representative sample of 1324 children in the UK were identified as poor comprehenders.

According to the simple view of reading, reading comprehension (R) is equal to decoding (D) ‘multiplied by’ linguistic comprehension (R = D × C). Given that the poor comprehender profile is defined by adequate reading accuracy (decoding) coupled with deficient reading comprehension, it follows from the simple view of reading that such children should show deficits on measures of language comprehension. A good deal of evidence supports this idea.

Many studies have shown that poor comprehenders show substantial deficits on a range of measures of oral language comprehension (including measures of vocabulary knowledge, listening comprehension, grammatical and morphological skills) in comparison with age-matched control children (for reviews). Furthermore, there is evidence that these language deficits exist prior to learning to read, which supports the idea that they are a plausible cause of these children's reading comprehension difficulties.

To test the idea that reading comprehension impairment is caused by an underlying weakness in oral language comprehension skills, Hulme and co-workers conducted a randomized trial in which 160 children with poor reading comprehension relative to accuracy were randomly assigned to one of four conditions: oral language training, text comprehension training, combined oral language with text comprehension training or an untreated waiting list control. The interventions were delivered in the children's schools by specially trained teaching assistants in three 30-min sessions each week over 20 weeks. The children's reading and language skills were assessed before the intervention began, after the intervention was completed, and again some 11 months later.

Immediately after the interventions were completed, all three intervention groups showed reliable improvements of statistically equivalent size in reading comprehension (as measured by the Wechsler Individual Achievement test II) in comparison with the control group (increases of approx. 3.5–4.5 standard-score points; effect sizes between d = 0.59 and d = 0.99). However, at delayed follow-up, 11 months after the intervention had been completed, the advantage of the oral language intervention group had increased to 7.9 standard-score points compared with the untreated control group (d = 1.24—a very large effect), and this group was now showing a larger gain than either the text comprehension or the combined text comprehension and oral language groups (gains of 5.2 and 4.7 standard-score points, respectively).

Following the logic described earlier, a mediation analysis was conducted in which changes in vocabulary knowledge measured at the end of the intervention were examined as a possible mediator of the increases in reading comprehension scores at delayed follow-up (some 11 months after the intervention had finished). The effects of both the oral language and the combined oral language and text comprehension interventions were at least partly accounted for by changes in a measure of vocabulary that had been taught in these interventions (the direct effect of the oral language and combined programmes on reading comprehension scores were reduced by roughly 30% by including vocabulary as a mediator of outcome). The children in the oral language intervention (who had experienced a large dose of vocabulary instruction) also showed statistically reliable improvements at the end of the intervention on a standardized test of vocabulary knowledge involving words that had not been taught in the intervention. This, together with the increased size of reading-comprehension advantage at follow-up for this group, suggests that the intervention had resulted in some generalized improvements in these children's oral-language comprehension abilities.

Further support for a causal role of language comprehension skills as determinants of reading comprehension skills comes from another intervention study by our group. That study reported the findings of a broad-based oral language intervention given over 30 weeks to children in nursery and reception classes (when children were from 4 to 5 years old). This intervention was successful in producing reliable improvements in children's oral language and spoken narrative skills in comparison with a waiting list control group. Importantly, the intervention showed generalization to a standardized measure of reading comprehension given to the children at delayed follow-up some six months after the intervention was completed. A mediation analysis showed that the improvements in reading comprehension at delayed follow-up were completely mediated by the improvements seen in a language latent factor (defined by the Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals vocabulary, information and grammar scores from the action picture test and a measure of listening comprehension) assessed immediately after the intervention had been completed.

In summary, the findings of this study and together with those of an earlier study show that weaknesses in oral language comprehension skills can be ameliorated by training, and in line with the simple view of reading, such improvements in oral language skills lead directly to later improvements in children's reading comprehension. The findings of both studies support a causal theory that sees poor reading comprehension as arising from underlying oral language comprehension deficits. More studies are required to identify whether particular subcomponents of language comprehension are particularly critical for the development of children's reading comprehension skills. Some findings indicate that vocabulary knowledge is one skill that contributes to reading comprehension ability, but it seems likely that many other oral language skills are also important (including grammatical and morphological skills). It is also clear that a range of other skills, including non-verbal abilities, appear to predict variations in reading comprehension ability in clinical populations (see for a review) and it remains to determine the extent to which non-linguistic cognitive processes may affect the development of reading comprehension skills. Finally, pragmatic language skills are likely to have effects on the development of reading comprehension. For example, some autistic children, and some non-autistic children who share the pragmatic language difficulties that are common in autism, show problems of reading comprehension that appear to be related to their weak pragmatic language skills (see for a review).


The origins of language learning weaknesses that underlie reading difficulties

We have focused so far on the proximal causes of developmental disorders of reading, which we have argued reflect a variety of impairments in children's oral language skills. Clearly, a pressing question is to understand the causal risk factors that contribute to these language learning difficulties. Ultimately, variations in oral language skills will reflect differences in genetic and environmental influences in the population studied. Individual differences in both reading and oral language skills appear to be highly heritable.

Twin studies provide evidence for the importance of genetic influences for the genesis of reading problems, as well as for normal variations in reading skills in the population. It has been suggested that as much as 70% of the variation in 7-year-olds’ decoding skills is attributable to genetic differences. Similarly, normal variations in oral language skills are heritable, and there is evidence for the importance of genetic influences in the aetiology of specific language impairment. Moreover, recent genetic advances have identified a number of candidate genes associated with dyslexia and specific language impairment.

At a cognitive level of explanation, there have been attempts to reduce reading and language disorders to simpler underlying mechanisms. At the time of writing, such attempts have primarily focused on dyslexia. The hypotheses range from extremely broad ideas to more specific proposals. At a broad level, Nicholson & Fawcett suggested that dyslexia might reflect an impairment of the cerebellum which led to an automatization deficit. This theory had difficulties on logical grounds in explaining the highly specific difficulties seen in many children with dyslexia. Subsequent studies suggest that the original evidence suggesting cerebellar impairments in children with dyslexia were actually the result of comorbidity with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.

Much more narrowly focused explanations for phonological difficulties have included the idea of them arising from a speech perception or more basic auditory processing impairment. However, the evidence for these views is mixed, and there is not yet convincing evidence from longitudinal studies testing causal hypotheses (see [ch. 2], for a review). Thus, a question remaining for future research is to find more basic cognitive level explanations for the origin of the language learning weaknesses which appear critical determinants of reading difficulties.


Summary and conclusion

We have provided a selective review of current knowledge about reading development and the origins of difficulties in learning to read. We have argued that the proximal causes of problems in acquiring adequate decoding and reading comprehension skills are a variety of deficits in underlying oral language skills. We believe our arguments complement well the primary systems hypothesis, which sees adult cases of reading disorders being heavily influenced by impairments to underlying oral language systems. A pressing need in the developmental field is for more research aimed at understanding the cognitive, neural and genetic mechanisms that contribute to the genesis of language learning difficulties.


Problems with tense marking in children with specific language impairment: not how but when

Dorothy V. M. Bishop — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2014. PMC3866428, CC BY 3.0.

Many children with specific language impairment (SLI) have persisting problems in the correct use of verb tense, but there has been disagreement as to the underlying reason. When we take into account studies using receptive as well as expressive language tasks, the data suggest that the difficulty for children with SLI is in knowing when to inflect verbs for tense, rather than how to do so. This is perhaps not surprising when we consider that tense does not have a transparent semantic interpretation, but depends on complex relationships between inflections and hierarchically organized clauses. An explanation in terms of syntactic limitations contrasts with a popular morpho-phonological account, the Words and Rules model. This model, which attributes problems to difficulties with applying a rule to generate regular inflected forms, has been widely applied to adult-acquired disorders. There are striking similarities in the pattern of errors in adults with anterior aphasia and children with SLI, suggesting that impairments in appreciation of when to mark tense may apply to acquired as well as developmental disorders.


Introduction

When children first learn to talk, they don't just imitate the speech they hear: their output reflects limitations of their immature language. Verbs are a particularly rich source of errors. Sometimes we see bare stem errors, where the inflection is simply omitted, as in ‘John go there’ or ‘Yesterday Daddy run the marathon’. In addition, we may see overregularization of an irregular verb, such as ‘I runned home’ or ‘Mummy drived her car’. Both types of error have stimulated theorizing about the underlying nature of the child's grammatical difficulties, but despite many years of research, there is still debate as to their origins.

Problems with verb inflections are seen in typical development and are also a striking feature of both developmental language disorders and some types of acquired aphasia. My main focus here is on English-speaking children with specific language impairment (SLI), a condition that is diagnosed when language is out of step with other aspects of development for no obvious reason. Encouraged, however, by the integrative spirit of this special issue, I briefly consider whether insights from the study of children might also help us to understand abnormal use of verbal inflections in acquired aphasia.


How is tense acquired?

shows a schematic sequence for acquisition of grammar inspired by Edelman & Waterfall and Tomasello. Stages are shown to illustrate the kinds of internal representations that predominate at different points in development, but transition from one to the next is assumed to be gradual.

As the child hears more and more language, patterns are identified, so that lexical items can be grouped into syntactic categories that can occupy specific slots in sentence frames (stage II). For instance, the child who hears ‘Mummy is eating’, ‘Daddy is coming’, ‘Mummy is waiting’, ‘Baby is eating’ and so on, will start to categorize Mummy, Daddy and Baby together as the same kind of word. The presence of inflectional endings, such as -ing, as well as co-occurrence with other high-frequency words, such as determiners or auxiliaries, can act as important cues to syntactic category.

Gradually, the child will start to recognize sequential dependencies between abstract units and begin to operate with larger units, such as Noun Phrase and Verb Phrase; this allows a move away from rote-learned utterances so that novel word sequences can be generated. Part of this learning is the recognition that the same verbs can occur with or without suffixes such as /t/ (as in ‘washed’), /d/ (as in ‘robbed’) or /id/ (as in ‘posted’). Once the morphological status of these inflections is appreciated, lexical storage can become more efficient, because only the verb stem need be stored, and inflectional paradigms can be set up. Inflected forms can then be assembled by rule, with the abstract past tense marker, -ed, converted to the appropriate phonological form depending on the verb's final phoneme.

Suppose, however, that the child has auditory difficulties that make it difficult to perceive a morpheme, such as past tense -ed, which in English is often unstressed and not perceptually salient. Leonard proposed just such an account—the ‘surface hypothesis’—to explain SLI. If the child frequently fails to perceive the inflection, then learning of the past tense rule will be delayed, because it depends on acquiring a critical mass of inflected and uninflected verb forms, so that the pattern can be detected.

A related idea is that learning of tense could be impaired by problems with phonological segmentation. The child who has no difficulty distinguishing, for instance, ‘walk’ and ‘walked’, may nevertheless treat both words as unanalysed wholes and fail to recognize their component phonemes. This has been termed the ‘phonological deficit hypothesis’. If the child fails to parse an inflected verb into stem and inflection, then lexical representations of verbs may remain at stage II and this will impair ability to learn the significance of inflections.

A similar outcome could arise if, despite identifying phonological segments, there was a problem in identifying regularities in the input, so that Verb + -ed was not recognized as a recurring pattern. Gopnik & Crago suggested that such an account might explain problems with grammatical features in members of a three-generational family affected with an inherited form of SLI. Specifically, they proposed that affected individuals ‘…have a learning mechanism that sees each word as an independent item that must be learned and entered into a lexicon that specifies its grammatical properties and meaning’, and they ‘do not have the normal language-learning mechanism…that would allow them…to construct inflectional paradigms on the basis of regularities hypothesised from the observed linguistic evidence’ (p. 47). Others, coming from a very different perspective, have proposed rather similar ideas without assuming that the problem is specific to grammar. Rather, it has been suggested that inability to detect recurring syntactic patterns might be part of a broader difficulty with statistical learning. We can see, then, that there are several reasons—perceptual limitations, poor phonological segmentation and a deficit in identifying linguistic regularities—all of which could lead to delays in identifying patterns of regular inflection.

According to the timeline shown in, irregular past tense verbs would only be identified as tensed forms once the child had isolated the -ed morpheme from regular verbs and identified some of the syntactic and semantic features associated with it. These same features could then be stored in the lexicon with the irregular verb. Thus, the child would start out at stage II with a single, lexical means of representing verbs, inflected or not, with syntactic features becoming established at stage III, as more and more regular verbs are encountered.

But how does the child identify the conditions under which inflections are obligatory? Tense is a particularly complex feature of grammar, for two reasons. First, the functional significance of a tense inflection is much harder to deduce than that of a semantically transparent inflection such as noun plural -s. Although -ed indicates past tense of a verb, it does not always correspond to past time: for instance, we say ‘I saw him jump’ or ‘I wanted to escape’ rather than ‘*I saw him jumped’ or ‘*I wanted to escaped’, even though the jumping or escaping is in the past. In a passive construction, we may use an -ed inflected verb for a current event or future event, e.g. ‘The dog is being/will be groomed by the man’. Second, for most inflections, there are reliable local cues that determine grammaticality; for instance, consistency of verb–subject agreement in number makes it easy to learn that some sequences such as ‘they comes’ or ‘he am going’ are ungrammatical. In English, local cues are not, however, a reliable guide to the contrast between finite (tensed) and infinite (bare stem) verb forms. First, in emphatic, question and negative sentences, tense is marked on an auxiliary verb rather than the main verb, and in some contexts, notably questions, there may be distance between the tensed auxiliary and the stem, e.g. ‘Did the boy over there jump in the pool?’. Even more complex is the system of verb complementation, where a clause is treated like the object of a verb. English allows for both finite and non-finite complements: a sequence such as ‘John jump’ is acceptable in the context ‘I made John jump’, but not in ‘*John jump yesterday’; ‘John jumped’ follows the opposite pattern: acceptable as ‘John jumped yesterday’ or ‘I know John jumped yesterday’ but not as ‘*I made John jumped yesterday’. Thus, to master tense the child must establish the relationship between clauses in a multi-clause utterance, and then relate these to small sublexical units (inflections).


How is tense marking applied once language has been learned?

shows stages in producing a tense-inflected verb. This model, which is based on the Words and Rules view of language processing, distinguishes between processing of irregular verbs, which are represented as inflected forms in the lexicon, and regular verbs, where the regular form is assembled by rule. This separation of processing routes is not universally accepted but will serve the purpose here of indicating stages in processing that could be affected in a child who made errors in inflecting verbs. Problems in marking inflections will arise if there is a failure of learning at any stage—if knowledge of syntax is deficient (step 1), if lexical representations of irregulars are missing (step 2) or if knowledge of the past tense -ed rule is shaky (step 3). A key point, however, is that grammatical errors need not be a sign of poor learning: a person may make errors in the course of computing a linguistic representation: at the stage of assigning grammatical features (step 1), looking up an entry in the lexicon (step 2), combining a stem with an inflection (step 3) or assembling a motor programme to articulate a phonological sequence (step 4).

We may draw an analogy with a person presented with a sequence of arithmetic problems in rapid succession. Even if she was fully familiar with basic arithmetic, she would make mistakes if the presentation rate made it hard to solve one problem before the next one came along. In the context of verb inflections, the notion is that cognitive resources are consumed by the process of generating a sentence in real time, and tense inflections may be particularly vulnerable when resources are limited.


Evaluating the evidence

We turn now to consider evidence for different explanations for children's problems with tense marking. This takes three forms: performance on production tasks, performance on receptive language tasks and correlational evidence.


Past tense inflections in SLI. Language production


Elicitation tasks

In a typical elicitation task, an introductory sentence is used, such as ‘Every day I eat some chips. Just like every day, yesterday I….’ with the expected completion ‘ate some chips’. This type of format has been used with regular and irregular verbs, and with novel (nonsense) verbs. Comparison of these verb types is complicated by the fact that an incorrect response to an irregular verb can take the form of a bare stem or an overregularization (e.g. ‘falled’). As noted by Rice et al., children with SLI produce correctly inflected irregular verbs at a similar rate to typically developing children who are 2 years younger. However, they are significantly less likely than these younger children to produce overregularizations, instead producing a high proportion of bare stems. If we focus only on whether tense is marked in obligatory contexts, children with SLI show a substantial impairment even relative to younger control children who are similar on measures of overall language ability (‘language-matched’ controls). This is a particularly stringent comparison: where age-matched controls are used, the observed deficits are even more striking, but one often sees ceiling effects in the controls. shows a forest plot, depicting effect size when comparing past tense marking by children with SLI relative to language-matched controls. For this plot, irregular verbs were treated as correctly inflected if the child used either the correct irregular form, or an overregularization with -ed (e.g. ‘runned’). The first point to note is that these data confirm that problems with past tense inflections are a striking feature of children with SLI: the effect sizes are typically close to 1.0. A study with a smaller effect size compared 13-year olds with SLI with language-matched controls some 7 years younger. The second point is that the deficit is apparent for regular and irregular verbs: for both verb types, children with SLI are more likely than language-matched controls to produce bare stems in contexts where an inflected form is required. The difference between regular and irregular verbs varies from study to study; this may well depend on verb-specific effects. We know that children's ability to produce inflections is influenced by factors such as the frequency of the stem, frequency of the inflected form, phonological composition of the stem and inflected form and semantic aspects of the verb. Although recent studies have attempted to control for such factors, we can never be sure that we have equated items sets on all relevant variables. Data in this field are seldom analysed to test for item-specific effects, but in one study where this was done, an effect of verb regularity that was significant by subjects was not significant by items. In other words, the difference between irregular and regular verbs was not consistent across verbs, but depended on the specific words used.

Difficulties with applying the -ed inflection to verbs were shown to be syntax specific in an ingenious experiment by Leonard et al.. They showed that children with SLI were more likely than language-matched controls to omit -ed on verbs in both past tense and passive participle contexts (e.g. ‘the spoon got washed by the bunny’), but their performance was significantly better in the passive sentences.

A further point to note is that children with SLI are able to apply an appropriate inflection in a rule-based fashion. Although their performance on elicitation tasks is very poor relative to controls, they nevertheless inflect some verbs correctly, even when the verb is an unfamiliar nonsense form: for instance, re-analysis of data from the study by Norbury et al. revealed that all children with SLI produced a correctly inflected form for at least one nonword, and the mean score was 5.17 of 16 nonwords correct (s.d. = 4.00). Furthermore, overregularizations, although uncommon, were seen for irregular verbs.


Sentence repetition

In a repetition task, the phonological form is provided and the only requirement is to copy it. Such tasks place minimal demands on grammatical or lexical processing, and it might seem that they should be difficult only if there are deficits at the output phonological stage. However, the simplicity of the task is rather misleading, and it is well established that ability to repeat a sentence is related to ability to process its syntactic structure.

Dalal & Loeb were interested in whether the perceptual salience of an inflected verb affected accuracy of children's repetition. They studied 10 children with SLI aged from 4 to 6 years. Children were asked to repeat 10 sentences with sentence-internal verbs, e.g. ‘She skated on the ice’, and 10 sentences of the same length, with the same verbs in final position, e.g. ‘The tall thin girl skated’. All verbs had a syllabic -ed ending. Accuracy was significantly higher for the sentence final verbs, and the authors concluded that the results supported Leonard's surface account of morphological errors. However, misperception of inflectional endings could not account for all the data: 46% of errors involved producing either the wrong verb or a verb with a present progressive tense marking, and 21% involved verb omission, leaving only 32% of bare stem errors. Also, the 10 children had been selected as doing poorly on production of verb inflections in a pretest, yet three of them made no errors on the repetition task, and only four children made three or more errors in 20 items, indicating that repetition is easier than elicited production. No controls were tested, and so it is not possible to tell whether the effect of verb salience was an unusual feature of SLI or a normal developmental phenomenon. Overall, this study shows that repetition of an inflected verb is affected by sentence position, but it does not demonstrate that perceptual difficulties are an adequate explanation for problems with verb inflections in SLI.


Written language

Written language is of interest because, although it develops out of spoken language, it places different demands on processing. On the one hand, we might expect children to do better in producing inflected forms that they know, given that phonological production and poor perceptual ability are unlikely to be an issue, and there is less time pressure than with speech. On the other hand, if a child is still learning to be literate, combining the task of retrieving spellings and formulating sentences with computing correct inflectional endings may be more taxing than in talking. Windsor et al. obtained evidence that production of inflections in written language was indeed particularly difficult for children with SLI. They compared written and spoken language samples from 10- to 12-year olds with SLI with those of both age-matched controls and language-matched controls some 2 years younger. Neither control group made many grammatical errors. The SLI group made substantially more grammatical errors in their written samples than in the spoken samples, with past tense omissions being the commonest form of error (affecting 26% of verbs in obligatory contexts).


Past tense inflections in SLI. Receptive language tasks


Grammaticality judgement

A grammaticality judgement task—determining whether a sentence like ‘Yesterday John go to school’ is grammatical—can be used to test whether the child has syntactic knowledge of tense marking.

van der Lely & Ullman compared 12 children with SLI aged 9–12 years with typically developing control groups of different ages, including one group who were 5 years younger and who performed at a comparable level on a test of sentence comprehension. The children with SLI were substantially more likely than controls to accept an ungrammatical finite sentence containing a verb stem. This contrasted with their responses to made-up irregular forms, for example ‘leck’ for ‘looked’, which they overwhelmingly rejected. In a similar vein, Rice et al. presented children with a range of grammatical and ungrammatical sentences, including sentences with bare stems, for example ‘Maybe he need a Band-Aid’. Some sentences included additional information to indicate a third person singular context, e.g. ‘He look happy now’, and others involved omission of inflected copula or auxiliary (‘He brown’, ‘He running away’). These items were treated together as instances where the error involved failure to apply finite verb marking. Acceptance of grammatically erroneous forms was high relative to controls on these items, but not for other errors, such as failure of agreement (e.g. ‘I likes toast’) or dropping of -ing (‘He is run’). This pattern of results was replicated by Redmond & Rice, who studied processing of irregular verbs. They found 8-year olds with SLI were more likely than control 6-year olds to accept uninflected verbs in finite verb positions. Subsequently, Miller et al. showed that 16-year olds with SLI were less sensitive than age-matched controls to grammaticality violation, including omission of tense markers. Overall, these results provide evidence that omission of inflectional endings by children with SLI cannot be attributed simply to problems at the stage of phonological output. Nor are difficulties confined to regular inflections.


Word monitoring

Montgomery & Leonard used a reaction time task where children were required to respond as fast as possible to a target word in a heard sentence. The target word was preceded by a verb that was either inflected appropriately or was an (ungrammatical) bare stem. Control 6-year olds and 8-year olds responded more slowly when an obligatory inflection was omitted in the preceding verb. By contrast, 8-year olds with SLI were insensitive to this factor, despite showing good ability to detect ungrammaticality of similar items in an offline grammaticality judgement task (in contrast to other studies). Similar findings on a word-monitoring task were reported for 16-year olds with SLI: insensitivity to ungrammaticality was evident only when this involved omission of verb tense inflection.


Correlational evidence

SLI is seldom as specific as the label suggests and it is not uncommon to find co-occurring problems in non-linguistic domains, as well as a range of non-grammatical language deficits. It has been argued, however, that neither auditory impairments nor non-verbal ability or receptive vocabulary predict which children have problems with grammatical morphology. Phonological short-term memory (as assessed by nonword repetition) is a strong correlate of SLI, but there is only a weak relationship with omission of verb inflections.


Integrating the evidence

We shall now consider the evidence in relation to the model shown in, to see how far the errors made by children can be attributed to a deficit at a specific stage of processing.


Phonological formulation (step 4)

There is ample evidence that phonological complexity does impact on children's ability to produce past tense verbs, but phonological formulation problems cannot account for the range of deficits seen in SLI on tasks such as grammaticality judgement, word monitoring and written language. Nor can this account explain why production of the same phonological form is more accurate when it corresponds to a passive participle rather than a past tense verb.


Application of morpho-phonological rule (step 3)

There are several lines of evidence against a morpho-phonological explanation for tense errors in SLI. First, there is clear evidence for problems with irregular as well as regular past tense in elicitation tasks. Furthermore, children with SLI show some ability to apply a morphological rule, such as add -ed to a verb, as evidenced by their ability to inflect nonsense words and to overregularize irregular verbs. Finally, problems are not confined to tasks involving word production, but also occur on grammaticality judgement and word-monitoring tasks.

Could we nevertheless argue that complexity at the morpho-phonological level affects children's ability to process tense inflections? Sentence comprehension requires the child to parse incoming input in real time. If the child's language processor was unable to keep up with an incoming stream of words, then online syntactic interpretation might be disrupted, with inflections being particularly vulnerable to omission from a parsed representation. This account, however, would predict insensitivity to inflections in general, and this is not seen. Furthermore, adolescents with SLI showed normal reaction times in a word-monitoring task, contradicting the notion that they suffer from generally slowed receptive language processing.


Lexical entries for irregular forms (step 2)

This stage of processing is not generally regarded as a plausible explanation for tense errors in SLI, because knowledge of irregular verb inflections is not a specific source of difficulty, but is in line with general language ability.


Failure to assign grammatical feature of tense (step 1)

The pattern of errors observed in grammaticality judgement and word-monitoring tasks, plus the frequency of bare stem errors on irregular as well as regular verbs suggest that the problem for children with SLI is in knowing when to apply tense marking, rather than with how to do so. In other words, the problem is with syntax rather than morpho-phonological rules.

So, we are left with the question of why this aspect of grammar is disproportionately hard for children with SLI. Here, we find very different answers depending on the theoretical background of those proposing an account.


Domain-general learning accounts: perception, memory and statistical learning

As illustrated in the early stages of, to acquire language, the child must be able to distinguish salient features in the input and remember sequences of words. This raises the possibility that language acquisition could be disrupted by difficulty in perceiving, segmenting or remembering heard speech. Could such disruption be the root cause of problems with past tense? One piece of evidence that goes against such an explanation is the finding that children with mild-to-moderate hearing loss do not typically have the kinds of tense-marking problems that are seen in SLI, even though they do poorly on tests of speech perception and phonological short-term memory. The weak relationship between tense-marking errors and poor phonological short-term memory (nonword repetition) in SLI is further evidence against this account.


A competence account: the extended optional infinitive

The difficulty of learning tense marking via local dependencies between words is one reason why generative linguists have argued for principles of Universal Grammar; normal learning mechanisms, it is argued, could not accomplish this feat, and so there must be innate knowledge of a grammatical feature such as tense.

According to a popular generative account, the child comes to the language-learning task armed with knowledge about the grammatical options available in different languages. Mastery of tense is achieved when exposure to language input triggers one setting or another of a parameter that specifies how tense is represented in that language. Triggering, however, implies a fairly abrupt transition from inaccurate to accurate tense usage, which is not what is seen in typical development. For a language such as English, the problem is dealt with by proposing that the distinction the child learns is between optional versus obligatory marking of tense in finite contexts.

To explain SLI, the proposal is that an optional setting for tense persists well beyond the usual age, hence this is known as the Extended Optional Infinitive account of SLI. Specifically, it is proposed that the parameter setting for tense undergoes maturation, and that this maturational process is delayed in some children—those with SLI.

An optionality account regards syntactic competence in SLI as immature. This is consistent with observations that these children go through a stage where they produce a mixture of correctly and incorrectly tensed verbs, but they seldom apply tense marking in appropriate syntactic contexts. However, one piece of evidence is hard to accommodate within such a theory: children and adolescents with SLI perform far worse than controls when asked to judge sentences such as

*He made the robot fell into the pool,

where they tend to accept sentences with finite verbs as grammatical. The theory predicts that finite or non-finite verbs will be seen in finite contexts, but only non-finite verbs should be seen in non-finite contexts, and so it has difficulty explaining such a result. It should, however, be noted that children's apparent insensitivity to this kind of grammatical error is unexpected, as they do not make similar errors in their own speech. Furthermore, adolescents with SLI showed sensitivity to this kind of grammatical error on a word-monitoring task.


An explanation in terms of computational complexity

van der Lely introduced the notion that at least some subtypes of SLI are due to deficits affecting syntactic, morphological or phonological computations. She argued that all these components of language are characterized by recursion and hierarchical non-local dependencies, and that problems with marking past tense could reflect difficulties at one or all of these levels. Although her account was derived from a generative perspective, the proposed problem is not with a specific parameter of the grammar, so much as in carrying out complex computations. Nevertheless, van der Lely argued that the underlying deficit was domain specific, insofar as it was not caused by a more general impairment in auditory or memory processing. A syntactic deficit in computational complexity would be expected to affect all aspects of grammar that required complex computations of nonlinear structure. As she noted, children with SLI do indeed have problems that extend beyond tense: they have difficulty understanding passives, producing questions and assigning pronominal reference as well.


An alternative domain-general performance account

According to van der Lely, computational operations, such as recursion or identification of hierarchical non-local dependencies, are quintessentially linguistic, and her postulated deficit in computational complexity is seen as domain specific. Such a view, however, has been challenged by Ullman & Pierpont, who have suggested that grammar is handled by a procedural learning system that is also implicated in sequential learning in other domains. According to this view, problems with tense marking could be due to a deficiency in a domain-general system that plays a key role in language learning and online language processing, but which is also involved in other tasks such as implicit learning of motor sequences. In recent years, several studies have found evidence compatible with this account, documenting deficiencies in non-verbal sequential motor learning in SLI. Furthermore, although specific links with tense marking have not yet been demonstrated, some correlations have been documented between impaired motor sequence learning and grammatical abilities. Such evidence suggests that there may be a domain-general sequence extraction mechanism that plays a role in online production and comprehension of complex language—similar to the computational complexity account of van der Lely, but not linguistically specific.


Implications for tense errors in acquired aphasia

One needs to be cautious of drawing parallels between acquired and developmental disorders. Nevertheless, where similar phenomena are seen in children and adults, theories and methodologies can evolve quite separately, and it can be instructive to compare and contrast. For acquired disorders, the distinction between regular and irregular past tense verbs has been a major focus of attention and a great deal of debate has centred around the extent to which the Words and Rules account of language processing can account for the observed phenomena. According to this account, there are two distinct systems used in past tense formation—one involves applying a rule to generate past tense from a base form and the other involves looking up an inflected form in the mental lexicon. Data from people with acquired language disorders have been used as evidence for this duality, on the basis that one can find instances of double dissociation: one group of people has problems predominantly with irregular inflection, whereas another group shows greater impairment with regulars. According to Pinker & Ullman, these correspond to deficits in the lexicon for the first group and the rule-based grammatical system for the second group. This interpretation has, however, been challenged by those who question the neat divide between two processing routes and who argue that phonological problems in production or perception could be responsible for the disproportionate problems with regular past tense seen in some people with aphasia.

The data from the cases reported by Ullman et al. suggest, however, that those with anterior lesions, like children with SLI, may have problems in knowing when to mark tense. Data were reported for one case with a circumscribed frontal lesion, and five others with larger lesions. The prediction was that these individuals should perform worse at inflecting regular than irregular forms, should not overregularize and should be unable to apply past tense -ed to novel verbs. While it was true that the percentage of correctly inflected verbs was numerically greater for irregular than regular verbs, performance on irregular verbs was not impressive (55% correct for irregular and 20% for regular). For irregular as well as regular verbs, there were instances of unmarked forms (15% for irregular verbs versus 33% for regular verbs) or inappropriate application of the -ing inflection (6% of irregular verbs and 11% of regular verbs). This kind of evidence suggests that at least part of the failure to use correct inflections involves problems in understanding the syntactic context that obligates tense marking, rather than just knowing how to mark tense.

Similar points were made by Druks, in a case study of a man with Broca's aphasia and phonological dyslexia. Although on some tasks he made more errors on regular than irregular past tense verbs, his performance with irregular verbs was far from perfect and much worse than his performance with simple content words. Furthermore, performance with verb past tense inflections was worse than with noun inflections, derivational morphemes or present progressive -ing. Finally, the impairments with verb tense extended to comprehension and recognition tasks. The results of this case suggest that, as with SLI, an explanation in terms of syntactic impairment does a better job of explaining the pattern of errors than one that focuses only on the morpho-phonological or phonological levels.

The careful and painstaking research that has been conducted on SLI and acquired aphasia over the past two decades confirms that tense marking is often an area of particular difficulty. I have attempted to pull together the evidence from SLI and concluded that there is an underlying problem with syntax, rather than only with morphology or phonology. This is not to exclude a role of morphological or phonological deficits—it is quite likely that more than one linguistic system is affected and this may vary from child to child. Insofar as tense is implicated, we need to recognize that an explanation in terms of syntax need not commit us to a generative view that attributes development to setting of a parameter of Universal Grammar. An explanation couched in terms of problems in extraction of hierarchical structure from sequential input may have a better chance of explaining the full pattern of linguistic strengths and weaknesses.


The development of spatial behaviour and the hippocampal neural representation of space

Thomas J. Wills, Laurenz Muessig, Francesca Cacucci — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2014. PMC3866458, CC BY 3.0.

The role of the hippocampal formation in spatial cognition is thought to be supported by distinct classes of neurons whose firing is tuned to an organism's position and orientation in space. In this article, we review recent research focused on how and when this neural representation of space emerges during development: each class of spatially tuned neurons appears at a different age, and matures at a different rate, but all the main spatial responses tested so far are present by three weeks of age in the rat. We also summarize the development of spatial behaviour in the rat, describing how active exploration of space emerges during the third week of life, the first evidence of learning in formal tests of hippocampus-dependent spatial cognition is observed in the fourth week, whereas fully adult-like spatial cognitive abilities require another few weeks to be achieved. We argue that the development of spatially tuned neurons needs to be considered within the context of the development of spatial behaviour in order to achieve an integrated understanding of the emergence of hippocampal function and spatial cognition.


Introduction

The hippocampal formation plays a fundamental role in spatial cognition and navigation, across the whole vertebrate group. This role is thought to be supported, at the neural level, by the presence of several different classes of neurons whose firing is tuned to an animal's position and orientation in space. Some of the principal spatial cell responses are place cells, which fire in a unique position in an environment and encode the animal's current location; head direction (HD) cells, which encode the heading direction of the animal; grid cells, which fire in several locations in an environment, laid out in a hexagonal grid, and may encode distance travelled; boundary vector/border cells, which respond to boundaries of the environment and may represent fundamental inputs to place and grid cells. Spatially tuned neurons have been most intensively studied in rodents (laboratory rats and mice in particular), but similar neuronal activity has been described in a range of mammalian species, as well as in other vertebrates.

An intense and long-standing research effort has addressed the function of this neural representation of space, and how it underpins spatial cognition in the adult rodent. More recently, several groups have also begun to approach the question of how and when the hippocampal neural representation of space emerges during development (see also for earlier work). The results of this work show that the different types of spatially tuned neurons emerge at different times during development, within the first three weeks of the rat's life, and follow different developmental programmes thereafter. So far, this research has not only provided insights into the developmental mechanisms responsible for the emergence of the neural map of space, but, crucially, also into how this might function in the adult.

The purpose of this review is to summarize what is known of the development of spatial behaviour in the laboratory rat (Rattus norvegius), encompassing both the emergence of spontaneously expressed spatial behaviour, as well as formal testing of spatial cognition in tasks known to be dependent on an intact hippocampus in the adult. In order to provide a meaningful context to the emergence of spatial cognition, we will also summarize the most important landmarks in the sensory and motor development of the rat, focusing on those aspects that are thought to be necessary to express spatial learning and behaviour.

We will compare the development of spatial behaviour with the emergence of spatially tuned responses in the hippocampal formation, with the view of addressing two questions. First, does the relative timing of the emergence of spatial behaviour and spatial firing allow us to infer the relative roles of sensory experience and endogenous factors in their development? The original proposal of the hippocampus as a cognitive mapping system argued that the neural representation of allocentric space supported by the hippocampus was a Kantian synthetic a priori system, meaning that it did not require empirical experience for its construction, or for its validation. Rather, the cognitive map was predicted to be independent of prior experience of spatial relations in the world, and form a scaffold for the coherent organization of those experiences. In this sense, the cognitive map theory predicted that the ontogenetic development of spatially tuned neurons should be independent of experience of space.

The second question that will be addressed in this review relates to the functional link between the hippocampal neural representation of space and spatial cognition. In the adult rat, the firing of spatially tuned neurons has been shown to correlate with the accuracy of behaviour in tests of spatial cognition. Do ontogenetic studies allow us to look for such functional relationships, that is, does the developmental timeline of spatially modulated firing indicate that it is a prerequisite for the expression of spatial behaviour?

More generally, establishing the relative developmental timelines of spatial behaviour and spatially modulated firing is an important step in understanding the interaction of the different factors (e.g. molecular cues, intrinsic neural activity and environmental experience) that are involved in the development of neural systems. The development of the hippocampus at the molecular, cellular and physiological level will not be discussed in this review, but the reader is directed towards other recent reviews that cover these areas.


The development of sensory-motor systems in the rat


The development of sensory systems

Like humans, rats are altricial animals, and newborn rat pups have limited sensory perception. Sensory development in the rat follows the general mammalian blueprint of sensory ontogenesis, with the vestibular and olfactory functions being the first to emerge (around birth) followed by tactile, auditory and visual function, respectively.

At birth, rats display a rudimentary righting reflex, possibly reflecting the functioning of an immature vestibular system. Recordings of peripheral or central vestibular neurons in anaesthetized animals show that weak neural responses to rotation exist as early as postnatal day 1–2 (P1–2), which become largely adult-like by P8. The behavioural development of vestibular responses has not been extensively tested in rats, but it is known that pups can right in mid-air during a fall from P17 onwards. In the mouse, the optokinetic and vestibulo-ocular reflexes are essentially adult-like at P21. The vestibular system is therefore thought to be present in immature form from the first few days of life and develop substantially during the first three weeks of the rat's life.

The other precocious sensory modality in the rat is olfaction: rats demonstrate a preference for their mother's odour at 2 days of age. Rudimentary sniffing behaviour can be observed at P4, but it is not until P10–11 that the typical adult sniffing behaviour (in combination with head pointing) emerges, and by P15 rat pups systematically sniff at everything in their home cage.

Tactile exploration in rats is thought to be principally mediated by active whisking (high-frequency-directed movements of their facial macrovibrissae). Movements of the whiskers are first observed at P4, but adult-like whisking (repeated cycles of retraction and protraction) does not emerge until P10–13, after which the frequency and amplitude of whisking movements continue to develop until around P21. However, even before P4, passive movement of the whiskers can induce activity in rat pups, and whisker clipping disrupts suckling and huddling behaviours at P4–5.

The auditory system of infant rats begins to function at P8–9, at which age cochlear microphonic potentials (reflecting hair cell stimulation) can be observed. Action potential responses (reflecting action potentials in the auditory nerve) first occur at P11–12. The auditory meati of rat pups open at P11–13, and it is around that time that rat pups start showing clear orienting towards an auditory stimulus.

Vision is the last sensory system to emerge, with the eyes opening at P13–15. The optics of the eye are not clear until P19, and electrophysiological recordings from primary visual cortex reveal very immature responses to a series of bars and gratings at P17–19 (reduced acuity, larger receptive fields and insensitivity to orientation or movement direction). However, a more recent study reported that neuronal preference for the orientation and spatial frequency of a grating is largely adult-like at P16, though the contrast threshold is lower than that in adults.

The precocious sensory modalities (vestibular, olfaction, tactile sensation) are therefore probably generally adult-like by three weeks of age, in clear contrast to the visual system, which is functional, but remains largely immature at this age.


The development of motor skills

During the first week of life, relatively simple motor behaviours prevail. At P0, pups can invert their posture, either to right themselves or to feed from their mother, and move a small distance along the mother's ventrum to arrive at a nipple. Altman & Sudarshan performed an extensive series of tests of the development of motor skills in Wistar rat pups, testing animals every day between P1 and P21. It is important to note that these tests were conducted in an open field, where pups were individually tested while away from their mother and littermates. The first organized locomotor behaviour observed under these conditions was ‘pivoting’, turning on the spot that is driven by movement of the forelimbs, whereas the hindlimbs remain immobile. Pivoting began at P3, peaked at P7 and diminished thereafter. Pups first became capable of translational movement at around one week of age, although such movements were inefficient (termed ‘crawling’), with the hindlimbs mostly dragged along, rather than contributing to movement. Full quadrupedal walking, including proper, coordinated use of hindlimbs, emerged from P14 onwards. Rats did not actively move around in the open field until P9, started to travel short distances between P10 and P14, and the distance covered increased abruptly from P15 onwards. By P21, pups were capable of a large range of complex motor skills, including rope climbing, traversing a narrow raised walkway and jumping down a vertical drop.

The results of this study suggest that, similar to the development of sensory systems, the development of the species-specific motor repertoire of the rat takes place across the first three weeks of postnatal life.


The development of spatial behaviour

In this review, we will adopt a definition of spatial behaviour that encompasses all spontaneously expressed movements through space (§2a), as well as the ability to solve formal tasks of spatial learning and navigation, that are dependent on an intact hippocampus in the adult rat (§2b). The data from the studies discussed below are also summarized in.


The emergence of spontaneous movements through space

During the first two weeks of life, rats spend most of the time in their nest, with their mother and littermates (see below, ‘Activity in the nest’). The emergence of spontaneous movements outside the nest occurs, in laboratory animals, sometime within the third week of life.


Homing

One of the earliest expressions of spatial behaviour is the ability of pups to return to the nest if separated from their mother and littermates by the experimenter. Altman & Sudarshan tested when pups could return to the nest group within 3 min when separated by a 20 cm direct line: at P7, none could achieve this; by P10, the success rate was approximately 50%; by P13, 100% of pups could return to the nest. However, this task was probably testing the development of crawling ability, as well as the ability to locate the nest: almost 100% of pups could correctly orient towards the nest by P8. In a more formal homing test, Bulut & Altman probed whether rats could learn to discriminate between two adjacent doors in order to return to the nest. Training started at P6, but no pup performed successfully on this task until P13. In summary, rat pups develop the ability to successfully orient towards the nest (probably using olfactory and auditory cues) and locomote towards it during their second week of life.


Exploration and leaving the nest

The earliest studies of rat development noted the striking prominence of exploration and curiosity in immature rats. In adult rats, exposure to novel environments prompts a well-defined exploratory response which depends upon an intact hippocampus: hippocampal-lesioned animals are hyperactive, but do not systematically explore their environment, and show less habituation after repeated exposures to an environment. Pinpointing the emergence of spontaneous exploration may therefore inform us about the development of hippocampal function. It will also help to define at which age rats experience large-scale space during the course of normal development: as described below, the development of locomotor skills, when tested in isolation, does not necessarily map onto the normal emergence of spontaneous exploratory behaviour.

When isolated pups are placed in an environment, they will walk from around two weeks of age. If isolated pups are left for longer in the testing arena (25–120 min), then P20–21 pups will habituate to the environment, as shown by decreasing activity levels, but P15 pups will continue to move at similar levels throughout the whole testing period (reminiscent of hippocampal-lesioned animals), leading to an overall peak in motor activity at P15, see also. This behaviour is dramatically changed, however, by the presence of a conspecific in the open field. The heightened activity levels of P15 pups can be inhibited by the presence of littermates, an anaesthetized lactating female, or even an anaesthetized male, suggesting that heightened open field activity around P15 may reflect a response to social isolation, rather than spontaneous exploration of the environment. In keeping with this interpretation, ultrasonic vocalization (USV) distress calls, which are an anxiety-based response to social isolation in rat pups, peak during the second week of life, are still observed at P14, but are much reduced by P18–19.

Nadel et al. also found a dissociation between the ontogenetic profile of motor activity, as tested in a running wheel, and that of active exploration, as tested by placing single rat pups in an open arena containing several objects. A peak in motor output in the running wheel occurred around P16–17, contrasting with the emergence of significant exploration of the arena, which appeared between P17 and P25 (median P21). Perhaps the most intriguing observation in this study was that the onset of active exploration was abrupt within each pup, occurring almost overnight, in an all-or-none fashion.

Consistent with this latter study, the age at which pups will spontaneously leave the confines of the nest to explore the surrounding environment is towards the end of the third week of life. Pups reared with free access to an eight-arm maze (while the mother was confined to the nest-box) did not make any forays into the maze between P13 and P15, a small amount of activity was seen on P16, and activity levels rose steeply thereafter. Similarly, pups placed on an open platform with their littermates (but without their mother) make only very short forays away from the huddle between P16 and P18, and the distance of these forays increases from P19 onwards. Likewise, pups prefer to explore the novel side of a box only from P19 onwards. Rearing on the hind legs, an important behavioural marker of novelty-induced exploration, first emerges at around P17, and increases rapidly from P19 onwards.

The presence of the mother outside the nest is also an important stimulus that can increase levels of nest egression. At P19, pups make more spontaneous forays from a nest-box into an open field if the mother is present there. Bearing this in mind, probably the most ethologically valid approach is to determine the emergence of exploration when both mother and pups have free access to an open field. When this is the case, pups tend to spend a small amount of time (less than 10%) in the open field between P15 and P17, and show a sudden increase to approximately 30% of time spent in the open field at P18. This study also found that the developmental emergence of nest egression is modulated by the ambient temperature, presumably reflecting the temperature regulation function of huddling behaviour (see §3a(iv)). The results described above refer to pups raised at 21°C; pups raised at 30°C spend more than 50% of their time in the open field at P16, whereas at 18°C, less than 10% of time is spent in the open field even at P20. For all temperatures, the amount of time spent in the open field is approximately zero at P14, setting a well-defined lower limit to the earliest age of exploration.

Full independence from the mother occurs much later in development: although weaning is commonly induced in laboratory rats at P21, rats left with their mother will wean at around P35. Furthermore, the exploration of an open field and of objects has been shown to continue to mature between P30 and P90.

In summary, the onset of spontaneous exploration outside the confines of the nest happens during a narrow time window, centred around the end of the third week of life in the rat. Moreover, there are indications that the transition to exploratory behaviour is abrupt in each animal, suggesting that this transition might reflect specific, as yet unidentified, neural changes in the hippocampal circuitry.


Egression from the nest and the role of path integration

Path integration describes the ability of an animal to home back in a straight trajectory to a starting position (e.g. nest) after an excursion, calculating the distance and direction traversed on the outbound journey on the basis of internally generated cues (e.g. vestibular cues, motor efference copy or proprioception). Path integration is thought to be one of the two principal processes (along with information acquired from the location of external landmarks) in the generation of a neural map of space; it is generally accepted that path integrative behaviour is disrupted by lesions to areas containing spatially tuned neurons, but see also. It is therefore of interest to study the ontogenetic time course of path integration. Loewen et al. reported that the exploratory behaviour of rat pups was consistent with an ability to path integrate, even at very early ages (P16 onwards). On a 1.5 m diameter platform, return trips to the huddle were always shorter than outwards forays, even in the dark and upon removal of the olfactory and auditory cues provided by the presence of littermates.


Activity within the nest

Although egression from the nest marks the first movements in large-scale space, pups are far from immobile within the nest environment, and their activity patterns during this time may well constitute a critical experience of movement and orientation in space. Before active exploration outside the nest begins, the predominant environment of the pup is the ‘huddle’, an aggregation of littermates within which each individual pup will attempt to move to the centre, and be pushed to the periphery by littermates attempting to do likewise. The purpose of such aggregation behaviour is probably thermoregulation: increasing the ambient temperature can change the ‘convective flow’ of pups within the huddle from inwards (as described above) to outwards. Huddling behaviour gradually breaks down as pups become more active, sometime during the third week of life.

Another manner in which rat pups sample space within the nest are movements with respect to their mother. Rat pups display orienting towards the mother even at P1–3, move around the body of the mother and shift between nipples while suckling from P10 onwards. Cramer et al. reported that restricting nipple shifting between P5 and P24, by surgical removal of nipples, led to learning deficits in an eight-arm radial maze (see below) at P25, and suggested that nipple shifting may constitute experience of space and sequence learning. The specificity of this deficit to nipple shifting should probably be treated with caution, however, as surgical removal of the nipples may have altered the pup–mother interaction, which could have also affected the normal course of development in a more general way. In particular, the hippocampus has an important role in the stress response in the adult, and stress modulates the efficacy of hippocampal learning and synaptic plasticity. It has been shown that stress during development, including variations in maternal care, can alter the hippocampal response to stress and hippocampal function in spatial cognition, later in adult life.


Development in a non-laboratory environment

Comparatively, little is known about the behaviour of Norway rats in the wild. An ethological perspective is important for ontogenetic studies, as the developmental programme of behaviour may be evolutionarily adapted to an environment dissimilar to laboratory rearing conditions: knowing the ‘natural’ environment can help understand the interaction between the individual animal and its environment during development.

Calhoun raised a colony of wild-born Norway rats in an enclosed outdoor pen approximately 1000 m2 in area. The development of three litters was described in detail in this study: in all cases, the first age at which nest egression was observed was considerably later (P23–P40) than described in the laboratory studies above (but note the late egression from the nest in cold conditions found in). Note that two of these three examples occurred within the first months of the existence of the colony, and therefore would not have been affected by the high mortality and low reproductive success that affected the colony towards the end of the study. It seems that emergence from the nest therefore occurs at younger ages in a laboratory setting compared with wild or semi-wild conditions. Thus, the end of the third week of life might be considered a lower bound when trying to identify the hippocampal processes that might underlie the onset of active exploratory behaviour in the rat.

In Calhoun's study, nest chambers were often contained within extensive, topologically complex burrow systems, though mothers also made nests in ‘harbourage boxes’ at surface level, provided by the experimenters. In burrow systems, the modal distance from a nest chamber to the nearest exit was approximately 0.5 m. Some studies have found that the burrows of domesticated laboratory rats are considerably more basic than those of wild Norway rats, though Boice found no difference between the burrows of wild rats and domesticated albino rats raised in an outdoor pen. In general, a nest chamber, connected to the external world by a short tunnel, would appear to define the geometry of the space into which a pup would be born, in non-laboratory conditions.


The development of hippocampus-dependent spatial learning and memory

In this section, we review the development of spatial learning and memory, as tested formally by behavioural tasks which require intact hippocampal function in the adult rat. We will not discuss the development of other forms of associative learning (for example, the development of conditioning): for this work, the reader is directed to the review contained within.


Water maze

The Morris water maze task, in which rats are required to learn the location of a platform in a circular swimming pool, is one of the most widely used behavioural paradigms in the assessment of spatial learning and hippocampal function. In the ‘place navigation’ version of this task, the platform is hidden below the water surface, meaning that rats cannot rely on local cues when finding the platform. In adult rats, lesions as well as pharmacological inactivation of the hippocampus abolish the ability to display such place navigation. If a salient visual cue is placed near the platform (the ‘cued’ version of the task), then the ability to find the platform is independent of hippocampal function, and is therefore thought to reflect the use of a different navigational system by the animal.

The first study of the ontogeny of place navigation in the water maze found that although adult-like learning (including multiple crosses through the platform site when the platform was removed) was not observed until P42, there was evidence of learning, reflected by reduced latencies to find the platform, even at P21. Several studies have since attempted to determine the first onset of place learning in the water maze. Rudy et al. showed that rats trained on days P18 and P19 demonstrated reduced latencies to find the platform at P19, but no preference to visit the platform location when it was removed from the pool. Rats trained on P20 and P21, however, showed latencies which reduced within the day, on both P20 and P21, and a preference for the platform location at P21. Brown & Whishaw confined training to 1 day only, and took precautions to ensure that training in the water did not lead to a drop in body temperature. In this case, evidence of place learning was observed at P19 and P20, but not at P18. Akers & Hamilton also confined training to 1 day, finding that the first evidence of reduced latencies can be observed at P20, but a clear preference for the platform quadrant in the no platform probe appears to develop later, between P20 and P24. Finally, it should be noted that weanling pups (P20–P28) show increased learning when the maze is scaled down to an appropriate size, and in a 40 cm diameter maze, rats trained between P17 and P19 showed evidence of place learning at P19, when compared with naive P19 rats.

In summary, no study has found evidence of place learning earlier than P19, and most studies agree that this ability is present by P21. It should be reiterated, however, that fully adult performance does not emerge until much later.

Most studies agree that the visually cued version of the task can be solved 1–2 days earlier during development than the hidden platform version, with the earliest evidence of learning (assessed by reduced escape latencies) being observed at P17. (Though note that one study failed to find evidence of this, with both place and visually cued learning emerging in parallel at P19). The earlier emergence of learning on the visually cued water maze has been interpreted as evidence that the different brain systems involved in place- and landmark-guided navigation are maturing at different times, and could also be taken as evidence that the limiting factor in the developmental emergence of place navigation is the development of hippocampal function, rather than immature sensory or motor systems (as the visually cued water maze requires rats to visually locate the platform and swim to it). However, some caution should be applied when considering this interpretation: visual acuity is still very immature around three weeks of age, and experimentally reduced visual acuity in the adult rat leads to deficits in the place, but not the cued version of the water maze. The developmental lag between place- and cued- navigation might simply reflect the later age at which visual acuity is sufficient for proper perception of the extra-maze cues. Consistent with this hypothesis, P19 rats show reduced escape latencies and increased preference for the platform location when the platform is positioned closer to the distal cues, or the number of distal cues is increased. Using a dry-land variant of the water maze (requiring an escape though one of a series of holes in an open arena), Rossier & Schenk showed that rats gave more emphasis to local olfactory cues than distal visual cues until after P48. Interestingly, if rats were trained with both visual and olfactory cues, and then the olfactory cues were removed, P48 rats could rely on visual cues on their own, but P24 rats could not, suggesting a late development of multi-sensory integration in the hippocampus.

To further test the role of extra-maze cues in the water maze, Hamilton et al. introduced a variant of the task in which the pool is shifted relative to the laboratory and distal extra-maze cues. In this situation, adult rats have a strong tendency to swim towards the platform position as defined by the pool, rather than that defined by the extra-maze cues. The authors interpret this as evidence of a navigation strategy that primarily uses a directional bearing to the platform (termed ‘directional’ navigation), but an alternative interpretation is that the boundaries of the pool play a primary role in defining platform position, and the extra-maze directional reference frame serves to disambiguate positions within the circularly symmetric pool. Adult rats can learn to navigate to an absolute position in the extra-maze reference frame, ignoring the pool boundaries (termed ‘place’ navigation), if trained on a procedure that explicitly dissociates the platform position from the pool boundaries, and if the pool boundary is eliminated as a sensory cue as much as possible (for example, by filling the pool completely with water). Akers et al. conducted a series of studies investigating when ‘directional’ and ‘place’ navigation emerged during development, and showed that ‘directional’ navigation emerged at approximately P20, whereas ‘place’ navigation emerged later, at around P26. One possible caveat is that this may, again, reflect protracted visual sensory development: it is possible that using several distal cues to precisely triangulate a position requires a higher visual acuity than using these cues only as a directional fix. Interestingly, animals as young as P17, trained using a visually cued platform, will show disrupted performance if the cued platform moves to a new position relative to the pool boundaries. This demonstrates that a ‘directional’ learning strategy (i.e. the use of the pool boundaries as a spatial cue and an extra-maze directional fix) is present in animals as young as P17, and furthermore, that this is not overshadowed by the presence of a visual landmark during learning.

Brown & Kraemer tested the development of long-term memory retention in the water maze, and found that a 3- or 7-day delay between learning and testing resulted in worse performance, compared with no delay, at P20 and P34, whereas adults performed equally well in all conditions. Likewise, Spreng et al. found that a spaced training protocol does not aid long-term retention at P33, unlike in adults. These studies suggest a protracted development for the long-term retention of spatial memory in the hippocampus, although Carman et al. found that early experience in the water maze can influence learning at a later date: pups trained at P17–19 performed better than naive pups at P26, after a limited ‘reinstatement’ training session.


T-maze

The T-maze can be run using various protocols, including ‘reference memory’, in which the goal location is constant, and ‘delayed forced alternation’, in which the rat is first forced into one goal arm (by blocking access to the other), then subsequently required to choose the opposite arm from a free choice, possibly after a variable delay. Green & Stanton investigated the ontogeny of learning on both the reference memory and delayed forced alternation protocols. It was found that pups as young as P15 can learn the reference memory task, but if forced alternation and a 15 s delay are introduced, then the behaviour of P15 pups falls to chance levels. P21 and P25 animals can learn the delayed forced alternation task after 20–30 trials, however, even at P33 rats are still more likely to make errors than adult animals. Freeman & Stanton found that fornix lesions at P10 prevented rats from learning the delayed forced alternation T-maze (when tested at P23), but not the reference memory T-maze, suggesting that the early emergence of the latter is based on non-hippocampal neural systems.

When presented with a free choice between two maze arms, adult rats will naturally tend to alternate between them, a behaviour that is generally abolished by hippocampal lesions. Kirkby reported a gradual increase in rates of spontaneous alternation between P20 and P80, with P20 animals performing at chance levels. Douglas et al. investigated the emergence of this behaviour in more detail, showing that most animals reach a criterion (75% alternation across 20 consecutive trials) between P23 and P33, but a small fraction of animals reaches this criterion only between P61 and P65. More remarkably, within individual animals, the transition between performing at or around chance levels to reaching the criterion occurs within a very short period (few days), an effect that is obscured when one only looks at the average performance across animals. Echoing the slow maturation of long-term memory in the water maze, Bronstein et al. reported adult-like performance in P30 rats when testing spontaneous alternation across a 15 s delay, but a reduction in performance to chance levels when using a 1 h delay.


Radial arm maze

In the simplest version of the radial arm maze, rats need to collect the reward from all arms of the maze, learning not to return to previously visited arms: the acquisition of this task requires an intact hippocampus. Rauch & Raskin trained one group of animals on this task repeatedly from P16 until P25, and found that rats could not complete the task (defined as visiting all eight arms in 15 min) until P21, and the success rate at P21 (defined as the number of different arms entered in the first eight choices) was above chance. A different group of animals, trained for one developmental day only (age range P21–P25), could complete the task by P22, and showed a sharp increase in performance on P23 (when judged by a reduction in the number of repeat arm entries until all eight pellets were eaten). When animals were tested on a mixed reference/working memory paradigm (the same four arms out of the eight always baited), both reference and working memory scores were above chance from P21 onwards. The ability to solve this version of the radial arm maze therefore emerges at approximately three weeks of age.

In summary, formal testing of spatial cognition in rats shows that the first evidence of hippocampus-dependent navigation emerges around three weeks of age (see for summary). However, the full complement of adult abilities unfolds over a longer timescale, achieving maturity between six and eight weeks of life.


The development of the neural map of space

Spatially responsive neurons in the hippocampal formation are thought to represent the neural underpinnings of cognitive maps, i.e. mental representations of the relative location of objects and landmarks in space that can be used for navigation. In the following sections, we will review the recent work that has begun to uncover when the spatially modulated firing of these cells emerges during development, and, whenever possible, highlight potential functional links between the emergence of spatial signalling in the hippocampus and spatial behaviour in immature rats.


Head direction cells

HD cells encode the current heading direction of the animal. Each HD cell fires whenever an animal points its head in a specific allocentric direction, as defined by both exteroceptive (e.g. external sensory landmarks: visual, auditory, olfactory) and interoceptive (e.g. vestibular, self-motion signals, motor efference copy, optic flow information) cues.

Intriguingly, of those spatially responsive neurons studied so far (HD, place and grid cells), HD cells are the first to emerge during development. Adult-like HD responses, which are stable both within and across two recording sessions, separated by approximately 15 min, can be recorded from both the medial entorhinal cortex and the dorsal presubiculum, in rat pups that are at least 15- to 16-days old. This is an age preceding significant active exploration (see §3a(ii)), suggesting that the HD circuit might be wired in the absence of active exploratory experience, and that its wiring might rather rely on endogenous mechanisms. Consistent with this interpretation, the amount of experience in the recording environment does not correlate with the quality of HD firing in these immature pups. The early maturation of the HD system might, more specifically, reflect the early maturation of the vestibular system (see §2(a)), with which the HD circuit is intimately connected. Adult-like HD responses can be recorded at an age when place responses are still mostly immature (see below) and when no stable grid cell responses can be detected (see below), suggesting that HD responses might be the ‘primary’ spatial signal, and be independent of other spatial neurons for their function or development. This hypothesis is consistent with observations that lesions to, or temporary inactivation of the hippocampus (where place cells are located) have little impact on HD cell firing in adults.


Grid cells

Grid cells fire in multiple locations arranged in a hexagonally symmetrical grid, and may encode for the distance travelled by the animal. They can be recorded from the whole of the parahippocampal region (medial entorhinal cortex, pre- and parasubiculum).

Two studies have so far traced the emergence of this spatial signal and demonstrated that the first stable, adult-like grid responses can be recorded from the medial entorhinal cortex not earlier than P20. From thereafter, one can observe a swift improvement in both stability and spatial quality (as measured by gridness) within the next few days of life. Grid cell responses thus emerge about a week later than fully mature HD cells and the earliest place cells (see below). Their emergence roughly corresponds with the age at which weaning is induced in laboratory animals (P21) and pups are therefore required to start an independent life, as well as the age at which hippocampus-dependent behaviours start to emerge (see §3b).

Some of the distinctive properties of the grid cell network are already present as soon as these signals can be detected. Adult grid cells are arranged in functional ‘modules’: within each module, all grid cells share the same wavelength and orientation, and the relative spatial phases of the grid fields remains fixed, even though the absolute position of their firing peaks (phase) can change. This coherent network structure emerges concurrently with the first stable grid cells, from P20 onwards. Other adult-like characteristics of medial entorhinal cortex firing, such as the existence of ‘conjunctive’ (combined grid and HD tuning) cells, and speed-modulation of grid cell firing, also emerge at around P20. These data suggest that local networks of stable grid cells emerge as coherent units, relatively abruptly during development.


Place cells

Place cells fire whenever an animal occupies a specific location in its environment (the ‘place field’ of the cell) and, as such, are thought to encode the current location of the animal.

Several studies have tracked the development of this spatial cell type in the rat. At the earliest ages sampled (P16), place cells appeared to be on the whole immature, with most place fields displaying lower spatial stability than those of adult rats, both within and across repeated exposures to the recording environment. The specificity of spatial tuning (as measured by spatial information) was also significantly lower in the youngest pups, compared with adults, in (though not in). For examples, see. Interestingly, both these parameters seem to improve monotonically during the following two weeks of the rat's life, with one report suggesting that the place cell network might approach maturity at around P45. This gradual improvement in place cell responses is very much at odds with the relatively sudden appearance and maturation of grid cell firing, and these distinct ontogenetic modes may reflect the different developmental mechanisms underpinning their emergence.

This hypothesis is further strengthened by the observation that there is a large variability in the quality of place responses recorded from rat pups at any given age. Even at P16 (the earliest age sampled so far), a subset of place cells display adult-like stability and spatial quality, suggesting that the development of place responses is not taking place at a network level, but at the single pyramidal cell level. This variability might reflect the nature of the inputs each pyramidal cell receives during development, or factors endogenous to each cell. This is in marked contrast with HD and grid cell development, where there are strong indications that development takes place at the network level. It is also important to note here that as for HD and grid cells, the improvement in the spatial quality of place cell responses does not correlate with experience in the recording environment.

The emergence of place cells several days earlier during development than grid cells was an important piece of evidence against the previously commonly accepted model that grid cells formed the principal input to place cells. One alternative possibility is that the earliest building blocks of place cell firing might rather be boundary vector cells, consistent with a long-standing theoretical model predicting that place cell firing fields are based on inputs from boundary-responsive cells. Preliminary evidence from recording in pre-weanling rats indicates that boundary-responsive cells can be recorded from at least P17 onwards, and, furthermore, that boundaries may form an important functional input to place cells in pre-weanling rats.


Conclusion and open questions

In reviewing the emergence of spatial behaviour and spatially modulated neural firing in the hippocampal formation of the rat, we endeavoured to provide an answer to two fundamental questions: (i) what are the relative roles of sensory experience and endogenous mechanisms in shaping the development of hippocampal spatial networks; (ii) how does the development of spatial responses at the neural level interact with the development of navigational ability? In this concluding section, we will attempt to provide tentative answers to these questions and highlight the gaps of knowledge that need to be addressed by future research.


The role of experience in the development of the neural representation of space

One of the most striking findings to emerge from studying the development of spatially responsive neurons is the precocious development of the HD system, with adult-like responses emerging before the onset of active exploration. The neural representation of direction in the hippocampal formation (and other brain regions) may therefore qualify as a Kantian synthetic a priori system, insofar as its construction during development may not require experience of exploring large-scale space. However, while P15–16 is certainly before the emergence of extensive exploration, it is also on the cusp of when initial, tentative forays outside the nest begin. In this regard, it is interesting to note that preliminary evidence pinpoints the emergence of HD cells to P14, an age before any exploration outside the nest is observed at all. A further possible caveat is that active exploration of space outside the nest is only one type of experience that occurs during development, and the crawling, turning and diving motions that rats experience within the huddle may be necessary to set up the vestibular and motor inputs into the HD system. On the other hand, HD cells in adults are noted for their dependence on distal visual cues for stability, and how the network would function in the confined space of the huddle, in functionally blind animals, is not at all clear.

Most network models of HD cells centre around a common type of architecture, termed a ‘continuous attractor’ network. The only network model of HD cells to directly address their development proposes that a continuous attractor network is created by experience-dependent learning, with input from a stable visual landmark combining with vestibular input to shape the developing network. To date, no formal neural network model exists explaining how the intricate set of connections necessary for a continuous attractor could develop independently of sensory experience.

Both grid cells, and a fully mature place cell network, emerge at a point in development after extensive exploration of space; therefore experience of exploration could be a necessary part of their normal development. Network models of grid cell development using experience-dependent learning have been proposed, though it may be important that, in all these models, learning depends on input from pre-existing spatially tuned neurons, leaving the ontogeny of this ‘teaching’ signal still unexplained. It is also important to note that Wills et al. found no correlation between experience of the recording arena and the maturity of grid or place cells, suggesting that there was no role for learning to associate spatial firing with specific places, though this does not rule out a role for the experience of space per se.

It may also be useful to consider the natural environment in which rats would develop outside of the laboratory. If the developmental programme of rat pups has been adapted by natural selection to an environment consisting of restricted nest chamber linked to a narrow tunnel, this may dictate how the neural representation of space develops. In particular, it may explain why neural representations of direction and boundaries (the defining spatial features of a tunnel system) emerge earlier than those spatial responses (for example, grid cells) that map open spaces, and may also predict differential roles of experience on the development of these cell types.


The role of the neural representation of space in the development of spatial behaviour

The appearance and rapid maturation of the grid cell network seems to mark the age at which there is a transition to a hippocampus-dependent navigational system, at around three weeks of age, possibly underlying the functional coming ‘online’ of the hippocampal formation. One problem with this interpretation is that place cells in CA1, generally thought of as one of the major output structures of the hippocampal formation, remain, on average, rather immature at three weeks of age, and furthermore show no abrupt developmental change at this time. If grid cells do represent the critical missing component necessary for adult-like hippocampal function, then the spatial information they convey is either being transmitted via different anatomical pathways, or is encoded in the activity of CA1 cells in a way that is, so far, not apparent. It should also be noted that, to date, no interventional or even correlational studies have been conducted to assess whether the emergence of grid cells and hippocampus-dependent behaviours co-occur in a single rat pup, therefore the functional link between these phenomena must remain speculative.

It should also be emphasized that although the first evidence of hippocampal function emerges at three weeks, fully adult-like spatial learning abilities do not emerge until considerably later. Some of this protracted development could reflect the slow maturation of the visual system, and therefore the increasing ability to use distal visual cues. However, the slow maturation of phenomena such as long-term retention of place memories, spontaneous alternation across a 30-s delay or cross-modal redundancy in spatial processing suggest that hippocampal function itself is still developing over this period, and this protracted maturation may be a reflection of the protracted development of place cells. The late development of long-term spatial memory is particularly relevant to the observation that place cells in weanling rats have place fields which are relatively unstable over time (unlike those recorded from adult rats), suggesting that the inability of the hippocampus to form a stable map might underlie the long-term memory deficits observed in weanling and adolescent rats. An additional open question is whether the spatial memory deficits in immature rats, either at the behavioural level, or at the level of place field instability, map onto the phenomenon of infantile amnesia observed in humans (see also for work investigating the ontogeny of associative memory using non-spatial tasks).

Adult-like HD cells emerge very early, before most spontaneously expressed spatial behaviours. It is therefore tempting to speculate that HD cell signalling may underlie some of the very earliest spatial behaviours observed in immature rats, such as taking a direct return path to the nest using path integration or solving a visually cued water maze. The possible causal link between HD cell development and homing using path integration is especially intriguing given recent evidence showing a correlation between HD cell accuracy and performance on a path integration-based homing task in adults. Accurate HD cell signalling may therefore be a prerequisite in order for pups to commence exploration and return successfully to their nest, at an age when the other spatial signals (place and grid cells) are still not available to the organism. The finding that water maze performance in P17 pups was disrupted by the displacement of the platform relative to the pool was interpreted by the authors as evidence for the adoption of directional strategy by the pups. This interpretation would be in keeping with the early emergence of HD cells. However, we would also emphasize the role of the pool boundaries in defining the location of the platform (see above) and note that preliminary evidence suggests that boundary responsive cells are present by P17. The ability of P17 pups to solve this ‘directional’ version of the water maze may therefore rely on the precocious development of a spatial system based on both direction and the boundaries of the environment.

As previously noted, all such functional links must remain speculative at this stage, in the absence of studies which directly test these hypotheses (though). We hope that the work outlined in this review will stimulate further research aimed at understanding the ontogeny of spatial behaviour and spatial function.


Timing as an intrinsic property of neural networks: evidence from in vivo and in vitro experiments

Anubhuti Goel, Dean V. Buonomano — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2014. PMC3895985, CC BY 3.0.

The discrimination and production of temporal patterns on the scale of hundreds of milliseconds are critical to sensory and motor processing. Indeed, most complex behaviours, such as speech comprehension and production, would be impossible in the absence of sophisticated timing mechanisms. Despite the importance of timing to human learning and cognition, little is known about the underlying mechanisms, in particular whether timing relies on specialized dedicated circuits and mechanisms or on general and intrinsic properties of neurons and neural circuits. Here, we review experimental data describing timing and interval-selective neurons in vivo and in vitro. We also review theoretical models of timing, focusing primarily on the state-dependent network model, which proposes that timing in the subsecond range relies on the inherent time-dependent properties of neurons and the active neural dynamics within recurrent circuits. Within this framework, time is naturally encoded in populations of neurons whose pattern of activity is dynamically changing in time. Together, we argue that current experimental and theoretical studies provide sufficient evidence to conclude that at least some forms of temporal processing reflect intrinsic computations based on local neural network dynamics.


Introduction

The dynamic nature of our natural environment and the need to move and anticipate events in this environment provided strong evolutionary pressures for the nervous system to process temporal information and generate timed responses. Additionally, later in evolution the temporal features of animal vocalizations came to play a fundamental role in social communication. As a result of these evolutionary pressures, the human brain is exquisitely capable of processing temporal information and generating temporal patterns. Indeed, the sophistication of temporal processing is well illustrated by the observation that humans can reduce communication to a purely temporal code, as occurs when people communicate using Morse code. Despite the obvious importance of temporal processing to communication, learning, cognition, and sensory and motor processing, even the most basic mechanisms of how animals discriminate simple intervals or generate timed responses remains unknown.

A key question in the debate of how the brain tells time relates to whether timing should be viewed as ‘dedicated’—relying on specialized and centralized mechanisms—or ‘intrinsic’—relying on local and general properties of neural circuits. In attempting to answer this question, it is first critical to define the time scale of interest because it is clear that the brain uses fundamentally different mechanisms to solve timing tasks across the range of microseconds used for sound localization to circadian rhythms. Here, we focus on the time scale of tens of milliseconds to a few seconds. It is within this range that the most sophisticated and flexible forms of temporal processing reside, as it encompasses the temporal structure critical to the recognition and production of both speech and music. We review models of temporal processing and experimental data supporting the view that timing in this range relies on intrinsic neural properties, specifically that timing is among the most basic and general computations that neural circuits perform. This review focuses primarily on the electrophysiological experimental data and theoretical models; we do not carefully address behavioural and psychophysical experiments, which have been reviewed elsewhere.


Models of timing

Timing has been proposed to rely on a number of different potential mechanisms. These models cover a broad range of different neural substrates and vary dramatically in the level of biological detail and plausibility. Broadly speaking, these theoretical models of timing can be loosely categorized into four classes: (i) spectral/delay line models; (ii) oscillator models; (iii) ramping models; and (iv) state-dependent network (SDN) models. We briefly describe the first three classes of models, and then describe the state-dependent models in more detail before reviewing the experimental studies of timing.


Spectral/delay line models

Some of the earliest models of temporal processing relied on the notion that representations of recent events were ‘buffered’ through delay lines. This view was strongly influenced by the delay line models of sound localization. According to this model, interaural time differences on the order of tens of microseconds are computed in the auditory brainstem based on two mechanisms: delay lines and coincidence detectors. Delays are introduced as a result of axonal length, and when the delays are counterbalanced by the input time difference between them, neurons functioning as coincidence detectors report the relative timing of both inputs. On longer time scales, conceptually similar models—sometimes referred to as tapped delay lines—operate under the assumption that different neurons are activated or receive inputs at different time delays. For example, early cerebellar models emphasized the potential of parallel fibres (the axons of cerebellar granule cells) to function as delay lines on the order of tens of milliseconds—this notion has never received experimental support and it is generally acknowledged that the conduction time delays in the cerebellum are unlikely to contribute to timing on scales above tens of milliseconds. More generally, spectral models propose that there is a range (a spectrum) of different delays timing a range of different intervals.

Spectral models share the common principle that at least one variable or property of a neuron is set to a different value, which endows each unit with the ability to respond selectively to different intervals. In addition to axonal length, a wide range of different biological loci have been proposed to account for the delays, including kinetic constants of the metabotropic receptor pathway, the time constant of slow membrane conductances and the decay time of inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs). Spectral models have the advantage of encoding the time since the arrival of a stimulus by having different subsets of cells active at different times. Combined with simple learning rules, where a teaching or error signal modifies connections for only those cells that are active, it is possible for spectral models to learn outputs that are properly timed.


Oscillator models

When considering the mechanisms of timing, it is perhaps most intuitive to think in terms of devices that share the principles of man-made clocks. Indeed, the most influential model of timing is based on the notion of an oscillator that elicits pulses at certain intervals and a counter that integrates the pulses of the oscillator providing a linear metric of the passage of time. Subsequent versions of clock-like models proved hugely valuable in guiding behavioural animal experiments, however the ‘standard’ internal clock model has not yet been expressed concretely in biologically realistic models.

More sophisticated oscillator-based models have proposed that timing arises from a population of elements oscillating at different frequencies. These multiple-oscillator models have the advantage of not requiring integrating or counting the pulses in any of the oscillators, but rely on detecting specific ‘beats’ or synchronous patterns among the population of oscillators. This detection process can be performed by read-out neurons that detect the coincident activity of a subset of oscillators—corresponding to a specific point in time. While oscillations are a robust property of many different types of neurons, it remains to be determined whether stimuli can trigger a set of oscillators at different frequencies. Additionally, multiple-oscillator models have focused primarily on timing in the suprasecond range, rather than the subsecond range.


Ramping models

Ramping models propose that time is encoded in the approximately linear increase in the firing rate of neurons. Experimental studies have conclusively established that some neurons can exhibit a more or less linear ramping of firing rate during timing tasks, and that the slope of the ramp can be modulated so that a particular rate is reached at a target time. In this framework, a timed motor response can be generated when the firing rate of a neuron reaches a certain threshold value. The neural mechanisms underlying this ramping are not known, but have been proposed to be a product of either the intrinsic properties of neurons or the dynamics of local neural networks.

During timing tasks motor responses or expectation of an event are, of course, tightly coupled with elapsed timing. Thus, in many tasks there is a potential confound regarding whether ramping is actually encoding time or responsible for triggering a motor response (or representing the expectation of a reward). At least some data suggest that ramping neurons are coding expectation rather than absolute time; furthermore, while upward ramping is seen during some types of timing tasks it is not observed in others.


State-dependent network model

SDN models propose that timing arises from the time-dependent changes in network state imposed by time-varying neural properties and the neural dynamics characteristic of recurrent circuits. The SDN model is a prototypical example of an intrinsic model of timing, in that it does not rely on what most would consider specialized timing mechanisms. Similarly, this class of models is also local, that is, any cortical network could potentially process temporal information.

To understand how the state of a neural network might encode time, the dynamics of a liquid provides a useful analogy. A pebble thrown into a pond will create a spatio-temporal pattern of ripples, and the pattern produced by any subsequent pebbles will be a complex nonlinear function of the interaction of the stimulus (the second pebble) and the internal state of the liquid (the current pattern of ripples). Ripples thus establish a short-lasting and dynamic memory of the recent stimulus history of the liquid, and it is possible to estimate the amount of time elapsed based on the current state of the liquid.

In defining the state of a neural network, it is important to consider two general types of states: the active and hidden states. (i) The active state at any given time point refers to the population of neurons that is currently firing. The active state thus represents the traditional spatio-temporal patterns of activity. (ii) The hidden states refer to the collection of time-varying neuronal and synaptic properties. These include slow synaptic currents, channel kinetics and short-term synaptic plasticity (STP). These properties are referred to as the ‘hidden’ state because they typically cannot be measured using conventional extracellular recording methods, but the effects of these time-dependent neural mechanisms are expressed at the level of firing properties when the network is ‘probed’ by a subsequent sensory stimulus. SDN models have typically focused on STP as the principal contributor to the hidden state of neural networks. STP refers to a form of use-dependent change in synaptic efficacy that is observed in almost all synapses. As a result of STP, the second of two consecutive exciatitory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) can be larger (facilitation) or smaller (depression) than the first. In a sense, in the same manner that long-term potentiation provides a memory of coincident activity between groups of synapses that occurred minutes or hours in the past, STP provides a memory of an event that happened tens or hundreds of milliseconds ago.

The hypothesis that the dynamically changing active state of neural networks may encode time was first proposed by Michael Mauk in the context of the Marr–Albus–Mauk cerebellar model. In this model, there is a dynamic turnover in the population of active granule cells as a result of the negative feedback loop between granule and Golgi neurons.

The concept that time may be encoded in the population of neurons was later generalized to cortical circuits and to incorporate the hidden state of neural networks. In a reduced circuit composed of a single excitatory and inhibitory neuron, it is easy to see how STP can potentially account for interval selectivity. For example, if facilitation peaks at 50 ms, it is possible to adjust the synaptic weight so that a neuron will fire exclusively at 50 ms. Interestingly, in the context of simple disynaptic circuits composed of a single excitatory and inhibitory neuron, it is possible to tune the circuit so that the excitatory neuron fires selectively to a range of different intervals even though the temporal profile of STP remains the same. As described below, experimental evidence supports the notion that interval selectivity in neurons arises from dynamic changes in the balance of excitation and inhibition imposed by STP.

We stress however, that the SDN model does not suggest that the timing that underlies complex temporal processing is solely the result of carefully tuned weights and STP in simple disynaptic circuits. Rather, the core proposal of SDN models is that temporal-selectivity is in part an inevitable consequence of the rich repertoire of time-dependent synaptic and neural properties embedded within large intricately connected recurrent neural networks. Indeed, as shown in, computer simulations demonstrate that in randomly connected simulated cortical networks, a percentage of the neurons exhibit interval selectivity. Thus, the key notion is that complex neural circuits—in regimes in which excitation and inhibition are balanced—will naturally possess neurons that are selective to temporal features as an inevitable consequence of the dynamics of the network.

It is important to note that the different classes of models described above are not mutually exclusive. Timing and temporal processing encompass a very broad range of tasks requiring different computational needs. Thus, it seems likely that multiple mechanisms will contribute to timing. However, we focus here primarily on the SDN model, which we argue better accounts for the experimental evidence described below. We should also stress that the spectral, oscillator and ramping models are mostly limited to relatively simple forms of timing, for example interval discrimination. It seems unlikely that these models are sufficiently flexible and powerful to account for the timing necessary for speech, music or Morse code.


Temporal selectivity in vivo

The fact that many animals are capable of discriminating simple intervals or durations indicates that there are neurons in their brains that respond with at least some degree of selectivity to the temporal features of stimuli. There are numerous reports of temporally selective neurons. However, compared with the spatial features of sensory stimuli, such as position or orientation of visual stimuli, or frequency or intensity of auditory tones, very little is known about the location, development and mechanisms underlying temporally selective neural responses.

Some of the best examples of temporal selectivity have been performed in invertebrates and non-mammalian vertebrates. Extracting temporal information from acoustic stimuli is a crucial part of social communication of invertebrates and vertebrates. In some species, including frogs, electric fish and crickets, communication relies on relatively simple temporal codes in which information is conveyed by the interval between sensory events. Thus, these animals have provided an ideal model system to identify temporally selective neural responses and study the underlying neural mechanisms. Below, we discuss three examples of temporally selective neurons, in which the selectivity seems to arise from dynamic changes in the balance of excitation and inhibition imposed by STP.

Electric fish. The temporal structure of electric pulses is an integral part of social communication in mormyrid electric fish. The frequencies of pulses in the range of 10–100 Hz convey information about the temporal characteristics that encode species-specific communication. Intracellular recordings from electrosensory neurons in the brainstem of these fish have revealed selective responses to electrical pulses repeated at specific intervals, leading to high-frequency, low-frequency or bandpass neurons. a provides an example of a neuron that is tuned to respond to pulses presented at intervals of 50 ms, compared to intervals of 10 or 100 ms.

Crickets. Female crickets use the information contained in the temporal characteristics of the male cricket's song for phonotactic orientation. Recordings from auditory neurons in response to different song patterns revealed the presence of a particular class of interneurons that respond selectively to pulses presented at specific intervals. For example, a subpopulation of neurons exhibited firing rate versus pulse interval tuning curves that closely mirrored the behavioural response which peaked at intervals of 15 ms. These neurons would not respond to a sequence of four pulses presented every 5 or 60 ms, but spiked when the four pulses were presented at 15 ms intervals (b). When the intervals between pulses were either too short (5 ms) or too long (60 ms), IPSPs were elicited to the first few pulses in the sequence followed by weak or negligible EPSPs to the subsequent pulses. When the pulse interval was optimal, the first few pulses were still dominated by pronounced IPSPs but the latter pulses in the temporal pattern elicited suprathreshold EPSPs accompanied by spikes.

Frogs. Some species of frogs also communicate through a temporal code in which the calls of different species are defined by their temporal structure. Neurons in the auditory brainstem of these anurans have also been shown to respond selectively to the interval and number of pulses in a sequence. Short-term plasticity and the interplay of excitation and inhibition contribute to the interval selectivity observed in ‘interval-counting’ neurons. The interval tuning of these auditory neurons is interesting in that they are tuned to respond only when a certain number of pulses with the optimal interval duration has been repeated. Hence, they are termed as interval-counting neurons because they show pronounced enhancement of excitation over a selective range of pulse repetition rates. Furthermore, if the temporal sequence of pulses contains a single non-optimal pulse interval (wherein the interval is too long or too short), then the interval-counting procedure is reset. A detailed study by Edwards et al. examined the neural mechanisms of ‘interval counting’. They found that for a given neuron, when the number of pulses in a temporal sequence of optimal intervals exceeded a threshold, there was an enhancement of EPSPs often accompanied by spikes followed by subsequent inhibition.

Together, the above studies provide examples of neurons that respond selectively to the temporal structure of sensory stimuli. While the exact mechanisms underlying the interval selectivity are only partially understood, all of the above studies favoured interpretations based on dynamic changes in the balance of EPSPs and IPSPs imposed by STP—as proposed by the SDN model.


Temporally selective neurons in mammals

Neurons that respond selectively to the temporal and spatio-temporal structure of sensory stimuli have also been identified in the auditory system of birds and mammals. Identifying temporally selective neurons, also referred to as temporally combination sensitive neurons, is particularly challenging in mammals because of the complexity and multiplicity of auditory fields. A further problem relates to the combinatorial explosion of potential spatio-temporal stimuli to be explored—that is, even if a given neuron was highly selective to some specific spatio-temporal stimulus pattern, it is difficult to identify what that stimulus may be. Nevertheless, a number of studies have provided careful quantitative descriptions of neurons that respond preferentially when pairs or sequences of tones are presented in a given order with a specific interval between them. These studies reveal a rich repertoire of cells that generally exhibit complex interactions between the frequencies and durations of the tones, and the interval between them. The mechanisms underlying these examples of interval and order selectivity have not been carefully examined but are broadly consistent with SDN models.


Timing and neural dynamics in vitro

The fact that interval- and order-selective neurons have been observed in a wide range of subcortical and cortical areas across many species favours the notion that timing may be a general and intrinsic property of neural networks. Perhaps the most rigorous prediction of models that propose that timing is an intrinsic computation is that timing may be able to be observed in vitro. That is, if neural networks are indeed intrinsically capable of timing, it may not only be possible to observe examples of timing in vitro, but also to, in a sense, ‘teach’ in vitro circuits simple temporal tasks. We now discuss studies that have attempted to ask and answer this question experimentally.

These studies focus on examples of timing that may rely on the active and hidden states of neural networks. When timing relies on the active states of neural networks, the notion is that autonomous dynamics changes the population of active neurons. A number of in vivo experimental studies support the notion that time-dependent changes in the active state of neural networks may encode time. We focus, however, primarily on in vitro studies on neural dynamics and timing because they provide a tractable approach to understand the underlying mechanisms. And because, as mentioned, in vitro timing would provide strong support to the notion that timing is a basic and general computation of neural networks.


Neural dynamics in vitro

Several in vivo and in vitro studies have shown that the richly interconnected circuits in the cortex exhibit complex dynamic patterns of activity. This dynamics can be studied through intracellular recordings from single neurons, extracellular recordings from multiple neurons or multi-cell Ca2+-imaging; and methods have revealed that complex yet reproducible patterns of activity appear to be a general and widespread regime of recurrent neural circuits.

In vitro whole-cell recordings in both acute and organotypic slices demonstrate that in addition to a short-lasting monosynaptic EPSP, external stimulation can elicit long-lasting polysynaptic responses. This polysynaptic activity reflects the internal dynamics of local recurrent networks. a illustrates an example of evoked polysynaptic activity in simultaneously recorded neurons in an organotypic cortical slice. Note that even the intracellular polysynaptic activity recorded in a single neuron provides a measure of overall network activity in that the subthreshold PSPs reflect a read-out of the subpopulation of neurons connected to the recorded cell. In this example, is it also clear that across trials the two neurons tend to fire at different time points (129 and 205 ms after the stimulus). In a manner of speaking, these neurons and the networks they are embedded in can be said to encode time. Specifically, if a neuron reliably fires during some time window after the stimulus, this neuron contains information about how much time has elapsed since the stimulus.

Simultaneous recordings from ensembles of L-IV neurons using Ca2+-imaging also reveal that electrical stimulation can elicit spatio-temporal patterns of network activity. For example, MacLean et al. have shown that acute cortical slices can exhibit reproducible patterns of activity (up states) in response to thalamic stimulation that persists for hundreds of milliseconds or even seconds beyond the duration of the stimulus. Interestingly, this particular study also found that subsets of L-IV cells that participated in thalamically evoked network responses also participated in spontaneous network activity (b). Together, these results suggest that cortical networks in vitro can generate reproducible patterns of activity that can be thought of as a neural trajectory—e.g. in neural state-space, the activity of each neuron in a network corresponds to an axis in high-dimensional space and one can plot the changing activity of the network as a trajectory. As is the case with the trajectory of any dynamical system that is moving through state-space, it naturally encodes time, functioning in effect as what has been called a population clock. Critical to the potential ability of these patterns to be able to encode time is that they must be reproducible across different trials. The degree of variability across trials places strong constraints on the ability and accuracy of such patterns to potentially encode time.


State-dependent responses in vitro

A number of in vitro studies have attempted to ask whether in vitro networks can encode information about time or previous stimuli in a state-dependent fashion. One group has examined this question in rodent hippocampal slices wherein different stimuli were presented to hippocampal slices via stimulation of electrodes in the perforant pathway. Responses to stimuli were recorded during intracellular recordings of up to three simultaneously recorded hilar neurons. It was demonstrated that the different patterns of activity in three hilar neurons could be used to decode which of four perforant path electrodes had been stimulated. This was true even 15 s after the stimuli had been presented—indicating that ongoing activity patterns within the network provided a memory of the stimulus. More importantly, however, when sequences of four stimuli (A, B, C and D) were presented, e.g. ABCD × DCBA, there was also a robust context- or state-dependent code that allowed, for example, one to determine whether A had been presented by itself or preceded by other stimuli.

A related in vitro study, performed in dissociated cultures on multi-electrode arrays, also examined whether a population of neurons could encode the sequences of different input patterns to the network. In this study, neurons were transfected with channelrhodopsin (ChR) and different ‘visual’ patterns generated using an optical grid that stimulated different subsets of ChR-positive neurons, serving as different ‘sensory’ inputs. The response of the network was quantified based on the extracellular recordings of dozens of units. The results demonstrated that in response to the presentation of stimulus pairs, such as AC or BC (each separated by intervals of up to 1 s), it was possible to look at a population response elicited by stimulus C and determine whether it had been preceded by A or B. In other words, the network activity in response to C implicitly encoded the context in which it was presented. Because network activity often faded back to baseline within a 1 s time window, it is suggested that the ‘memory’ of the previous stimulus is represented in the hidden state of the network.

While relatively few studies have examined the capacity, complexity and temporal features of stimuli that in vitro networks can encode, there is now significant evidence that even in vitro networks are capable of encoding order and temporal information as predicted by SDN models. Specifically, on the subsecond time scale, the population response to a stimulus can not only encode the identity of the current stimulus but that of the previous stimulus as well.


Neural dynamics and timing plasticity in vitro

The studies above reveal that recurrent networks can produce complex dynamics in response to a brief stimulus and encode information about stimulus order and time. However, it is not clear whether these networks were in some sense ‘designed’ to process temporal information, or in contrast, the observed timing was essentially a product of random activity patterns. A particularly valuable approach to determine whether recurrent neural circuits are in effect ‘designed’ for temporal processing would be to establish whether they can ‘learn’ to process temporal information. Here, we use the term ‘learn’ in a general sense and ask whether the neural dynamics of circuits exposed to a specific temporal pattern adapt in a manner that would improve the processing of the experienced pattern.

One approach towards answering this question has been to ask whether the dynamics in in vitro cortical cultures can be sculpted by experience. Cortical cultures were ‘implanted’ with a pair of electrodes that were used to provide structured ‘sensory’ input to the network. In the initial experiments, both electrodes were synchronously stimulated for 2 h (every 10 s), whereas in the second group, both electrodes were stimulated with a 100 ms interval: electrode E1 was activated at t = 0 and electrode E2 at t = 100 ms. Thus, the pathways in both groups received the same amount of total stimulation but differed in the temporal pattern they were exposed to. After training, whole-cell recordings were made from supragranular pyramidal neurons near E2 and the responses to E1 were analysed. The results demonstrate that there was significantly more polysynaptic activity in the 100 ms group than in the synchronous group. Furthermore, there was some clustering of polysynaptic responses evoked by E1 at around 100 ms. One interpretation of these data is that the cells near E2 ‘expected’ or anticipated a stimulus 100 ms after E1, and the network was performing a form of temporal pattern completion. This was further tested by training slices with either a 100 or 500 ms interval. As shown in, a comparison of evoked polysynaptic activity revealed a significant difference in the timing of the distribution of polysynaptic events. Specifically, the temporal profile of this polysynaptic activity reflected the interval used during training: more short- and long-latency events in the 100 and 500 ms groups, respectively. Additionally, ongoing experiments have further explored the ability of in vitro networks to adapt to experienced intervals by combining electrical and optogenetic stimulation. In these experiments, an electrical pulse was followed by an optical stimulation of a subset of neurons transfected with the light-activated cation channel ChR. In one group there was a 100 ms interval between the electrical stimulus and light, and in the other a 500 ms interval. After 2 h of training, whole-cell recordings from the ChR-positive neurons revealed that there was a significant difference in the timing of the distribution of polysynaptic events: there was a larger proportion of late events in the 500 ms group compared with the 100 ms group.

Experience-dependent changes in network dynamics have also been observed in vivo preparations. Aizenman and co-workers demonstrated that in Xenopus tadpoles, stimulation of the optic nerve elicited firing patterns that lasted hundreds of milliseconds in neurons in the optic tectum. These long-lasting responses were in part generated by the recurrent circuitry within the optic tectum, and interestingly the duration of the activity was influenced by experience. Presenting visual flashes at intervals of 150 or 400 ms for 4 h before recording sessions revealed different distributions of the spike times: median spike latencies of 73 and 106 ms, respectively.

A related in vivo study in the visual cortex of rats revealed experience-dependent changes of light-evoked neural activity in the context of an associative learning task. During a training phase, rats received rewards at different delays (more specifically after a specific number of licks required for the reward) in response to flashes to the left or right eye. Extracellular recordings in V1 revealed that a significant percentage of neurons exhibited responses that peaked over a second after the stimulus offset and at approximately the expected time of the reward (even in the absence of the reward). These responses were specific to one eye and matched the delay associated with that eye, thus providing strong evidence that the neural dynamics was learned. In a subsequent study, the authors examined the contribution of neuromodulators to this form of associative learning task and demonstrated that changes in the temporal dynamics can also be observed in acute visual cortex slices. Slices were exposed to a conditioning protocol that consisted of pairing brief electrical stimulation followed by a puff of a cholinergic agonist 0.5, 1 or 1.5 s after the electrical stimulus. After this training protocol, extracellular or intracellular recordings were performed in layer 5 neurons. The results revealed that the duration of the neural activity evoked by a single electrical stimulus was proportional to the interval used during training. That is, spiking activity was short lasting in the slices trained with a 0.5 s interval, and long lasting in slices trained with a 1.5 s interval. This study demonstrated that acute slices can ‘learn’ to fire with different temporal profiles and suggests that cholinergic input can provide a reinforcing signal that is required for this form of temporal plasticity.

The above examples demonstrate that network dynamics undergoes experience-dependent plasticity. Specifically, the duration or dynamics of neural responses within neural circuits can be shaped by the experience in a manner that should facilitate the processing of the temporal patterns the network experienced. Together, these findings support not only the hypothesis that recurrent neural circuits, and cortical circuits in particular, are capable of encoding time, but also that there are mechanisms in place that allow such circuits to ‘learn’ the temporal structure of the stimuli they are exposed to.


Conclusion

The temporal components of different sensory, motor, cognitive and learning tasks often require different levels of accuracy, precision, flexibility (e.g. the time it takes to ‘reset’ a clock between tasks) and complexity (e.g. simple intervals or complex patterns). Thus, it would seem that the sheer diversity of sensory and motor tasks that require timing hints that there may be multiple mechanisms operating in parallel. For example, a simple interval-timing task may require animals to time the interval between a cue and a response, expected reward or unconditioned stimulus, whereas interpreting Morse code or playing the piano requires the decoding and generation of very complex temporal patterns. While simple interval timing could rely on many different potential mechanisms including ramping firing rates or neural oscillators, it seems unlikely that complex temporal tasks rely on such mechanisms. Here, we have focused on a general framework that could potentially contribute to both simple and complex forms of temporal processing. Within this SDN framework, temporal computations arise from time-dependent changes in cellular or synaptic properties (the hidden state) and dynamic changes in the population of active neurons within recurrent neural circuits (the active state).

To date, the neural basis of temporal processing has proved to be a challenging problem. This is in part a product of the relative difficulty in identifying the brain regions underlying temporal processing, and reliably recording from temporally selective neurons. Consider, the relative ease with which neuroscientists can identify neurons that respond to the touch of a specific whisker in a rodent or a visual neuron that responds to a specific orientation. In contradistinction, even though numerous reports have identified instances of cortical neurons that respond selectively to temporal features, it is not possible to predict in advance which neurons are temporally selective or anticipate their preferred temporal features. This somewhat stochastic nature of temporal-selectivity is, however, what SDN models predict: that some percentage of neurons will fire selectively to order, interval and duration, but which ones do is in part a stochastic product of the connectivity and synaptic properties of the local circuitry. Indeed, computer simulations of randomly connected recurrent cortical networks that exhibit STP reveal that some percentage of the units exhibit temporally selective responses, but as a result of the complexity and randomness in the network it is hard to ascertain a priori which units will exhibit temporal-selectivity.

Whether or not STP and intrinsic dynamics of recurrent circuits account for timing in the subsecond range remains an open question. However, the in vivo studies described above in different areas of the invertebrate, frog, fish, bird and mammalian nervous system strongly favour the hypothesis that timing on the scale of tens of milliseconds to a few seconds is an intrinsic property of neural circuits, as opposed to specialized computations performed by some dedicated brain area. Furthermore, we suggest that observations of timed responses in in vitro circuits, together with evidence that in vitro circuits adapt to the temporal structure of experienced temporal features, offer some of the best evidence for the intrinsic timing hypothesis. Thus, although the mechanisms underlying the diverse forms of temporal processing the brain performs remain to be elucidated, we believe that there is sufficient cumulative evidence to conclude that at least some forms of timing on the subsecond scale are a product of intrinsic mechanisms—that is, they are a general and inherent computation of neural circuits, as opposed to a product of dedicated or centralized neural circuits.


Visual perception from the perspective of a representational, non-reductionistic, level-dependent account of perception and conscious awareness

Morten Overgaard, Jesper Mogensen — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2014. PMC3965164, CC BY 3.0.

This article proposes a new model to interpret seemingly conflicting evidence concerning the correlation of consciousness and neural processes. Based on an analysis of research of blindsight and subliminal perception, the reorganization of elementary functions and consciousness framework suggests that mental representations consist of functions at several different levels of analysis, including truly localized perceptual elementary functions and perceptual algorithmic modules, which are interconnections of the elementary functions. We suggest that conscious content relates to the ‘top level’ of analysis in a ‘situational algorithmic strategy’ that reflects the general state of an individual. We argue that conscious experience is intrinsically related to representations that are available to guide behaviour. From this perspective, we find that blindsight and subliminal perception can be explained partly by too coarse-grained methodology, and partly by top-down enhancing of representations that normally would not be relevant to action.


Introduction

We still have no generally accepted or comprehensive understanding of the mind–brain problem. Human consciousness can be defined as inner subjective experiences, such as perceptions, judgements, thoughts, intentions to act, feelings and desires. These experiences can be described from a subjective, phenomenal first-person perspective. On the other hand, cognitive neuroscience explores the neural correlates with respect to brain topology and brain dynamics from an objective third-person perspective. This difference in perspectives is on many accounts a fundamental part of the reason why consciousness seems incompatible with neuroscience.

This paper will present a new look at how one may conceive of the relationship between conscious experience and neural processes. It will take as a point of departure an analysis of ‘blindsight’, partly because the phenomenon has had a big impact on already existing mind–brain models, and partly because research on the topic holds inconsistencies, the resolution of which may be crucial to such a theory.

Many existing models have explicitly attempted a ‘creationist’ strategy, trying to explain how consciousness arises from or is created by brain processes. As often pointed out, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to show that a particular relationship between neural and mental states indicates that the one level of description explains the other, let alone causes it. To do so, one needs a further claim saying more than just two observations go together.

The reason for our pessimism for the ‘creationist’ strategy is that we believe that such a ‘further claim’ can never be built on the same scientific grounds as the correlation. This is a consequence of the fact that the use of one level of description, referring to conscious experience, is a necessary methodological requirement to find any correlation. Deducing the components of this level of description from components of another (e.g. neural phenomena) that are already mapped to the first level is obviously circular. Excluding either the correlations or descriptions of conscious states would be logically impossible as the neural phenomena (e.g. ‘brain areas’) are only ‘components’ because they are identified by virtue of their correlations with particular experiences.

These convictions are, however, not the end but rather the starting point of our analysis—leading to a framework to investigate and possibly understand consciousness in relation to neural processes.


Blindsight

The concept ‘blindsight’ refers to a ‘visual capacity in the absence of acknowledged awareness’ in relation to a lesion to the primary visual cortex. As blindsight is typically conceived, it is, from the perspective of subjective experience, identical to cortical blindness or hemianopia. However, from a cognitive perspective it is quite different, as certain visual functions are preserved. It seems less important which exact functions are preserved, it is rather the very segregation of functional and phenomenal aspects of mental states that is central to the idea.

In possibly the first experimental study on blindsight (see, however), Weiskrantz et al. reported experiments with the now famous patient DB. DB was asked to shift his eyes from a fixation point to the position where he would guess a light was flashed. The experiment showed a weak correspondence between target position and eye movement. In a second experiment, DB now had to reach for the target with a finger instead of relying on eye movements alone. With this different method, results showed a very clear correspondence between target and finger position, especially for larger stimuli. Further experiments studied DB's ability to discriminate between two possible stimuli (X versus O, horizontal versus vertical lines, etc.) and found that he was able to do so well above chance level with increased performance as a function of stimulus size.

Many experiments have demonstrated how blindsight patients seem able to do complicated tasks in the reported absence of conscious experience, but also the limits of the visual abilities. Kentridge et al. found that patient GY's attention could be directed by cues in the residual part of the visual field as well as in the blind field. Cues in the blind field could even direct his attention to locations in the healthy field, from which the authors conclude that spatial information selection and conscious experience rely on different processes, and that blindsight patients may have fully or partially intact visual attention without visual experience. It is repeatedly found that blindsight differs from normal vision by needing cueing and prompting for the patient to react to the visual information.

This finding is not specific for blindsight, but is generally the case for experiments on unconscious vision in healthy subjects. Many psychological experiments have attempted to prove the existence of unconscious perceptual processes by demonstrating that stimuli are perceived when subjects are not consciously aware of the stimuli. The basic strategy in these studies is to establish conditions under which conscious experience does not occur and then to demonstrate that stimuli can nevertheless be perceived under these conditions. The success of these studies depends crucially on two factors: first, the acceptability of the method used to establish the absence of conscious perception, and second, the method of assessing that the not consciously experienced stimulus is indeed unconsciously perceived. Today, research on unconscious vision in healthy subjects and blindsight alike is conducted using a combination of performance measures and introspective reports. Unconscious perception is defined as a successful performance (e.g. discrimination) in the absence of positive introspective reports. Studies based on both types of measures have not led to completely convincing results, because it is always possible to question whether the measure of conscious perception was successful in guaranteeing a complete absence of all relevant conscious experiences, as absence of evidence is no evidence of absence. Nevertheless, the majority of cognitive scientists today seem to share the conviction that perception comes in two varieties: conscious and unconscious.


Unconsciousness or vague experiences?

One historically difficult issue for blindsight has been the fact that all or most blindsight patients have reported some vague experiences associated with the visual stimuli about which they are asked to report. Many blindsight researchers handle such reports by subdividing blindsight into ‘type 1’ and ‘type 2’, where ‘type 1’ are patients without any conscious experiences related to visual stimuli, whereas ‘type 2’ are patients with conscious experiences related to visual stimuli. Such experiences are, however, not conceived as being of a visual nature.

Other experiments seem, however, to support a different perspective. Overgaard et al. performed a study on a 31-year-old hemianopic patient with left-sided injury to primary visual cortex (GR). In the first experiment, letters were briefly flashed at different locations on a computer screen and GR's only task was to respond to every stimulus, revealing that she was blind to everything presented in the upper right quadrant. In the second experiment, GR was presented with different visual figures and asked (1) which figures were shown, and (2) if she actually saw the figure—yes or no. GR reported only very rarely that she saw stimuli in the upper right quadrant, yet she was able to report correctly about these stimuli more often than chance. In the healthy part, her reports were significant predictors of correctness, based on which the authors concluded that she had blindsight. The third experiment was identical to the second, except she now should respond with the perceptual awareness scale (PAS) with four labelled points, rather than in a binary fashion. As a consequence, her blindsight seemingly ‘disappeared’ in the sense that, even though she reported much more vague experiences in the upper right compared with the upper left quadrant, the relationship between correctness and reported experience was identical to what was found within the rest of the visual field. All correctness above chance seemed related to vague yet conscious vision when using PAS. So, the first experiment indicates that GR is a ‘cortically blind hemianopic’, the second indicates that she has blindsight, perhaps type 1, and the third that she has blindsight type 2 if blindsight at all. One might be tempted to conclude that blindsight is indeed closely related to the methods used to study conscious perception. This method-dependency is far from being a unique feature of blindsight. Within numerous cognitive domains (irrespectively of their relationship to consciousness), studies in animal models as well as humans have demonstrated that radically different conclusions of what is preserved or lost after injury to the brain depend heavily on the testing methods and experimental procedures applied. We will return to this and other similarities between findings within blindsight and problem solving after brain injury, respectively, in §5.

The findings obtained with GR are closely related to experiments by Stoerig & Barth investigating GY, one of the most thoroughly studied blindsight patients. GY was asked to match a visual stimulus presented to the blind field with one of different image transformation of the same stimulus in the healthy field. With moving stimuli, GY accepted the match as long as they were sufficiently blurred. The results match with GY's verbal descriptions of his ‘feelings’ as ‘similar’ to that of a normally sighted man who, with his eyes shut against sunlight, can perceive the direction of motion of a hand waved in front of him.

The conclusion that the method for reporting has important consequences for findings of unconscious perception has been reached many times with healthy subjects. The PAS was first developed by Ramsøy & Overgaard, who asked subjects to create their own scale for subjective reporting with the instruction that they should be able to subjectively experience the difference between the scale points they invented. Most subjects conformed to a four-point scale categorized as ‘not seen’, ‘weak glimpse’ (meaning ‘something was there but I had no idea what it was’), ‘almost clear image’ and ‘clear image’. Ramsøy and Overgaard showed that in an experimental design where one should expect to find subliminal perception, subjects were completely at base chance when reporting ‘not seen’. In a later study, dichotomous reports were compared directly with PAS. Using the dichotomous report, subjects showed subliminal perception, whereas none was present at PAS = ‘not seen’. In further studies, PAS was found to be more sensitive to subjective experience than other four-point scales. Generally, PAS fitted better with objective measures such as stimulus duration and correctness than did the dichotomous report.


Mental states, representation and gradedness

Much conceptual work has attempted to make clear distinctions between different notions of mental states. Ned Block has famously distinguished between phenomenal consciousness (‘P-consciousness’) and access consciousness (‘A-consciousness’). P-consciousness denotes subjective experience, such as the taste of coffee, seeing the colour red or thinking about a sunny day. A-consciousness denotes states on the basis of which a subject is able to reason, and to have rational control of action and speech. Hypothetically, the two meanings of the term give rise to two meanings of unconsciousness as well, namely ‘P-unconscious’ (yet potentially still A-conscious) and ‘A-unconscious’ (yet still P-conscious). The latter of the two ideas is the most controversial, and to many scientists it is conceptual only. The first idea, A without P, is, however, the important case in blindsight. If occipital lobe injured patients are able to perform certain judgements based on visual stimuli without reports about having experienced those stimuli, this may satisfy this idea.

However, experiments such as the ones described above challenge the idea that mental states come as ‘on’- or ‘off’-versions of states with otherwise identical contents. Instead, they suggest a graded account with many stages or ‘levels’. This is, however, not at all an unusual situation in neuropsychology. When one scrutinizes clinical results, patients who lose particular functions or abilities as a consequence of brain injury rarely lose all aspects of those functions, and rarely lose accompanying experiences as well. Patients with working memory dysfunctions after neural injury do not lose working memory altogether. Patients with prosopagnosia after, typically, injury to the fusiform gyrus, do not experience ‘nothing’ where there should have been a face, but rather ‘something unfamiliar’. In other words, it is, in a way, already well-established that many cognitive functions come in degrees. Still, however, the ‘on–off’ interpretation of mental states is often reflected in theories about the neural correlate of consciousness that look for particular areas or processes in the brain that are associated with the ‘on’ state. This type of approach considers particular areas or brain processes as ‘add-ons’ to the ‘off’ versions of the identical mental states, and therefore seems related to the notion of ‘consciousness arising’ from those particular brain processes.

Recent theoretical developments, such as the ‘partial awareness hypothesis’ offer alternative ideas. Here, it is argued that ‘access’, as in Block's A-consciousness, should be understood as a hierarchy of representational levels where each level may be accessed individually. Our proposal shares some of the basic assumptions with the partial awareness hypothesis, e.g. that information in the brain is processed in a hierarchical manner from very simple features of, say, visual objects (e.g. flickers of light, contours or movements) to complex conglomerates of information (e.g. meaning or recognition). Here, however, we take this idea a step further and argue that the representational account of mental states, conscious experience and action stand in a necessary, yet plastic and dynamic, mutually fixed relationship.

All experiments reviewed above suggest that patients as well as healthy individuals perform better in various tasks when reporting experiences of relevant objects of the task than when they do not. The experiments using PAS even suggest almost perfect correlations between performance and clarity of experience where difficulties could be described as a ‘lag’ between two sigmoid curves rather than as fundamentally different categories. On the basis of evidence, we propose that there is an intrinsic relationship of some kind between a functional account of mental representation and conscious experience, so that the more elaborate a mental representation is, the more clearly the particular object is perceived. In conceptual terms, the proposal goes against the idea that a conceptual division between ‘A-’ and ‘P-consciousness’ reflects an empirical division.

By ‘intrinsic relationship’ we wish to express that we believe this correlational relationship reflects some more fundamental, or ontological, relationship. However, for reasons stated above, we do not believe that the relationship between functional and phenomenal aspects of mind, as well as the relationship between mind and brain, can be expressed as identity or in terms of reduction. Our choice of words—that the relation is ‘intrinsic’—relates to David Chalmers’ proposal that some (yet undiscovered) natural law connects conscious experience with information (per se). In our version, there is, obviously, no evidence for a connection between experience and ‘information’, in this very broad sense, but rather for a relationship between experience and at least one very specific kind of information: representations that are available for action, e.g. a report.

Blindsight fits well into this conception. Whereas some experiments that look for relationships between performance and graded experience find some level of experience underlying imperfect yet above chance performance, other experiments that do not look for gradedness find good performance when patients tend to report no experiences. However, almost all blindsight experiments, as well as experiments on unconscious perception in healthy subjects, make use of prompting, forced choice guessing and no information irrelevant for the experiment competing for attention. As mentioned, some experiments have shown that very weak experiences of ‘something being present’ correlate with a not perfect but above chance performance. The same blindsight patients seem unable to use such weak experiences in everyday life, or even in more standard neuropsychological testing, where they appear completely blind. Together, these findings indicate that strong, top-down functions should be considered as part of a neuroscientific model of consciousness where information that typically is of little or no use as a guide for action can be enhanced and selected as a basis for report under such prompting conditions. Such top-down ‘enhancement’ related to specific tasks or instructions have been shown in cognitive training experiments with visual stimuli.

Arguably, our reasoning here indicates that the relationship between experience and action is so that the information that is most available and relevant to action is what is experienced most clearly. From this perspective, top-down functions make it possible to enhance the analysis or at least availability of specific over other information. In this way, the top-down selection of particular representations allows for, say, visual search in complex scenes or even searching in one's own memories of past events. However, in most normal cases, information that is represented with most detail and richness allows more flexible behaviour without any need for forced choice options. We suggest that this explains the findings that have led to ‘global workspace’ models of consciousness.


Representations as strategies

Whereas we believe that our proposal can account for all available experimental data and, at the same time, of at least our own introspective accounts of what kind of information is experienced, an important aspect of the review in §§2 and 3 has so far been overlooked. An intrinsic relationship between representation and experience, modulated by relevance to action, does not in and of itself explain why experiments in blindsight and animal models reveal that results about what is preserved after injury depend on the kind of task or testing method that is applied.

Experiments on blindsight have revealed more than whether it represents conscious or unconscious vision (or, as it seems, something more graded in between). Some experiments also give indications of whether the contents of weak experiences in blindsight are different from contents in normal vision. Azzopardi & Cowey performed a signal detection analysis on GY's yes/no detection judgements and forced choice detection tasks, and found that his sensitivity was significantly higher during the forced choice task. This is different from the performance of healthy subjects when having ‘near-threshold vision’, indicating that visual stimuli in blindsight are processed ‘in an unusual way’ [p. 14 190].

In another study, Morland et al. demonstrated that the famous blindsight patient GY is able to match some but not all aspects of visual stimuli when asked to compare stimuli presented to the blind and healthy hemifields. In the experiment, GY associated colour and motion correctly, but not brightness, based on which the authors argue for an anatomical separation of these functions. Morland et al. suggest the results indicate that GY has visual awareness of those stimulus properties for which he gave correct reports, yet, as they somewhat ambiguously put it, he is not visually aware owing to lack of or limited processing of brightness.

In sum, research on blindsight has so far generated results similar to certain central aspects of research on ‘healthy unconscious vision’, and, at the same time, that are quite different in other aspects.

This situation bears resemblance to results obtained in studies addressing the neural and cognitive mechanisms of problem solving in brain-injured and post-traumatically recovered individuals. Such mechanisms have been most thoroughly addressed in studies using animal models. In some instances, post-traumatic rehabilitative training of a cognitive task can lead to a solution equally proficient to that seen in intact individuals. Apparently, the experimental animals lacking, e.g. the hippocampus or the prefrontal cortex, are nevertheless able to achieve a task solution similar to that seen in intact individuals.

In these cases, the proficiency of recovered, injured subjects and normal individuals, respectively, is similar. However, a conclusion regarding identical mechanisms of task solution does not withstand further scrutiny. Subjecting the animals to organic and behavioural/cognitive ‘challenges’ allows a more thorough analysis of the neural and cognitive mechanisms mediating the task solution. Even when normal and recovered brain-injured individuals have achieved identical levels of solution proficiency, such an analysis reveals that the groups differ regarding both the neural substrate and cognitive mechanisms behind the successful task solution.


The reorganization of elementary functions framework

Studies of the consequences of brain injury and post-traumatic cognitive recovery provide apparently contradictory results and theoretical dilemmas not unlike those found in blindsight.

At the most general level, one finds the contradiction between the concepts of ‘localization’ of various ‘functions’ and functional ‘recovery’ as seen in animal models and clinical studies. These two phenomena have a number of parallels to two of the prominent models of functional organization within the brain: the ‘modular’ theories proposed by, for instance, Fodor, Pinker and Pylyshyn (see review regarding ‘massive modularity’ in), and the models emphasizing distributed, connectionist networks. Modularity emphasizes a strict functional localization, in which loss of the neural structure mediating that cognitive module leads to a cognitive impairment. On the basis of such a framework it is, however, hard to realize how a function may demonstrate a post-traumatic functional recovery (although some such models are less categorical and remain open to at least a certain degree of sparing/recovery, e.g.). On the other hand, the connectionist framework makes it relatively easier to conceptualize the dynamic network reorganizations seen in post-traumatic cognitive rehabilitation—but can rarely account for the degree and specificity of initial trauma-associated impairments.

Perhaps less theoretically challenging, but important, are some of the issues mentioned in §3: the fact that the presence and nature of brain injury-associated symptoms appear to be dependent on details of the method of testing (in such a way that apparently cognitively similar variants of a given test may nevertheless provide completely contradictory results); and the fact that even for identical injury to the same neural structure, the post-traumatic neural and cognitive reorganizations will depend on the task facing the individual.

Attempting to establish a comprehensive framework of the neural and cognitive mechanisms of post-traumatic functional recovery within problem solving, the reorganization of elementary functions (REF) framework was constructed. The REF framework essentially describes a connectionist network in which, however, the ‘unit’ is not a neutral and functionally ‘indifferent neuron’, but advanced information processing modules called elementary functions. REF is thus able to account for both the localization and post-traumatic recovery of functions.


The reorganization of elementary functions and consciousness framework

As emphasized above, we see a number of striking similarities between some of the findings related to blindsight and the results achieved within studies of post-traumatic cognitive recovery of problem solving after focal brain injury. These similarities have prompted us to suggest a variation of the REF framework as a possible way to uncover neural correlates of consciousness (Mogensen & Overgaard). We believe that this framework, called reorganization of elementary functions and consciousness (REF CON), can provide a comprehensive frame within which presently available data can be interpreted. Additionally, our theory will stimulate future research able to clarify many of the outstanding issues regarding both blindsight and the mechanisms of conscious perception more generally.

According to the original version of the REF framework task solution, be it in the form of overt behaviour or mental representation, is achieved via two underlying levels: the lower level of the elementary functions and the level of the algorithmic strategies. Elementary functions perform basic information processing and are localized within restricted subdivisions of neural structures. By contrast, algorithmic strategies consist of numerous interacting elementary functions and are distributed in the sense that the neural substrate of an algorithmic strategy includes both the neural substrates of the individual elementary functions and the connections mediating the complicated interaction between these elementary functions. A given task solution is achieved via the computations of an algorithmic strategy. In a later elaboration of the REF framework, the level of algorithmic modules has been added. Similar to an algorithmic strategy, an algorithmic module consists of a number of elementary functions and a pattern of interconnections between these elementary functions, computationally constituting a significantly higher level of information processing than that which is achieved by an individual elementary function. Algorithmic modules, however, differ from algorithmic strategies by not being able in themselves to mediate a task solution. The information processing of an algorithmic module constitutes a computational ‘subroutine’, which contributes to a number of algorithmic strategies. The major distinction between an algorithmic module and an algorithmic strategy is that the information processing of an algorithmic module is, in itself, insufficient to mediate a task solution. The distinction between an algorithmic module and an elementary function is that the information processing of an algorithmic module is more extensive and cognitively more specialized than that which is the case for an elementary function.

A given behavioural pattern or task solution may be achieved via different algorithmic strategies. Focal brain injury will deprive the individual of a substantial number of elementary functions and thereby all algorithmic strategies that depend upon those elementary functions. Thus, injury will lead to behavioural impairments of tasks previously achieved via activation of those algorithmic strategies. Subsequent training will, however, be able to establish novel algorithmic strategies (using preserved elementary functions). In addition, potentially the novel algorithmic strategies will be able to allow a task solution with a similar proficiency to what was seen pretraumatically. This ‘recovered’ task solution is, however, achieved via neural and cognitive mechanisms (‘strategies’) different from those present pretraumatically.

The REF CON framework is based on the same types of elementary functions, algorithmic modules and algorithmic strategies as the original REF framework. A crucial element within the mechanisms of REF CON is the perceptual elementary function (PEF) which differs from other elementary functions by receiving a more or less direct sensory input. ‘Ordinary’ elementary functions have no functional specificity reaching beyond their basic information processing (the association of an elementary function with a particular cognitive domain is purely determined by the dynamically changing input/output relationships of the elementary function). By contrast, a PEF is essentially ‘prewired’ to be associated with a sensory modality and thus with a perceptual analysis.

The PEFs are likely to be localized at subcortical as well as cortical levels and are the initial central processing steps for the incoming sensory information. It should be emphasized that the sensory information has been processed peripherally before reaching the PEFs of the brain—visual information has, for instance, undergone an extensive processing within the retina. Within the somatosensory system, some of the PEFs will be ‘modules’ within the somatotopic maps, while PEFs within the auditory modality include ‘modules’ within the tonotopic maps.

Any sensory input to the brain will result in the activation of, and information processing within, a number of PEFs. In most real-life situations, a sensory situation will be associated with the simultaneous activation of PEFs within several modalities.

The information processing of algorithmic strategies is shaped via backpropagation mechanisms emerging as a consequence of the situational feedback encountered when a pre-existing algorithmic strategy is activated and mediates behaviour. This experience-associated feedback and backpropagation-associated reprogramming shape the connectivity between elementary functions in a manner that can both modulate existing algorithmic strategies and create novel versions of such. The algorithmic modules emerge as a consequence of such modulations and reorganizations: when multiple algorithmic strategies share a network of elementary functions this network has become an algorithmic module. Through these kinds of mechanisms, PEFs as well as more ‘ordinary’ elementary functions are combined into networks which constitute the perceptual algorithmic modules. These networks (perceptual algorithmic modules) are not in themselves able to either direct behavioural activity or form the basis of conscious representations. They are, however, crucial elements in the process leading to behavioural control as well as conscious awareness.

The perceptual algorithmic modules are organized in a hierarchical manner reaching from relatively low-level modules (situated close to the initial sensory input) to algorithmic modules which become incorporated in a special type of algorithmic strategy termed the situational algorithmic strategy (SAS). When incorporated in the SAS, a perceptual algorithmic module becomes able to direct behaviour and potentially reach conscious awareness.

Whenever a pattern of activation of PEF occurs, the activated elementary functions will automatically lead to a degree of activation of a number of perceptual algorithmic modules of the lowest level of this hierarchy (as shown in a). Every PEF is an element within a huge number of perceptual elementary modules of the lowest level. In addition, all of these modules will receive a degree of activation when such a PEF is activated. The degree of activation of a given perceptual elementary module of the lowest level will depend heavily upon how many of its constituent PEFs are active at that moment in time. For each of the, in this way, activated perceptual elementary modules, the activation initiates a testing of the degree of coherence within the activation of its constituent elementary functions. Each of the activated perceptual elementary modules will ‘interrogate’ all of its constituent PEFs as to their degree of current activation. In the case of a high degree of ‘mismatch’ between the pattern of interrogated and activated PEFs, respectively, the algorithmic module in question will not reach a significant level of activation. If, however, there is a reasonable level of congruity of the current pattern of PEF-activation and the pattern ‘expected’ by the algorithmic module in question, a full activation of that module is likely to occur. The degree of activation of perceptual algorithmic modules in a given situation is also a result of mutual competition and inhibition between related perceptual algorithmic modules at this lowest level. It should be remembered that the networks constituting the perceptual algorithmic modules at a given level are heavily interconnected and partly overlapping.

Within the hierarchically organized perceptual algorithmic modules, the modules at the lowest level are constituent elements within the perceptual elementary modules of the next level. Activated modules at the lowest level will lead to a degree of activation of a number of perceptual elementary modules at the next level (as illustrated in b). The process determining which of these activated modules at the second lowest level will eventually reach full activation is essentially similar to what was described with respect to the selection of the perceptual elementary modules of the lowest level. The algorithmic modules at the second lowest level which are best able to ‘account for’ the pattern of activation of the lowest level algorithmic modules will reach a level of full activation, thereby activating a number of perceptual algorithmic modules at the next level which will then enter into a mutual competition as occurred at the lower levels.

The number of levels of perceptual algorithmic modules through which the perceptual analysis is conducted is determined by multiple factors. The type of sensory information to be analysed is a factor. But the level of experience of the individual, as well as the potential presence of injury or dysfunction, are other factors impacting upon the hierarchy of such algorithmic modules. But no matter what the condition, the ongoing activation of perceptual algorithmic modules of constantly higher levels will continue until the activated algorithmic module does not feed into any higher level of perceptual algorithmic modules. This may be when an essentially ‘full analysis’ of the sensory input has been achieved. Or it may be due to levels of algorithmic modules being unavailable because of the lack of experience with the sensory information in question, or injury/dysfunction within the perceptual systems. Regardless of the reasons, the ultimate (i.e. highest available) level of perceptual algorithmic modules activated in a given perceptual process will eventually be reached, and represent under the current circumstances the most advanced perceptual analysis available.

It should be noted that at all the levels of perceptual algorithmic modules, the selected module represents the ‘best available fit’ rather than a 100% fit to the activation pattern of the immediately lower level. Thus, the current model includes contributions from both bottom-up and top-down processes, top-down processes not being in the least determined by the pre-existing connectivity within perceptual algorithmic modules of various levels. As pre-existing connectivity is shaped by experience, the bottom-up/top-down interplay predicts that the contents of experience in many cases will be different between individuals even under the same circumstances.

The progression through which the sensory input causes the selection of perceptual algorithmic modules of the lowest level and subsequently higher levels, is a constant interplay between ‘forward’ activation and feedback activation interrogating the original activation pattern at the immediately lower level. Such a process agrees well with the results of Garrido et al.. In an analysis of long-latency event-related potentials (ERPs), Garrido et al. found that such responses are best explained by an interaction between the activation of forward and backward connections within the systems in question. This is a different perspective on, but in agreement with, findings that visual experience is related to feedback signals to primary sensory areas.

Only the perceptual algorithmic modules of the highest level of the above-described hierarchy are (potentially) available to the regulation of behaviour and/or conscious experience. With well-known material and intact perceptual systems, an individual will thus only experience the relatively ‘completely analysed’ percept. All previous steps of the perceptual analysis will remain unavailable to behavioural control and/or subjective awareness. If, however, injury or dysfunction prevents parts of the perceptual analysis, what is available to behaviour and/or consciousness can be of a more ‘basic’ and potentially fragmented nature, simply because what before was a ‘primitive’ is now the best possible ‘highest level representation’. A similar situation may occur if the stimulus material is unknown or presented under such atypical circumstances that the higher levels of analysis are unavailable.

The analysed sensory input represented by the perceptual algorithmic modules of the highest level is in such a form that it is not available as either the basis for action or conscious awareness. To reach such a level, it will have to become part of an algorithmic strategy. In the case of perceptual algorithmic modules of the highest level, they will have to be integrated into a special type of algorithmic strategy called the SAS (c).

The SAS is a highly dynamic algorithmic strategy that reflects the current status of the individual. The defining feature of the SAS is that it combines elements within sensory/perceptual, motor/behavioural, motivational/planning and other systems. Some elements within this network are perceptual algorithmic modules of the highest level representing the external world. Other elements within the SAS reflect aspects of the internal world, as well as the current goal situation in terms of what objectives the individual is attempting and/or intending to achieve. Additionally, the SAS contains patterns reflecting the ongoing behavioural activities. The SAS is in a constant state of dynamic flux, being modified according to changing motives, goals, emotional fluctuations as well as sensory stimulation, thereby being even more dynamic and constantly modified than is the case with other algorithmic strategies.

If relevant to the current situation of the individual, the perceptual algorithmic modules of the highest level will be integrated into the SAS. Once integrated in this network, a perceptual algorithmic module will be able to influence the behaviour of the individual.

The integration of a perceptual algorithmic module into the SAS can take numerous forms. Any level of integration allows the perceptual algorithmic module to influence the ongoing and planned behaviour of the individual. However, only more elaborate integration and extensive connections to various other elements within the SAS allow the perceptual algorithmic module in question to influence the conscious awareness of the person. In other words, whether the information associated with a perceptual algorithmic module will be consciously available is determined by the degree and pattern of connectivity between, on the one hand, the perceptual algorithmic module and, on the other hand, other components of the SAS.


Reorganization of elementary functions and consciousness and the mechanisms of consciousness

The determining factor regarding whether or not the content of a perceptual algorithmic module is conscious is not the involvement of any particular elementary function but rather a pattern of computational interactions between the perceptual algorithmic module in question and other parts of the SAS. Such a pattern is influenced (among other factors) by the task currently facing the individual. Thus, for instance, different patterns of interactions between elementary functions will be associated with situations calling for a direct conscious perception or a situation calling for a metaconscious approach, respectively. These connectionistic differences are primary factors determining the differences between results obtained under such circumstances.

A crucial factor in determining whether and to what extent a perceptual algorithmic module is integrated into the SAS, and thereby is consciously experienced, is how relevant the percept represented by that algorithmic module is to the broadly defined actions of the individual. Such actions may be in the form of overt behaviour, but could also be ‘inner action’ in the form of thought processes.

As mentioned as a basic consideration for the REF CON framework, conscious experience relates to the ‘most analysed’ information from a functional perspective, i.e. the information that is most relevant for or available to action. Thus, REF CON would not predict any particular brain area as being necessary and sufficient for conscious experience. Perceptual algorithmic modules of the highest level integrated into the SAS are experienced regardless of which elementary functions are involved. For this reason, identifying a particular neural process associated with a given conscious experience does not lead to the conclusion that the absence of this neural process in other subjects or animals means absence of consciousness.

The incorporation of perceptual algorithmic modules of the highest level into the SAS is a situational and short-term process which has to be mediated by neural processes able to manifest themselves with an extremely short latency. The types of synaptic and general structural plasticity involved in more long-term reorganizations of algorithmic strategies cannot mediate such a situational process.


Training of conscious experience

In blindsight, the fact that visual information is typically not used spontaneously but can only become a factor in the behavioural control when the subject is prompted or given very specific instructions, appears to indicate that in these cases, the relevant perceptual algorithmic modules can only become integrated into the SAS when an external instruction has modified the SAS to be receptive to such an integration.

Normally, a perceptual algorithmic module of the highest level will become integrated into the SAS, and thereby become available to the control of behaviour, without any deliberate effort from the individual. That is, provided what is represented by the algorithmic module in question is relevant to the current goals of the individual. As mentioned in §2, the situation in blindsight appears to be somewhat different. The information potentially available in blindsight is not spontaneously used in behaviour. For blindsight to be demonstrated, external instructions are needed in combination with a deliberate effort on the part of the subject.

The somewhat rudimentarily analysed visual information available in blindsight is, according to the REF CON framework, a reflection of a process in which the visual analysis has progressed through only a relatively low number of levels of perceptual algorithmic modules. Therefore, the analysis will reach its most advanced level, the highest level, at a comparably earlier stage of analysis than that which is normally seen. Although these earlier levels can become integrated into the SAS (and thereby made available to behavioural control), such a process requires an unusual degree of top-down control and effort.

As previously described, the degree to which an individual is conscious of a stimulus depends on the degree and pattern of connectivity between, on the one hand, the perceptual algorithmic module of the highest level representing that stimulus and, on the other hand, the rest of SAS. The more elaborate this connectivity is, the higher the level of conscious awareness of the stimulus will be.

The studies in which a less dichotomous and more graded evaluation of conscious awareness (for instance, using the PAS; e.g.) has been applied do, however, indicate that at least a certain degree of conscious awareness can be demonstrated whenever a stimulus is able to direct behaviour. On such a background, it seems that whenever a perceptual algorithmic module is integrated into the SAS, it is not only available to behavioural control but also to conscious awareness, at least at a rudimentary level. The degree of conscious awareness will increase with more elaborate connectivity and thereby more elaborate information processing.

In contrast to these immediate processes of the actual incorporation of the perceptual algorithmic modules into the SAS, the mechanisms achieving the incorporation of perceptual algorithmic modules into the SAS can be modified by training. In addition, these modifications are likely to be mediated by neuroplastic processes similar to those achieved via the backpropagation mechanisms reorganizing other algorithmic modules. Using the metacontrast masking experimental set-up, it has been demonstrated that training can increase the utilization and subjective awareness of stimuli which were originally neither able to influence behaviour nor to be consciously perceived. Thus, training can influence whether and even how perceptual algorithmic modules are integrated into the SAS. These training effects are likely to have at least some mechanisms in common with the demonstrated effects of training in the case of blindsight. In a forced choice procedure, performance can be improved by training in both monkeys subjected to bilateral ablation of the primary visual cortex (V1) and patients demonstrating blindsight. In blindsight patients, training may not only improve the behavioural performance, but also the subjective awareness. In intact individuals presented with subliminal stimuli, the subjective awareness of these stimuli appears to be able to be increased by training procedures.

The effect of ‘training’ and experience can also be demonstrated in contexts which are more likely to cause modifications within perceptual algorithmic modules (of various levels). If part of the somatosensory input is lacking, thereby leaving part of the somatotopic representation ‘vacant’, a reorganization of this representation will occur. If, for instance, a hand is amputated, the contralateral somatosensory representation will undergo a change in which the two representations (the face and arm, respectively) neighbouring the now ‘vacant’ hand area will ‘grow’ and eventually completely cannibalize the area previously representing the now amputated hand. Thus, within the somatotopic representation, the area previously receiving input from the now absent hand will become activated by input from body-parts previously unable to activate this part of the somatotopic map. In terms of the present model, PEFs which were originally activated by input from the hand will now become activated by input from, for instance, the face. Although the actual input activating the previous somatosensory hand-representation is now originating from another body-part, the individual may for a period of time still experience input to the brain region in question as originating from the now absent hand. Only at a later point in time, when the individual has undergone additional ‘training’ in the form of daily experiences, will the sensory input activating the previous hand area be experienced as actually originating from its novel source (rather than from the amputated hand). In terms of the present framework, the mechanisms of this process are that while PEFs of the previous hand area quickly undergo changes activating them by input from face and arm, respectively, the perceptual algorithmic modules which process the activation of these PEFs are not reorganized as quickly. For a period of time, these perceptual algorithmic modules are still organized in ways which ‘assume’ the input to the hand-PEFs still to originate from the hand. Subsequent experiences, backpropagation mechanisms and reorganizations are necessary for these algorithmic modules to allow the individual to consciously experience activation of the previous hand area as representing input from the body areas from where the stimulation now actually originates.


Perception shaped by learning

A somewhat different example which nevertheless may reflect related processes can be found in the patient SB reported by Gregory & Wallace and Gregory. SB grew up virtually blind. Aged 52 years, SB received corneal grafts to both eyes and gained the ability to see. When postoperatively first experiencing vision, SB appeared to be almost exclusively able to visually perceive what had been available to tactile exploration. In a striking example, SB when drawing a bus (offered to his visual inspection) included a type of wheel which was no longer used on buses. SB had, however, as a child (using tactile exploration) experienced that type of wheel. When later again tasked with drawing a visually presented bus, SB now drew a wheel which was identical to the one actually present. Apparently, the visual information offered to SB was originally analysed through perceptual algorithmic modules which had primarily been constructed and structured using tactile information (while SB was blind). Only through a prolonged period of visual experiences were the perceptual algorithmic modules of SB reorganized into a structure representing the (visual) world of the present day.

As previously mentioned, perceptual algorithmic modules of the lowest level are under normal circumstances likely to receive activation from PEFs associated with multiple sensory modalities. Thus, within the framework of REF CON, multimodal perceptual phenomena such as the McGurk illusion can easily be accounted for. The McGurk illusion (the fact that auditory perception of syllables is modified by simultaneously watching a face pronouncing a different syllable) reflects the fact that even when consciously perceived as a purely auditory process, auditory perception of spoken language is in reality a multimodal process whenever relevant visual information is available. Some of the neural mechanisms associated with this multimodality are presently being analysed and such an analysis may provide cues regarding the neural networks mediating the associated perceptual algorithmic modules.

Since the perceptual algorithmic modules involved in various types of perceptual analysis are constantly subjected to use-associated feedback and potentially backpropagation-provoked reorganizations, REF CON predicts that plastic processes are able to allow not only reorganizations within a given modality but also reorganizations reaching across sensory modalities, as seen in various types of cross-modal plasticity. Mancuso et al. emphasize that according to most traditional views of colour perception it is surprising that gene therapy is able to eliminate colour blindness in adult primates. According to most prevailing theories, the mechanisms of colour perception become ‘hard-wired’ in early development and should not be able to use an adult insertion of a peripheral analysis of colour. REF CON, on the other hand, includes a number of dynamically reorganizable levels (the levels of perceptual algorithmic modules) between the sensory input to the brain and the mechanisms of the actual perceptual experience. Thus, REF CON can more easily account for such an ability to use an adult's age acquired ability to receive colour-coded input.


Studies of the neural correlate(s) of consciousness

Most current theories about the neural correlate(s) of consciousness (NCC) suggest some specific neural region as necessary, or at least sufficient, for subjective experience. For instance, Logothetis and colleagues have found that inferior temporal regions along the ventral projection streams from primary visual cortex are active in relation to the dominant percept during binocular rivalry. On this background, they suggest these regions as an interesting candidate for an NCC. Rees et al. review a number of experiments and argue that activations cluster around parietal and prefrontal sites when subjects experience changes in bistable figures, binocular rivalry, and when they become consciously aware of changes in complex visual scenes. Lamme, however, suggests that we can only be conscious if there are feedback loops to primary visual cortex based on, primarily, ERP experiments showing that visual information can reach even prefrontal areas without accompanying conscious experiences.

There are more proposals for NCC candidates than those which can be mentioned here. The few examples above aim to show that such candidates are rather different, and cover all cortical lobes. One difficulty for all such proposals is that they can only account for a limited amount of findings, and they are forced to explain why other experiments, with sometimes small methodological variations, give rise to very different findings.

One advantage of the REF CON framework is that it does not presuppose that there is any ‘consciousness region’ in the brain. Rather, it would predict that the level of cognitive representation, related to particular algorithmic strategy, correlates with consciousness. Even though the elementary parts of the model are expected to be localized in different regions, there is not one particular constellation of functions in one particular kind of strategy that is expected to be ‘more conscious’ than other possible constellations. For the same reason, REF CON has no principal problems explaining data that in the light of other theories look like conflicting data.

The REF CON framework shares more similarities with the relatively few computational theories of consciousness. According to Tononi, consciousness is identical to ‘integrated information’, i.e. consciousness is the property of a physical system, and its quantity can be specified mathematically. Crick & Koch argued that there might be a common neural mechanism behind ‘the binding together’ of information that is otherwise separately processed in the brain and mechanisms of consciousness. Therefore, they argued that synchronous activity in the ‘gamma range’ is causally involved in consciousness. Although those theories share with REF CON the idea that consciousness is not directly related to particular regions in the brain, they are, obviously, based on different assumptions about which properties to associate with consciousness. REF CON's association between consciousness and ‘level of representation’ is based on empirical data, as argued here and in §§9 and 10.


Conclusion

The REF CON framework is a theoretical proposal aimed at resolving seemingly contradictory evidence in blindsight and subliminal perception research. The model has a general scope, and is therefore applicable to any aspect of consciousness research without modifying the principal ideas. One advantage of REF CON is its ability to combine seemingly conflicting evidence in one, hierarchical organized model with several levels. Conflicting data on blindsight and subliminal perception can be resolved essentially by arguing that conscious experience is not in opposition to functional aspects of mind, but rather, an intrinsic part. Thus, the model opposes the idea that we can have ‘access consciousness’ about something of which we are ‘phenomenally unconscious’. Methodological developments in both fields have questioned the classical dichotomy between ‘on’ and ‘off’ versions of mental states, and show that vague perceptions may underlie what seems to be ‘fully unconscious perception’. The neuroscientific side of REF CON suggests a combination of organizational principles that are otherwise often presented as opposite ideas, namely the idea of functional localization, and the idea of a distributed, connectionist system. The model essentially suggests that no particular brain area or process is itself associated with consciousness, but that information analysed to a given ‘highest level’ and then integrated into the SAS is experienced. The model obviously predicts close correlations between information that is analysed to this degree and experience. But denies that one level of description can be said to create another.


Funding statement

M.O. was funded by a Starting Grant from the European Research Council, and J.M. by a grant from the Danish Council for Independent Research.


The bridge of iconicity: from a world of experience to the experience of language

Pamela Perniss, Gabriella Vigliocco — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2014. PMC4123679, CC BY 3.0.

Iconicity, a resemblance between properties of linguistic form (both in spoken and signed languages) and meaning, has traditionally been considered to be a marginal, irrelevant phenomenon for our understanding of language processing, development and evolution. Rather, the arbitrary and symbolic nature of language has long been taken as a design feature of the human linguistic system. In this paper, we propose an alternative framework in which iconicity in face-to-face communication (spoken and signed) is a powerful vehicle for bridging between language and human sensori-motor experience, and, as such, iconicity provides a key to understanding language evolution, development and processing. In language evolution, iconicity might have played a key role in establishing displacement (the ability of language to refer beyond what is immediately present), which is core to what language does; in ontogenesis, iconicity might play a critical role in supporting referentiality (learning to map linguistic labels to objects, events, etc., in the world), which is core to vocabulary development. Finally, in language processing, iconicity could provide a mechanism to account for how language comes to be embodied (grounded in our sensory and motor systems), which is core to meaningful communication.

Keywords: language evolution, language development, language processing, iconicity, sign language, co-speech gesture


Introduction

This paper provides a new theoretical perspective on three central areas of language study—language evolution, language learning and language processing—based on insights derived from the study of language, spoken or signed, as a system of face-to-face communication. To date, theoretical and methodological approaches to the study of language have been dominated by two main assumptions: (1) that language, as the object of study, is suitably represented in the form of spoken or written words and (2) that the relationship between words and their meaning is arbitrary, determined by convention alone. However, language has developed during phylogenesis as a system for face-to-face communication, it is learnt by infants and children in the context of face-to-face interaction with carers and, for many languages, i.e. spoken languages with no written form and all sign languages, it is always processed in such face-to-face communicative contexts. For both signed and spoken language, recent research has provided evidence that communicative expression comprises the use of different channels in systematic and orchestrated ways (e.g. for sign languages and for spoken languages), and that language users are sensitive to the semantic and temporal congruence of information expressed in concomitant channels.

When we consider language in the context of face-to-face communication, an obvious observation is that language is not simply arbitrary; rather there are multiple iconic (imagistic) cues in communicative/linguistic form to the intended meaning, i.e. properties of communicative/linguistic form often resemble their referent in some way. In spoken languages, speech is accompanied by gestures, as well as facial expression, and the vocal signal may be prosodically modulated. The gestures that accompany speech are often iconic of some aspects of the content of the speech (e.g. a,b). Moreover, the prosodic modulation of speech can also provide iconic cues to the meaning (e.g. when a speaker says looooong to refer to a long trip, or the sarcasm implied in saying shoooort). Finally, iconicity (also referred to as sound symbolism) is present in the linguistic signal itself in the form of putatively universal as well as language-specific mappings between given sounds and properties of referents, a propensity that becomes especially visible as soon as we extend our investigation to languages outside the Indo-European family (see for evidence that such sound-symbolic mappings are used by infants and children in vocabulary learning).

In sign languages, perceived visually and produced with the hands, face and body, the potential for iconic forms is much greater—given the modality's affordance for visual-to-visual and action-to-action mapping—and, indeed, across the board, sign languages exhibit a greater degree of iconicity than spoken languages in the linguistic form itself (e.g. c,d). Thus, far from being only a very limited phenomenon, iconicity is clearly visible in both signed and spoken languages, on the lexical level and embedded in different channels of expression (e.g. gestural and prosodic expression; see for a review).

In addition to reviewing the evidence for the presence of iconicity across language modalities and typologies, Perniss et al. provided a review of the existing evidence that iconicity plays a role in processing and development of both spoken and signed language. Evidence for iconicity effects in these domains continues to accumulate. For example, Thompson et al. have recently shown that children learning British Sign Language (BSL) produce and comprehend iconic signs earlier than non-iconic signs. On the basis of such a body of evidence, Perniss et al. argue that iconicity is a fundamental property of language, representing an adaptation to a critical constraint on the phylogenesis, ontogenesis and use of language, namely the need to map linguistic form to human (sensory, motor and affective) experience. In this view, iconicity would sit alongside arbitrariness as a fundamental property of language. Specifically, iconicity would be favoured by those processes engaged in ensuring that communication is meaningful, in the sense of related to and grounded in our experience; arbitrariness would, instead, be favoured by those processes engaged in ensuring that the linguistic signal is efficient and discriminable, contributing to exemplar learning and the ability to carry out within-category discrimination. Both the need to map linguistic form to experience and the need for an efficient, discriminable signal are central to successful communication.

In this paper, we spell out the implications of such a hypothesis, which sees iconicity as providing scaffolding for the cognitive system to connect communicative form with experience of the world, for the three core areas of language studies: phylogenesis, ontogenesis and language processing. In phylogenesis, iconicity would help to achieve displacement, the ability to refer to things that are spatially and/or temporally remote, and contribute to development of the cognitive ability to maintain conceptual reference. In ontogenesis, iconicity provides a mechanism for establishing referentiality, the ability to map linguistic form to meaning, which is at the core of vocabulary learning, as alternative—or in addition—to mechanisms such as correlational (Hebbian) learning and joint attention. In language processing, iconicity is the vehicle for grounding language in neural systems devoted to perception, action and affective experience—in essence, the mechanism by which embodiment of language is realized. In arguing that iconicity is a fundamental mechanism that supports language evolution, learning and processing, we provide a unified account of our capacity for language and offer a new theoretical perspective for understanding the cognitive systems and neural substrates underpinning this capacity.


What is iconicity?

We take iconicity to be any resemblance between certain properties of linguistic/communicative form (this includes sign or spoken language phonology, sign or spoken language prosody and co-speech gestures) and certain sensori-motor and/or affective properties of corresponding referents.

In sign languages, where all expression is in the visual modality, the potential for iconicity is high and iconic form–meaning mappings are ubiquitous and clearly visible in the lexicon and beyond. Traditional approaches to iconicity in sign languages distinguished between transparent signs (i.e. the meaning is obvious to anyone with shared social/cultural background), translucent signs (i.e. the meaning cannot be guessed by a non-signer, but the motivation for the sign is clear once the meaning is known and a non-signer could choose the correct meaning among alternatives), obscure signs (i.e. the form seems to be iconically motivated, but the motivation has become obscured over time) and opaque signs (i.e. non-iconic signs). Importantly, all iconic signs, even the transparent ones, are conventionalized, a property that sets iconic signs apart from pantomimes and iconic gestures. Iconicity can be classified according to whether it is action-based (including iconicity of how to handle an object) or perception-based. For example, many signs are made with handshapes that depict the handling and manual manipulation of an object, as in the sign HAMMER, which is produced as if actually holding and using a hammer (a). Other signs represent salient perceptual features of referents, as in the sign DEER, where the handshape represents the shape of a deer's antlers and the movement of the hands traces the length of the antlers extending from the head (b). In a sign like BOTTLE, the handshape is as if the hand were holding a bottle, but the tracing movement of the hand also provides information about the rounded, cylindrical shape of the bottle (c). Finally, in addition to iconicity in the manual form of signs, iconic mappings in sign language may also be non-manual, through expression on the face and mouth, as in the use of puffed cheeks to indicate roundness or thin, stretched lips to indicate thinness.

In spoken languages, the use of the hands in co-speech gestures, and possibly the use of facial expression, offers similar opportunities for iconic representation of action affordances and visual features of referents, and therefore, like signs, gestures can exhibit varying degrees of perceptual/motoric iconicity (e.g. the gesture in a exhibits action-based iconicity, while the gesture in b exhibits perception-based iconicity). Moreover, iconicity exists in the lexicon of all spoken languages in onomatopoeia, evoking acoustic experiences (e.g. meow, boom, splash), and, in many languages, extends to other sensory modalities (as in these examples from Japanese: pika ‘flash of light’, tobotobo ‘a sluggish manner of walking’, nurunuru ‘the tactile sensation caused by a slimy substance’, gorogoro ‘a heavy object rolling repeatedly’, korokoro ‘a light object rolling repeatedly’). These iconic forms rely on associations between certain sounds and certain qualities of experience (e.g. back vowels corresponding to large or round objects, or to higher intensity of sound or light; front vowels corresponding to small or spiky objects, or to lower intensity of sound or light; voiced consonants corresponding to large objects; voiceless consonants corresponding to small objects). In addition, these spoken language forms rely on correspondences between the structure of the word and features of the event being referred to (e.g. reduplication of syllables corresponding to iterated events). Finally, in vocal prosody, iconicity is achieved by mapping properties of the acoustic signal to properties of an experience, e.g. vowel lengthening to denote an extension or elongation in terms of space (size) or time (duration), as in looooong to mean a very long time.

We unify these various manifestations under the single term iconicity, regardless of language modality or linguistic tradition. Thus, our use of iconicity subsumes what is typically called sound symbolism (as is usually used for spoken languages), including the different terms that refer to word classes exhibiting sound symbolism across different language families (e.g. ideophones, mimetics, expressives and onomatopoeia). Note, however, that our conception of iconicity does not include the notion of non-arbitrary mappings achieved simply through regularity or systematicity of mapping between phonology and meaning (as would be the case, for example, if all words referring to tools differed only in their onset phoneme, cf.).

Much of current research on iconicity in sign languages has used subjective ratings by native signers on a Likert-type scale as a measure of the degree of iconicity of signs, a method that has proved to successfully predict language acquisition and language processing data. However, this holistic notion of iconicity neglects various possible distinctions and, in particular, the fact that the iconic mapping can exhibit varying degrees of abstraction. That is, the iconic form can differ in the extent or degree to which it resembles its referent (from more direct to more indirect resemblance). More direct iconic mappings are directly imitative, and thus do not involve a high degree of schematization and abstraction of features of the referent. This is the case for signs like PUSH (c), for example, where the movement of the hands to execute the sign is nearly identical to the movement necessary to perform the actual action of pushing. Similarly, the onomatopoeic word meow or an iconic ‘stirring’ gesture accompanying the word cook are also directly imitative of their meaning or referent, and these form–meaning mappings thus also do not exhibit high levels of abstraction. Other types of iconic mappings, however, are more indirect and thus more abstract and schematic. This is the case, for example, for signs like TREE (d), in which the iconic mapping represents a massive scaling-down in terms of size, and where parts of a prototypical tree are mapped onto parts of the hand and arm. A more indirect, abstract mapping is also exhibited in the examples of Japanese mimetics given further above (i.e. pika, tobotobo, etc.). Co-speech gestures may exhibit more abstract and schematic iconic mappings in a similar way. In the vocal modality, words can exhibit varying degrees of abstraction in cross-modal mappings, i.e. where the acoustic signal does not depict an acoustic event. For example, contrast the round mouth in producing bouba to refer to rounded shapes/objects to the more abstract mapping of length/gestalt of words corresponding to length/gestalt of events (see for a good review of types of more abstract mappings). It is important to note that ratings of the overall degree of iconicity of signs/words reflect the extent to which any feature of a given sign/word imagistically evokes properties of its referent. Thus, this measure does not coincide with ratings of the degree of abstraction (or schematic complexity) of iconic mappings as described above. This is illustrated in for BSL.

The level of abstraction in iconic mappings may be especially critical with respect to the way in which iconicity can be a vehicle for language evolution and development. The more directly imitative iconic mappings may provide the initial point of contact between linguistic form and sensori-motor experience. In scaffolding language development and development of the cognitive system, the facilitatory role of iconicity may depend on starting from the more simple, direct mappings in order to be able to recognize and appreciate the more complex types of iconicity. Interestingly, the fact that the degree of abstraction does not seem to affect performance by adult signers suggests that once learnt, all forms of iconicity support linguistic processing.


Iconicity, displacement and the phylogenesis of language

The question of language origins is a hot and extensively debated topic engaging researchers from very different fields—biology, psychology, neurology, ethology, anthropology, archaeology and linguistics. Crucial adaptations to language development from a biological perspective include the dropping of the larynx and the direct connection between the primary motor and laryngeal motor cortex. From a socio-cultural perspective, crucial adaptations include tool-making and the development of active sharing, cooperation and teaching among individuals.

Here, our argument is that iconicity also represents a fundamental adaptation. Specifically, iconicity would have played an important part in achieving displacement, i.e. the ability to refer to things that are not present in the immediate environment, which is a crucial design feature of language. As we explain below, displacement would have been instrumental in creating the adaptive niche that propelled early hominins from systems of communication based on functional reference and symptomatic signalling to a system based on conceptual reference and deliberate, intentional message transmission. The argument rests on the idea that the social structure and cultural development that existed in early hominin groups gave rise to the need to refer to things that are spatially and temporally removed, and that this need—and iconic signalling as one response to it—is a harbinger of conceptual reference. Thus, iconicity would have been instrumental in bringing about the transition from the use of purely functionally referential signals to the use of conceptually referential signals. (Some people have argued that this is better achieved in the manual modality because it lends itself better to the production of iconic, motivated signs; see also.) Below we first discuss the distinction between functional and conceptual reference and the conditions that might have played a key role for displacement to emerge. We then introduce how iconicity might have played a significant role in the development of displacement in communication.


Functional versus conceptual reference

Many animal calls, e.g. the calls produced by vervet monkeys or even by male domestic chickens, are functionally referential in that their function is to pick out a certain class of predator. In the case of vervet monkeys, calls distinguish between different kinds of predators (those in the sky, undergrowth or ground). They are uttered upon perceptual recognition of a predator type and alert other group members to engage in the appropriate flight response. While these and other animal calls provide evidence of categorization of different predator types, the calls can be produced only symptomatically, as a direct reaction to a perceived threat. Thus, there is no evidence here for any kind of conceptual reference—the predator is not actually being labelled based on a mental representation of the referent. By contrast, when we use words to refer to things, we do so through actual naming, based on a conceptual representation of the things referred to. We can retrieve information about objects and events independent of their immediate presence and our physical perception and experience of them, and are thus not bound to utterances that are purely indexical and symptomatic. This is the crucial difference between functional reference and conceptual reference. Conceptual representation is itself a form of displacement: the representations we have in our minds exist independently of—and thus displaced from—the objects and events they refer to.


Biological and socio-cultural preconditions for displacement

What are important conditions, in terms of biological development and social and cultural complexity, that would have had to be in place for the need to refer to the not here-and-now to have arisen—and thus for iconicity to have played a role in achieving the ability for displaced reference? One very important condition seems to be group size. Dunbar has argued that brain size is correlated positively to group size, such that even Neanderthals would likely have lived in groups of over 100 individuals. Social group size is intimately linked to cultural development and to the development of complex social structures, where individuals maintain a multitude of social relationships. One major consequence of socio-cultural advancement would be the development of a division of labour among individuals. An important benefit of a division of labour is an enhanced ability to transmit cultural skills (e.g. tool-making skills). As Dediu & Levinson (p. 9) note, citing Henrich, ‘One possible reason for the cultural limitations of small populations has to do with the transmission fidelity of culture, with only larger populations having the variance and division of labor to maintain the quality of skills’.

Another important consequence of complex social structure would be the emergence of cooperative information sharing. Factors like mutual inter-individual reliance, management of different social relationships and division of labour would help provide the impetus for cooperative information sharing. Cooperative interaction, and engagement in joint-attentional, information-sharing situations, are distinctively human behaviours. Related to this is an important development in the morphology of the human eye. Humans are the only primates with white sclera and irises small enough for the position of the pupil/iris against the sclera to be clearly visible. This distinctive feature has led to the cooperative eye hypothesis, which holds that the human white sclera evolved to make gaze following possible while engaged in joint activities or shared attentional situations. The ability to follow the direction of eye-gaze, instead of the direction in which the whole head is turned, is specific to humans, and the specific morphology of the human eye is argued to have evolved to support cooperative social interaction.


How iconicity contributes to displacement

Above, we have presented arguments for cultural developments like division of labour, mutual dependence and cooperative information-sharing emerging in the wake of large groups and complex social structures. One can imagine that the existence of mutual reliance for food and labour across the members of a group engenders the need to refer to things in the not here-and-now. As Kendon (p. 213) puts it, if the division of labour within a group ‘were to involve a periodic spatial separation of group members who are otherwise dependent on each other, [c]ommunication about matters not jointly present may thus become necessary’. In Bickerton's scenario, for example, such communication would be necessary for megafauna scavenging, specifically for the recruitment of group members to the remote (i.e. displaced) site at which the animal (carcass) had been discovered.

The use of iconicity, i.e. of imagistic, imitative representations of real objects and actions with objects, would be a key component in achieving displaced reference. For example, in attempting to communicate to someone else the intention to go hunting, one could rely on conceptual traces of previous sensori-motor experiences in hunting, using the face, hands, body and vocal chords to imitate what can be retrieved of these previous sensori-motor experiences to convey the intention to hunt. In this scenario, iconicity is imitative of something that is not there, to evoke some ‘trace’ of a previous experience and to thereby make the event present in a sense. In this lies a seed of conceptual reference, with iconicity bridging between a referent in the world and a representation in the mind, and thereby achieving displaced reference. It is plausible that it is especially the more direct, imitative type of iconicity that would have played a greater role at the beginning, while more complex mappings (e.g. in which the hands give a schematic of an object, as in the BSL sign TREE; d) would have appeared later, with continued conceptual development and therefore development of the ability to abstract from sensori-motor experience. In addition to increased complexity, repeated and frequent use of (iconic) mappings within a community—with feedback to enable grounding and memorization of representations—enables signal reduction and ritualization, leading to form conventionalization and, ultimately, to higher levels of abstraction. While we wish to accord iconicity an important, instrumental role in the evolution of language, we do not mean to suggest that iconicity would have been the only factor contributing to the development of conceptual reference. Growing complexity within the socio-cultural structure of hominin groups, for example, with individuals engaged in tool-making and other technical skills and maintaining a multitude of social relationships, would also contribute to the development of more abstract, conceptual thinking. Even assuming that conceptual reference developed under the influence of multiple forces, iconicity would nonetheless be key to language evolution, as we have argued above.

It is clear, in any case, that this scenario relies on the development of storage and retrieval capacity of previous experience in the brain. Importantly, as brain size increased in protohominids, so did brain connectivity. For example, compared to other mammals, primate brains are packed with an extraordinary amount of neurons in relation to the size of their brains. Cortical neurons in primate brains are comparatively small, which means that cortical cells can be densely packed and allow fast communication. In addition, this scenario relies on the capacity to recognize another's action (as potentially one's own). The mirror neuron system, by which individuals recognize actions by others because the same neural activation necessary to produce an action is generated by observation of the action, is crucial in this regard. For Rizzolatti & Arbib, the core of language lies in the development of a proto-dialogue between two individuals based on mutual action recognition through concerted activation of the mirror neuron system. In this account, however, there is no basis for why an individual would come to recognize another's action as an intentional communicative signal. Bringing iconicity and the need for displacement, as a result of socio-cultural advancements, into the picture provides an explanatory basis for the communicative intentionality of signals as it removes the necessary, purely symptomatic coupling between a signal and an event, allowing instead the representation (and hence communication) of a concept held independently in the mind.


Iconicity, referentiality and the ontogenesis of language

It is generally agreed that infants learn their first words through the co-occurrence of a heard word (or seen sign) and a visual scene. Standard approaches assume that the central problem is to explain how children manage to learn labels that are linked only arbitrarily to referents and how they are able to make correct form–meaning associations despite the ambiguity of everyday visual scenes that contain multiple referents. Standard solutions to this twofold problem of referential ambiguity—i.e. arbitrary mapping and multiple possible targets—assume a host of a priori cognitive skills that the infant brings to the task of word learning, including expectations that words highlight commonalities between objects in the world and that different types of words refer to different types of commonalities, the capacity to make inferences about the communicative intentions of speakers and the ability for statistically driven cross-situational learning.

Recent alternative approaches advocate a closer coupling between perceiving a word (or seeing a sign) and perceptuo-motoric access to a specific referent. For example, Yu & Smith argue that toddlers reduce referential ambiguity through their own actions, by coordinating their body, hands and eyes to visually isolate, and specifically zoom into, a given object. Initial word learning would be most effective when labelling by carers occurs during these moments of referent-specific visual attention—and it would seem that carers outside of the laboratory would be especially given to producing labels during such moments. Glenberg & Gallese propose that joint attention guides the process of learning to associate the sensori-motor linguistic processes of hearing and saying a word (and presumably seeing and producing a sign) and the sensori-motor experiences of seeing and holding/using an object. Finally, research suggests that pointing gestures (both by the child and the carer) may also provide a powerful tool for reducing referential ambiguity.

What remains common to all these approaches is the assumption that labels are only arbitrarily linked to referents in the sensori-motor experience of infants. Hence even when a single referent has been successfully visually isolated, establishing referentiality implies temporal overlap between attention to the (single) referent and exposure to the verbal label (spoken or signed), so that linguistic form and meaning can be linked via Hebbian learning, or other related mechanisms.

Here, we propose that iconicity provides an additional, critical mechanism for reducing referential ambiguity and therefore for promoting word/sign learning. Moreover, because iconicity provides a learning mechanism that does not require a referent to be present in the immediate visual environment, it also allows for language learning episodes when the objects are not present. On this account, the child makes use of a resemblance relationship between form and referent to link linguistic and conceptual form. The presence of iconicity in the input to a child would thus help the child to bridge the gap between experience of the world and the ability to communicate about this experience. As such, similar to the infant's own actions in visually isolating referents, iconicity provided by carers in the input would offer another type of ‘external sensory-motor solution’ (p. 244) to the task of word learning. Of course, for this hypothesis to be viable, there must be evidence that infants and children are sensitive to iconicity and that iconicity is indeed found in the input from carers. Below we review the available evidence.


Infants' and children's sensitivity to iconicity

For spoken language, several studies have provided evidence that infants (four-months) and toddlers (2–3 years) are sensitive to sound–meaning correspondences, particularly sound–shape correspondences of the kiki-bouba type. (Imai & Kita provide a comprehensive review of the literature concerning the role of sound-symbolic mappings in learning a spoken language.) These findings have been interpreted as suggesting that aspects of iconic, sound-symbolic mappings are universally and biologically grounded.

However, in general, it is argued that effects of iconic mappings do not emerge until about 3 years of age when children develop cognitive awareness of iconicity as a tool to link form to meaning. This seems corroborated by the finding that children do not start producing iconic gestures until the age of about 2.5 years. The contradiction implied by these two lines of evidence may be resolved by considering the degree of abstraction required by different types of iconic mapping.

For the acquisition of sign languages, iconicity has historically been treated as unimportant. The initial need to establish recognition of sign languages as fully-fledged natural human languages meant moving the focus away from features of signed language that suggested a pantomimic nature, and proving the existence of linguistic structures and categories equivalent to those in spoken languages in all respects. This also meant that theoretical assumptions about the fundamental arbitrary nature of language remained intact. However, Thompson et al. provided first evidence for a role of iconicity in vocabulary learning in BSL. They showed that the iconicity of signs (operationalized as subjective ratings by adult native signers) predicted sign production and comprehension by deaf infants and toddlers (aged 11–30 months), as reported in the BSL Communicative Development Inventory (BSL-CDI). Interestingly, these authors further reported that the advantage for iconic signs increases with age such that although both younger (11–20 months) and older (21–30 months) children produced and comprehended more iconic than less iconic signs, older children showed a greater effect of iconicity. One possible explanation for the difference between younger and older children might be linked to the level of abstraction in the iconic mappings of the signs. The younger children may not have been able to process more abstract forms of iconicity that were available to older children (and who thus showed an effect of iconicity for a greater number of signs.)

In line with this argument, Tolar et al. reported that hearing children aged 2.5–5 years learning signs from American Sign Language (ASL) were sensitive to iconic cues from age 3, although at 2.5 they already showed effects of action-based (but not perception-based) iconicity. This suggests that the difference between action-based and perception-based iconicity may be particularly relevant in terms of the developmental time course of access to different types of iconic mapping. In particular, action-based iconicity may be available earlier because it is based more on imitative resemblance (as in PUSH, c), while perception-based iconicity may be available later as it requires more abstract mapping of features (as for example in DEER, b, where the head of the signer needs to be mapped to the head of the animal and the signer's hands need to be mapped to the deer's antlers). However, to our knowledge no existing study has directly addressed action-based versus perception-based iconicity, or—possibly more importantly—the level of abstraction in the iconic mapping in the acquisition of a sign language as a first language.


Iconicity in the input to infants and children

To date, we know little about how iconicity is conveyed in carers' input to children. Are iconic mappings conveyed systematically in multiple channels of expression? Do carers explicitly use different channels to highlight resemblance relationships between communicative form and referents in the world, i.e. referents in specific joint-attentional situations?

More is known about non-iconic modifications and multichannel combinations of the language input. For example, for spoken language, there has been a considerable amount of research on the ways in which carers modify their speech when interacting with infants and toddlers—typically referred to as ‘motherese’ or ‘infant-/child-directed speech’. These modifications have been found to exist cross-linguistically and cross-culturally, and include higher pitch, shorter utterances, longer pauses, and exhibit generally exaggerated and more repetitive intonation. Functionally, they have been described as engaging attention, maintaining arousal, and facilitating segmentation and processing of the signal. Similar modifications have been found in the motherese of signed language. For example, Masataka found that deaf mothers using Japanese Sign Language exhibited more exaggerated movements, more repetition and bigger, slower signing when interacting with their deaf infants (aged between 8–11 months) compared to when signing with deaf adult friends.

There is some initial evidence that carers do modify their language in terms of the amount and type of iconicity conveyed when speaking with children versus adults or when conveying information about referents that are absent versus present in the communicative context. For spoken language, Saji & Imai found that Japanese-speaking carers used more sound-symbolic and onomatopoeic words when speaking to their toddlers than when speaking to adults. In sign languages, where iconicity is ubiquitous in the lexicon, features of referents reflected in the iconic mappings of signs may be similarly exaggerated in child-directed signing. Perniss et al. found that deaf adults, asked to imagine playing with their children, embedded more iconicity into their signing when toys were absent compared to when toys were present. The comparison between conditions in which referents are present versus absent is important given that parents do talk about things that are not in the here-and-now with their children and, as argued above, it is in these contexts that iconicity can be especially useful in reducing referential ambiguity. As such, iconicity may provide a broadly applicable and flexible learning mechanism.

However, an extensive literature looking at speech + gesture combinations in spoken language suggests a different picture, indicating that iconic gestures may not play much of a role in language development. These studies (looking at children in an age range between 14 and 42 months) have found that vocabulary size is predicted both by children's own use of gesture as well as by the amount of gesture in the parental input, but have found that over time, the frequency and distribution of functionally different types of speech + gesture combinations (i.e. disambiguating, re-inforcing or supplementary) remains stable in carers' input, and changes only in children, presumably reflecting changes in cognitive skills. These studies mainly emphasize the role of gesture production by children in eliciting labelling from their parents and in predicting language development in the children. Crucially, these findings suggest that children's communicative milestones in integrating speech and gesture are not the direct result of the nature of gestural input received, and generally indicate a preponderance of deictic (pointing or showing) gestures compared to only a small proportion of iconic (or representational) gestures.

This latter fact, however, may be the result of scoring decisions by the researchers. Iconicity may be embedded in certain kinds of deictic gestures, but may go unreported. For example, the category of deictic gestures used by Puccini et al. includes Action Demonstration (with an object), Object Demonstration (with an object) and Show. These types of deictic gestures seem very amenable to the embedding of iconic elements. For example, a parent could have been observed performing an action or object demonstration consisting in holding a toy frog and moving the frog in an iconic, jumping manner through the air while providing the label ‘jump’ or ‘frog’. However, this would have been coded as deictic, not as iconic. Thus, in focusing on a (broad) category of deictics, and possibly subsuming iconic elements under this category, the role of iconicity in language learning may be obscured and perhaps unfairly dismissed. In another study, Gogate et al. compared speech and gesture combinations in teaching novel nouns and verbs to infants, focusing on pointing and showing gestures. They found that carers included more movements with ‘show’ gestures when teaching novel verbs to infants compared to novel nouns. This invites the speculation that the movements involved in these ‘show’ gestures were related in some way to manner of movement of the referents, and that carers may have created an iconic mapping to promote word learning in their infants. (The use of iconicity to convey verb-like meanings furthermore suggests that the role of iconicity in language learning may extend beyond the object level to verb and event-level learning, providing an alternative/additional mechanism to syntactic bootstrapping in verb learning.)

However, differences in the role of iconicity in the manual components of signs and in co-speech gestures may also be related to whether iconicity is expressed in the primary or secondary linguistic channel. Hands provide primary information in sign languages, but only secondary information in spoken languages where, instead, speech is the primary source of information. It is the case that for spoken languages, the (limited) evidence suggests a role of iconicity in speech through the use of sound-symbolic mappings.


Iconicity, embodiment and language processing

In the past two decades, a growing body of literature has provided support for the idea that understanding language involves engaging in simulations of corresponding sensori-motor experience. The current evidence suggests that it is unlikely that language processing engages in full the same systems that are engaged in actual sensori-motor experience with the physical world (as a strong embodiment view would predict), but, in general, the evidence is compatible with views that higher level sensori-motor processes are engaged whenever we process language referring to sensori-motor experience (see for a comprehensive review of the neuroscientific evidence). With few exceptions, studies have not addressed how this may come to be, or in other words, few studies have endeavoured to identify the explicit mechanisms that underscore the coupling between language processing and sensori-motor processing. One reason for the lack of such studies may well be that, assuming arbitrary links between linguistic form and meaning, researchers more or less implicitly assume that such coupling must be realized during language development as a Hebbian type of association. As Glenberg & Gallese propose, in language acquisition, linguistic labels become inextricably linked to motor programmes through highly frequent co-occurrence in the input. These motor programmes are both the infant's own motor programmes, through their own interaction with objects, as well as the observed motor programmes in carers (which activate their own motor systems through mirror mechanisms). However, their account of the way in which the action system is involved in ‘generating’ meaning and language comprehension is more complex. Upon hearing a linguistic label for an object, the brain activates motor programmes associated with actions that have been associated with that object (through temporal co-occurrence). This activation generates predictions about effects (in the sense of sensori-motor consequences) of actual actions. Meaning is in effect generated from these predictions—i.e. from the expected outcomes of action.

Here, again, iconicity can provide an additional, mechanism for the grounding of language in sensori-motor systems. Under an embodied view of language, linguistic/communicative forms have meaning by virtue of being linked with real-world referents. Meaning is derived from mental simulations/representations of perceptual and motoric experience with real-world referents. Thus, iconic mappings, by their very nature of depicting perception-based and action-based properties of referents, imply the engagement of sensori-motor systems in processing the meaning of a linguistic signal. In grounding language in sensori-motor systems—through iconicity, as well as through mechanisms like Hebbian learning—it may well be that links between words and the world are made first for first-hand perceptual and motoric experience, and that structural alignment processes help to generalize to other, non-first-hand experiences once mental representations based on sensori-motor properties have been built up.

An embodied view of language stands in contrast to traditional views of language as a system of abstract symbol manipulation, which is separate from other aspects of perception, action and cognition. Iconicity makes links between linguistic/communicative forms and perception and action immediately clear. As such, it may be the case that embodied views of language would have gained popularity much earlier if the study of language had started with sign languages, where the multichannel and iconic nature of language is obvious, rather than with spoken languages. The relationship between iconicity and embodiment may thus be a demonstration par excellence of the overarching theme of this special issue—asking how our theoretical and methodological approaches to language should be informed by taking the multichannel and iconic nature of language as our starting point.

More generally, assuming that displacement and conceptual reference—as the most crucial adaptations of language as a system of communication—are achieved with the help of iconic signals, evoking the presence of a referent even in its absence, we provide a theoretically motivated reason for why sensori-motor systems would be involved in language. This is an important point, as any account of the phylogenesis and ontogenesis of language must also account for how the sensori-motor neural systems come to be engaged in language use. If this is the case, iconicity should have facilitatory effects in language processing as it would render the link between form and meaning stronger.


Iconicity effects in language processing

There are now a number of studies showing effects of iconicity in language processing (see Perniss et al. for a more extensive review). In signed languages, Thompson et al. found that processing of signs in signers of American Sign Language (ASL) is facilitated when the iconic link between a sign and its referent is highlighted. Signers performing a picture–sign matching task were faster to indicate that a sign referred to a previously viewed picture when the property of the referent iconically represented in the sign (e.g. tracing the cat's whiskers in the ASL sign for cat) was also highlighted in the picture (e.g. a picture of a cat's face with the whiskers prominent versus a picture of a whole cat). In another study, signers of BSL were slower in judging the phonological properties of signs (i.e. curved versus straight fingers) when signs were iconic compared to when they were non-iconic. This finding is notable in that it suggests that the tight coupling of form and meaning in iconic signs leads to automatic activation of meaning, even when meaning is not necessary to performing the task (and it actually interferes with the task).

For spoken language, where iconicity is less abundant in the lexicon, much of the evidence for effects of iconicity on language processing comes from studies of vocabulary learning, where iconic mappings can be built into novel words. For example, Kovic et al. found that adults who were asked to learn sound-symbolically congruent versus incongruent form–meaning associations, in a task learning labels for alien animal-like creatures, were faster to accept and slower to reject congruent form–meaning associations. Nygaard et al. found that English speakers were better able to learn Japanese sound-symbolic words when they had been taught the correct English translation of the word compared to when they had been taught a semantically unrelated wrong translation of the word, suggesting that iconic, sound-symbolic mappings may reflect a more general cross-linguistic phenomenon. Evidence for a processing advantage of regular form–meaning mappings in spoken English comes from the study of phonaestemes (e.g. the association of /gl/ with a meaning of low light intensity, as in ‘glint’, ‘glitter’, ‘glow’, ‘glare’, or the association of /wr/ with a meaning of torqueing or distortion, as in ‘wreck’, ‘wrestle’, ‘writhe’, ‘wring’). While it is not clear whether these regular mappings embed actual iconic mappings, i.e. based on form–meaning resemblance, Bergen demonstrated facilitated lexical access for phonaestemic form–meaning mappings, over and above the effects of phonological and semantic priming. In spoken languages, it is further the case that a mismatch between speech and iconic gestures (e.g. hearing the word ‘twist’ while watching a speaker making a gesture for ‘chopping’) slows down and induces more errors in comprehension, as would be expected if language comprehension implies integration of speech and gestures. Finally, a number of neuroimaging experiments have shown engagement of sensori-motor cortices in the processing of language relating to the specific sensory and motor processes (e.g. and see for a review).


Possible criticisms


Language versus communication

A first possible criticism is that in expanding our view to language as a multichannel phenomenon and a system of face-to-face communication, we are no longer dealing with language per se, rather we end up concerning ourselves with those aspects of communication as human behaviour that are not central to language. It is certainly the case that we take a broad perspective on language, considering it as a system of human communication and interaction in contrast to the more familiar narrow perspective in which language is taken to be a linguistic system expressed in the rule-governed concatenation of morphological/lexical units (as is evident in speech or text).

Our broad perspective is motivated by the observation that language, as it is learnt, produced and understood, occurs primarily in face-to-face communicative contexts. As such, language includes information expressed in other channels and consists of more than a purely linguistic signal. The intrinsic difficulty in separating language from face-to-face communication becomes especially clear when we consider languages that can only be transmitted in a face-to-face situation, such as sign languages, but is just as relevant for spoken languages. In general, we would argue that current theories of language have been encumbered by too narrow a focus on the object of study, attempting to explain the emergence of an ultimately vocal and arbitrary system. However, to understand language in its multifaceted use as a system for meaning representation in communicative interaction, viable theories of language must take into account the availability and use of multiple channels (vocal and visual) and formats (iconic and arbitrary) of expression.

Thus, we would reject the notion that our approach focuses on aspects of communication that are not central to language because they cannot be readily formalized in terms of linguistic structure. Rather, our approach represents a more comprehensive approach to understanding language that takes into account all channels of communicative expression and the interactive nature of such expression.

Such a broad perspective crucially affords the possibility to develop novel hypotheses concerning the design features of language (from phylogenetic and ontogenetic perspectives) and to derive predictions for future studies. As we have spelled out in the sections above, our theoretical framework allows us to provide novel answers to long-standing questions about how communicative signals were able to refer to non-present entities (displacement) and how children solve the problem of referential ambiguity in learning their first language.


Iconicity remains negligible in language: arbitrariness is the ‘stuff’ of language

We have argued in this paper that iconicity is a critical feature of language, representing an adaptation to the fundamental constraint of language to link linguistic form to human experience. As such, iconicity has important implications for the three main areas of language study—evolution, learning and processing. In language evolution, iconicity achieves displacement—arguably the design feature of language that should be accorded primary status in jump-starting the communicative system that we now know as human language—and thus the ability for conceptual reference. In language learning, iconicity critically supports the referential mapping process by highlighting similarity between linguistic form and referent, and enables language learning episodes when referents talked about are not present. In language processing, iconicity achieves the engagement and grounding of our linguistic representations in our sensori-motor neural systems, what has come to be referred to as the embodiment of language. Thus, under our hypothesis, iconicity is a fundamental and crucial property of language that provides a means for achieving the fundamental referential function of language in each of these main domains. This view does not deny a critical role for arbitrariness. As argued in Perniss et al., arbitrariness would also represent a central adaptation to a different constraint of language: the need for the linguistic signal to be efficient and discriminable.

This presents a possible criticism: it may be that iconicity plays an initial role in language evolution, providing the initial impetus for referential communication, but that it is dispensable to language as it exists in adults today. Here, iconicity would represent a mere remnant of a previous stage of language, a living fossil of proto-language, with arbitrariness representing the real stuff of language. For example, Dediu & Levinson (p. 8) write: ‘the peculiarity of linguistic symbols is that they denote by abstract convention, while a cave painting of a horse denotes by iconic similarity, a principle that plays a very minor role in language’. The critic would thus hold that: in language evolution, iconicity might have helped in the development of displacement, but once this was initiated, the human ability to abstract from sensori-motor experience (hence to master arbitrary systems) took over and led the way to the development of our sophisticated linguistic system. Of course, this must also be the case to some extent. As adult language users, our mastery of sophisticated and highly abstract linguistic systems is notable, and as children (especially learning Indo-European languages), we learn substantial vocabularies that conform to the standard tenet of arbitrariness.

There are two critical points to make, however. First, if iconicity plays a pivotal role in establishing displacement in evolution, this fact already makes iconicity more than just a marginal phenomenon. Second, and more crucially, we would not expect effects of iconicity in language processing and acquisition if the role of iconicity were limited to jump-starting referentiality in evolution; however, we do find such effects of iconicity. As we have discussed, there is a growing body of evidence showing effects of iconicity in processing and acquisition.

Finally, there is still a different way in which iconicity may be argued not to reflect general properties of language. There is clearly a disproportionate amount of iconicity in sign languages in comparison to spoken languages. This may be taken by some to represent a modality difference between signed and spoken languages. Sign languages are still considered by many to not represent the ‘real stuff’ of language, but rather to demonstrate the fundamental flexibility and plasticity of the human cognitive system, reflecting the capacity for development of language in an alternate modality when acoustic sensory input is lacking. Under this view, iconicity (i.e. as a modality effect) may simply reflect adaptation to sensory deprivation. The burden, then, is for any defendant of such a position to explain how and why iconicity effects would be found in spoken languages at all. Moreover, they would further need to explain why a theory that assumes two independent explanations for iconicity effects in signed versus spoken language should be favoured over a more parsimonious theory that can account for all of these phenomena within a single framework.


But this is all to do with the lexicon, what about grammar?

Throughout this paper, we have discussed vocabulary, and whereas it is certainly the case that words are part of language, it is also the case that grammar is more often taken to represent the core of language. In particular, the property of recursivity in grammar has been taken to be the specific feature of hierarchical structure that marks human language out from other animal communication systems. Our discussion of iconicity has pertained primarily to the lexicon, and not to grammar and the linguistic structure of language, i.e. the morphosyntactic organization of units of language. Though we have stressed throughout the need to define language as more than simply linguistic structure, our notion of language obviously also includes linguistic structure and grammar.

In terms of language development—in both phylogenesis and ontogenesis—grammatical/morphosyntactic structure would evolve later and more gradually than word forms and represents a higher level of complexity and abstraction. This may give rise to the idea of a divide, or tension, between iconicity and grammar, as expressed recently e.g. by Meir et al. (p. 310): ‘Iconicity is often depicted as a more basic representation device, while grammar supports the arbitrariness that comes with higher levels of symbolic processing’. However, iconicity has long played an important role in explanations of morphosyntax and grammar. Thus, for spoken languages, the role of iconicity in the evolution of grammatical structure may be said to have a stronger, more established tradition compared to discussion of iconicity in the lexicon, with a large body of literature to support the general idea that the structure of language reflects the structure of experience. For example, the principle of ‘iconicity of sequence’ (or ‘sequential order’) holds that the sequence of forms conforms to the sequence of experience, as in the famous collocation veni, vidi, vici. The principle of ‘iconicity of contiguity’ (or ‘linguistic proximity’) assumes that forms that belong together conceptually and semantically will occur closer together morphosyntactically than forms that are conceptually and semantically unrelated (cf. Bybee's analysis of the proximity relation between verb stem and inflectional categories according to conceptual relevance). For sign languages, the opposite may be true: iconicity in the lexicon has always been acknowledged, whereas descriptions of grammatical aspects of sign language structure included iconicity much later by comparison. The role of iconicity in structuring domains that rely on the use of space (e.g. pronouns, verbs) has been particularly acknowledged (see also Perniss for a review). In most current approaches, structure in these domains is framed in terms of exhibiting a confluence of linguistic and ‘gestural’ (i.e. imagistic, iconic) elements—an effect of the visual modality's inherently iconic and spatial nature. However, recently, the role of iconicity in sign language structure has also been discussed in terms of what might be considered grammar per se, as part of the evolution of grammatical structure.


Conclusion

This paper has spelled out a theoretical view, in which iconicity plays a fundamental role in language development and language processing. The starting point for this proposal is the recognition that in order to further our understanding of language evolution, learning and processing and to move beyond our current state-of-the-art in language sciences, we must focus our attention on how language unfolds in face-to-face communication. Once we take such a perspective, iconicity appears as a widespread phenomenon in language. Iconicity, we argue, provides a key to how humans share sensory, motor and affective experiences with each other via communication.

Specifically, we argue that iconicity is at the root of three fundamental features of human language: the capacity for displacement during human evolution, the capacity to establish referentiality during language acquisition and the embodiment of adult language processing. Thus, we present a parsimonious and unified view on how linking linguistic form to human experience is achieved in evolution, development and processing.

There are many predictions to be tested from this theory. For example, a straightforward prediction concerning neural activation in language comprehension is that activation of areas associated with motor processing should be greater for signs exhibiting action-based iconicity or for speech accompanied by action-based co-speech gestures. Other predictions concern alignment of the developmental time course of perceptuo-motor skills in infants and toddlers with a corresponding time course of accessibility to different types of iconic mappings.

A major challenge for future research is to move beyond the holistic notion of iconicity that has guided research so far to a multidimensional notion that takes into account the type of iconic links (e.g. action-based versus perception-based) and the level of abstraction from actual experience, as we have discussed above. Moreover, any new conceptualization of iconicity will need to be viable across language modalities (signed and spoken) and across communication channels (in sign languages: hand, mouth and body; in spoken languages: speech, gestures and prosody).


Funding statement

This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) of Great Britain: grant no. RES-620-28-6002 to the Deafness, Cognition and Language Research Centre (DCAL) and grant no. RES-062-23-2012 to G.V.


Goal-directed learning and obsessive–compulsive disorder

Claire M. Gillan, Trevor W. Robbins — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2014. PMC4186229, CC BY 4.0.

Obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) has become a paradigmatic case of goal-directed dysfunction in psychiatry. In this article, we review the neurobiological evidence, historical and recent, that originally led to this supposition and continues to support a habit hypothesis of OCD. We will then discuss a number of recent studies that have directly tested this hypothesis, using behavioural experiments in patient populations. Based on this research evidence, which suggests that rather than goal-directed avoidance behaviours, compulsions in OCD may derive from manifestations of excessive habit formation, we present the details of a novel account of the functional relationship between these habits and the full symptom profile of the disorder. Borrowing from a cognitive dissonance framework, we propose that the irrational threat beliefs (obsessions) characteristic of OCD may be a consequence, rather than an instigator, of compulsive behaviour in these patients. This lays the foundation for a potential shift in both clinical and neuropsychological conceptualization of OCD and related disorders. This model may also prove relevant to other putative disorders of compulsivity, such as substance dependence, where the experience of ‘wanting’ drugs may be better understood as post hoc rationalizations of otherwise goal-insensitive, stimulus-driven behaviour.


Introduction

‘Compulsivity’, although a young concept, has captured the imagination of researchers fast in the fields of psychology, psychiatry and neuroscience, and this burgeoning interest is reflected in the dramatic rise in the number of articles referring to this term in the last 5 years in particular. A range of maladaptive human behaviours are now popularly considered to be examples of compulsivity, including psychiatric problems such as drug use in substance-dependent individuals, repetitive behaviours and tics in Tourette's syndrome, excessive and restrictive eating behaviours in eating disorders and the repetitive, avoidance behaviour seen in the eponymous disorder of compulsivity, obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD). Although the list of overt behaviours that have been classified as compulsive is quite varied, there is consensus that compulsivity is ‘a hypothetical trait in which actions are persistently repeated despite adverse consequences’. In OCD, hand-washing behaviour, for example, is often continued in spite of the development of abrasions to the skin, along with the more typical loss of occupational and social function that is associated with the time taken to perform most compulsions. Although compulsivity has been successfully operationalized in terms of the resistance of this kind of behaviour to punishment, there is disagreement in the literature regarding the psychological mechanism which gives rise to compulsive behaviour. In this article, we aim to address this issue with reference to OCD, via recent research aimed at elucidating the neural and psychological basis of compulsive behaviour. While the majority of data discussed will pertain to OCD, the issues raised may also be relevant for understanding other purported disorders of compulsivity, for which empirical data in patient populations are currently lacking.

There are arguably two main schools of thought regarding the underlying mechanism that leads to compulsive behaviour. The first school is ‘cognitive’ and purports that compulsivity is mediated by dysfunction in the assignment of value to available alternatives, that is, the compulsive individual may view the cost of cessation of behaviour to be higher than the benefits thereof. In this sense, the choice to continue the behaviour is purposeful and goal directed; it is simply deemed compulsive by the outside observer (i.e. a clinician or society) to whom this choice appears suboptimal. Concordant with this view, many researchers have speculated that compulsions in OCD are performed to reduce the likelihood that an unwanted, or feared, consequence will take place. Disordered valuation or ‘cognitive bias’ is primary and motivates patients to perform avoidance compulsions as a form of coping with these distressing thoughts. ‘Cognitive bias’ is a broad term; it may subsume an exaggerated sense of personal responsibility over the environment and thought–action fusion, the belief that thinking about something is equivalent to doing it. Cognitive bias accounts of OCD purport that patients with OCD initially experience obsessions associated with potential threat or discomfort, and as a consequence of such distressing beliefs, anxiety is engendered. As a consequence of the two factor theory of avoidance, which suggests that Pavlovian fear arises first and motivates avoidance in healthy animals, compulsions are carried out as goal-directed, purposeful, attempts to reduce the likelihood of threat, or more generally to provide relief.

This article will argue that contrary to the cognitive account, OCD does not necessarily arise from faulty value attribution, or ‘cognitive bias’, but rather, it may result from goal-directed dysfunction that interacts with anxiety and irrational belief in a manner not hitherto discussed in the literature. This position holds that patients with OCD largely understand the relative value of the available outcomes and the cost of actions, and aim to promote expected values of outcomes and desist from compulsive behaviour, but cannot exert the necessary control over their actions to realize this goal. One way in which this lack of control over behaviour might arise is as a result of an imbalance between two fundamental associative learning systems that are relatively well characterized in both psychological and neurobiological terms.


Neurobiological parallels: habit and obsessive–compulsive disorder

Habits are responses that are automatically triggered by stimuli and are considered the functional reciprocal of goal-directed behaviours that are intentional, considered, and as the name suggests, sensitive to the value of prospective goals. The relative control that these two systems exert over behaviour have been described using a number of different theoretical frameworks. However, in spite of differences in terminology, these frameworks converge around a common theme; that animals use both reflective and reflexive modes of action selection. Goal-directed behaviour is more accurate, but that accuracy requires effort and attention. It follows that this mode of action selection suffers in times of stress, perhaps as a result of increases in working memory load, and is seen later in childhood development than habit learning. Most famously, however, goal-directed control over action subsides as we become comfortable with repetitive action following over-training of the stimulus–response pair, and when outcomes are less tightly coupled to responses.

In 2000, Graybiel & Rauch proposed the theory that OCD can be characterized as a disorder of maladaptive habit learning on the basis of neurobiological parallels between the brain regions implicated in OCD and the then proposed functional loci of repetitive behavioural habits, namely regions comprising the ‘fronto-striatal circuits’. Since then, a plethora of studies in rodents and humans has been conducted to elucidate the neural basis of habit formation and has reached consensus that a shift from associative to sensorimotor fronto-striatal circuits mediates the transition from goal-directed to habitual control over behaviour. To test for habits, a procedure called outcome devaluation is most commonly used (another is that of contingency degradation).

In this procedure, the outcome of a given action is made undesirable and continued responding for the stimulus is measured in an extinction test. When behaviour is under the control of the goal-directed (action–outcome) system, responding to stimuli that produce devalued outcomes should decline, whereas if habits (stimulus–response) are dominant, behaviour will become insensitive to the value of the outcome. Research in rodents using this technique has revealed an important double dissociation between medial and lateral subregions of the dorsal striatum in the balance between goal-directed and habitual control over behaviour. Specifically, habitual responding can be induced in rodents by lesions of the dorsomedial striatum (DMS: caudate in primates), suggesting that this region is critical for goal-directed action control. Disrupting activity in the dorsolateral striatum (DLS: putamen in primates), on the other hand, preserves sensitivity to outcome value in rodents, even after extended training. In the rodent prefrontal cortex, although the literature is less clear, there has been some suggestion of a similar double dissociation between the prelimbic and infralimbic cortices, with the former being associated with goal-directed learning and the latter necessary for the execution of habits. However, these data are contentious and it is presently unclear if and how rodent–primate homologies in the prefrontal cortex can be legitimately drawn, and so these data are difficult to interpret. The prelimbic cortex has been suggested to correspond to the human area 32 (a portion of anterior cingulate cortex) and the infralimic (IL) cortex to primate area 25 (although there is some doubt also about this). Rather than processing stimulus–response associations directly, some have proposed that the IL may arbitrate between controllers, inhibiting the goal-directed system in favour of performing previously reinforced actions. On the other hand, the IL is also implicated in both fear and appetitive (cocaine) extinction, and this role is entirely consistent with an inhibitory role for IL in the learning and expression of stimulus–outcome and action–outcome associations. In mice, recent data have highlighted an important role for the medial orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) (more rostral to the IL cortex in the rat) whereby inhibition of activity in this region interferes with goal-directed behavioural control, and furthermore, neuronal firing rates in the DMS, DLS and OFC in healthy animals dynamically change in concert with a shift between goal-directed and habitual actions in a manner suggestive of a key role for the OFC in goal-directed action selection. In line with this finding, in the rhesus monkey, lesions to areas 11 and 13 of the OFC cause impairments in goal devaluation, whereas lesions of area 14 disrupt extinction.

Studies using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in humans are broadly consistent and suggest a key role for subregions of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) in goal-directed control over action. Using selective satiety to devalue outcomes, Valentin et al. showed that activity in portions of the medial, central and lateral OFC were sensitive to the choice of actions that led to valued or devalued outcomes, suggesting these regions play a key role in determining the incentive value of outcomes in goal-directed decision-making. Another study used incongruent associations to create conflict in the goal-directed system, forcing subjects to rely instead on habits. Brain activation was compared for activation during these trials to congruent trials, devoid of conflict. The authors found that a more posterior portion of the vmPFC, corresponding to the perigenual anterior cingulate was more active when participants were carrying out goal-directed as opposed to habitual actions. Other studies using computational analysis have similarly revealed that the anterior caudate nucleus, in addition to the medial OFC, and more rostrally, the medial prefrontal cortex, track the level of contingency between actions and outcomes. Few studies, however, have been able to elucidate the neural basis of habits in humans, save for reductions in activation in goal-directed subregions of the vmPFC and caudate described above. One study, however, compared groups who received brief (1 day) versus extended (3 days) training on a free-operant habit task for food outcomes. In a subsequent devaluation test, Tricomi et al. observed that activity in the putamen increased when behaviour became autonomous from outcome value following over-training, a finding mirrored in the lack of behavioural sensitivity in the over-trained group. More recently, de Wit et al. found convergent evidence observing that increased white matter tract strength between the putamen and premotor regions was predictive of habitual control over behaviour in healthy humans, while the strength of connectivity between the medial prefrontal cortex and caudate predicted goal-directed behavioural choice. To summarize, there is good cross-species consistency regarding the importance of the putamen for stimulus–response habit learning and the caudate for goal-directed action selection. The role of the prefrontal cortex is less clear (and less well specified), but in humans the data converge on an important role for the vmPFC in goal-directed control over behaviour, particularly the medial portions of the OFC and prefrontal cortex.

The dominant neuroanatomical model of OCD centres on, but is not limited to, abnormalities within the regions involved in the balance between goal-directed behaviour and habits. Broadly speaking, neurobiological changes associated with OCD have been identified within circuits that run from the frontal lobes to the striatum, and via direct and indirect pathways to the thalamus and back to the frontal cortex, the ‘fronto-striatal loops’. In terms of specific loci, the caudate nucleus and the orbital gyrus are the most consistent regions where OCD patients show abnormal patterns of functional activation. Evidence for this comes primarily from symptom provocation studies and treatment response studies following pharmacotherapy and behavioural therapy using positron emission tomography and single photon emission computed tomography. In terms of structural brain changes, a recent meta-analysis of voxel-based morphometry studies revealed that OCD patients have increased grey matter volumes in the putamen (extending to the caudate nuclei) relative to healthy controls and other anxiety disorder groups, whereas all anxiety groups (including OCD) showed common decreases in dorsolateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex. Another meta-analysis found increased volume of the OFC, putamen and insula in OCD patients, which was a function of age, such that the normal loss of volume was not observed in patients as they aged. This suggests the possibility that these changes may reflect altered neuroplasticity associated with disease duration, for example the performance of compulsive behaviours throughout the lifespan. We will not summarize the findings of fMRI studies in OCD here because no studies to date have investigated the neural correlates of habit learning in this patient group. However, we will describe some studies that may be tangentially relevant later in this review.


Experimental evidence for goal-directed dysfunction in obsessive–compulsive disorder

The first study to directly test the contribution of the goal-directed system to OCD was carried out using an appetitive instrumental learning task, which has been since shown to rely upon white matter tract connectivity within and between the fronto-striatal circuits. Following trial and error learning of positively reinforced stimulus–response–outcome associations, subjects were given a series of tests to determine the contribution of goal-directed (action–outcome) and habitual (stimulus–response) associations to instrumental learning. The results indicated that OCD patients have a significant bias towards stimulus–response learning, at the expense of acquiring action–outcome associations. This result was evident across three independent tests. In an outcome-devaluation (‘slips-of-action’) test, OCD patients had deficits in their ability to refrain from responding to outcomes that were no longer worth any points (i.e. devalued; a). This result was compounded by behavioural and explicit tests of contingency knowledge, where OCD patients' action–outcome associative knowledge was impaired, but their stimulus–response knowledge was intact.

Further support for the notion that a goal-directed disturbance plays a role in OCD was provided in a follow-up study which assessed counterfactual decision-making in OCD patients on an economic choice paradigm. The design of the paradigm was such that there was no repetition of stimulus–response–outcome pairings, but rather, participants had to choose between two wheels depicting points and their respective probabilities. In this way, we could assess goal-directed choice behaviour in the absence of the potentially confounding influence of concurrent formation of habits over the course of training. Rather than using outcome devaluation, this study adopted a computational approach to understanding goal-directed behaviour, wherein trial-by-trial choice behaviour was used as the dependent measure. Goal-directed behaviour was operationalized as the degree to which ‘potential regret’ influences choice behaviour. Potential regret is a goal-directed computation that relies upon the comparison of prospective action–outcome states, that is, the ability to simulate and compare options in a decision tree. Healthy adults are known to use this computation to reduce their chances of experiencing regret in this decision environment. Consistent with the suggestion that OCD patients have a deficit in goal-directed control over action, the influence of this computation on decision-making was attenuated in OCD patients (b). Rather than being linked to a muted emotional experience of regret, as has been observed in patients with lesions to the OFC who also show this kind of choice behaviour, OCD patients experienced regretful trials as being even more aversive than healthy comparison subjects. OCD patients and comparison subjects did not differ in the extent to which their choices were based on the expected value of the available options, suggesting that basic decision processes were not affected in these patients.

A third study tested whether the deficits in appetitive goal-directed behaviour observed in OCD would be evident in avoidance. This question is not trivial because OCD is a disorder of compulsive avoidance rather than reward-seeking behaviour, and habits in avoidance had previously not been experimentally demonstrated in humans or animals. In this paradigm, OCD patients and healthy controls were trained to avoid aversive electrical shocks to their wrists by performing the correct response to a predictive stimulus, constituting negatively reinforced stimulus–response–outcome discriminations. Following an over-training period, participants were tested for habit formation using a selective outcome-devaluation procedure, wherein the shock electrodes were removed from one of their wrists (devalued), but remained connected on the contralateral side (valued). While OCD patients and controls did not differ in the number of avoidance responses made in response to the stimulus that predicted the valued shock, OCD patients made significantly more responses to the stimulus that predicted the devalued shock (c). A devaluation sensitivity test revealed that OCD patients were proficient in their goal-directed control over their responses prior to over-training and that their behaviour became excessively habit-based over the course of over-training. There was no evidence to suggest that habits were driven by associated failures in fear extinction in OCD patients using both physiological (i.e. skin conductance response) and evaluative conditioning (i.e. shock expectancy) measures. However, it is possible that avoidance habits are associated with impaired instrumental extinction in a more general sense, a proposition, which to our knowledge has not yet been tested. It is however unclear if and how these might be parsed experimentally.

Using different methodologies, these three studies show that in OCD there is a consistent shift in balance away from goal-directed associative control over action towards stimulus–response habits. There are a number of potential causes for this imbalance, three of which we will consider now. The first is that OCD patients may have a deficit in action–outcome associative learning, which causes them to rely excessively on stimulus–response links that were previously reinforced. There is ample evidence in support of this possibility, given that explicit knowledge of action–outcome associations is deficient in OCD following instrumental learning, and, furthermore, that these explicit learning deficits were correlated with patients' subsequent failure to show sensitivity to devaluation. Next, an alternative possibility is that excessive stimulus–response learning in OCD might cause patients to lose their sensitivity to action–outcome links, producing deficits in explicit action–outcome knowledge. However, the observation that OCD patients exhibit goal-directed deficits on a decision-making paradigm that does not permit stimulus–response habit learning does not sit well with this interpretation. Rather, these data suggest that a fundamental problem in action–outcome associative learning and/or execution exists in OCD, and it is not dependent on excessive habit formation in the disorder. In line with this account, recent fMRI work has found that OCD patients show under-activation of the ventral striatum during a reward anticipation task that requires goal-directed behaviour, and this is remediated by deep-brain stimulation of this region. Conversely, in the avoidance habit experiment described above, habit biases were observed despite intact action–outcome knowledge in patients tested in this study, using a comparatively less complex paradigm compared with the original study on appetitive habit learning. This indicates that habit biases in OCD are not necessarily driven by deficits in goal-directed contingency knowledge. It is plausible then that both habit-based and goal-directed learning may be affected in OCD, however, until a behavioural definition of habit learning that does not rely on an absence of goal-directed control can be formalized, there is perhaps little use in making a distinction between processes that are somewhat reciprocal. The recent ‘model-based, model-free’ reinforcement-learning schema, wherein model-based behaviour is hypothesized to map onto goal-directed action and model-free supports habit learning, does not consider the two systems reciprocal, and can therefore assess their independent contributions to choice behaviour. Using this paradigm, there is recent evidence to suggest that model-based control over action is selectively diminished in OCD patients. Although this is a promising avenue for future research, more work is needed to assess how this schema maps onto the habit-based, goal-directed dichotomy, as a direct comparison is currently lacking.

A third possibility, which we will touch on only briefly, is that rather than abnormalities in goal-directed control or habits, in OCD the problem could lie in the arbitration between these controllers. Recent evidence suggests that this arbitration is carried out in the frontal polar and inferior lateral prefrontal cortex, which track the reliability of the predictions of model-based and model-free controllers, respectively, and use these signals to inhibit the model-free system, where appropriate. This postulate awaits testing in OCD patients, however, given the neurobiological evidence outlined earlier, it seems more plausible that dysfunctional goal-directed learning processes (outcome valuation, contingency) associated with the caudate and medial OFC are responsible for biases towards habitual responding in OCD.


Habits and compulsive-obsessive disorder ‘COD’

We have previously suggested an alternative way of conceptualizing the functional relationship between obsessions and compulsions in OCD, a model captured by a rearrangement of the letters OCD to COD. This simple reshuffle belies what is a possibly crucial and maybe overdue shift in thinking away from the previously prescribed unidirectional nature of reinforcement that exists in the cycle of OCD symptomatology. As outlined in the Introduction, classic cognitive models of OCD posit that obsessions precede compulsions, which are considered active attempts to gain relief from obsessive thoughts. Indeed, it is impossible to ignore the tight coupling between the content of obsessions and compulsions in OCD, which leads to the intuitive inference: ‘I fear contamination and therefore I feel compelled to clean excessively’. Based on recent observations, we propose that the reverse—‘I feel compelled to clean excessively and therefore I must be afraid of contamination’—may better capture the OCD phenomenon.

There are two main problems with the current OCD framework ascribed by cognitive models of the disorder, which have led us to consider this alternative possibility. The first is that existing cognitive models rely on the supposition that obsessions drive OCD and compulsions are secondary phenomena. But in the three studies of habit formation described above, there is clear evidence that excessive compulsive-like, automatic behaviours develop in OCD patients in the absence of any prior obsessions relating to the experimental task procedures. First, this demonstrates that there is a purely behavioural disturbance in OCD that is independent of obsessionality. Second, OCD is an ego-dystonic disorder; the thoughts experienced and actions performed by patients are discordant with their concept of self, either categorically or proportionally. In other words, patients have insight (although it can be diminished in some cases) into the irrationality of their compulsive actions; they want to stop but cannot exert control over the urge to act. Cognitive models of OCD cannot account for this insight, how a patient can be aware that there lacks a contingency between flicking a light-switch and averting a traffic accident, and yet feel compelled to perform the action.

One way to reconcile this apparent paradox in OCD is to embrace it. Rather than a problematic footnote in the diagnostic criteria of OCD, the ego-dystonic nature of obsessions and compulsions in OCD may more accurately be considered a cardinal feature of the disorder. By definition, habits are behaviours insensitive to contingency and outcome value; in other words, they are ego-dystonic, purposeless acts. We propose that the excessive habit learning reliably observed in these patients captures the divergence between will and action that typifies OCD. We hypothesize that this behavioural disturbance is the critical component of the OCD diagnosis and has its neurobiological basis in the circuits running between the OFC and the caudate, whose (putative) hyper-activation disrupt normal goal-directed behaviour, fostering reliance on habits. We will now outline a model of OCD in terms of ‘COD’, in which a tendency towards compulsive habit learning is central and furthermore, we will suggest a mechanism through which the other critical features of the disorder, anxiety and obsessions, can be explained as both propagators and consequences of compulsivity.

Anecdotally, habits are considered to be automatic errors that go below the level of conscious awareness. We make slips when we are distracted and may, for example, take a familiar turn in the road instead of driving straight on to our intended destination. Recent data, however, have challenged this popular conception of habits as mere action-slips, finding that habits are associated with a hitherto unreported premonitory ‘urge to respond’. This urge may be critical in elaborating a model of how compulsive behaviour could give rise to obsessional thinking. To do this, we borrow from cognitive dissonance theory. Cognitive dissonance describes a state of conflict that arises when two or more competing beliefs are simultaneously held, and cognitive dissonance theory states that humans are motivated to reduce this conflict by altering one of these beliefs. This effect is also observed in humans when behaviour contradicts belief. In a forced compliance study, subjects completed an exceptionally monotonous experiment, after which a subset were instructed to tell new participants who were arriving for the study that it was in fact ‘a very interesting and enjoyable experience’. They found that those subjects who were induced to give a positive report to new participants gave more favourable ratings of their own experience in the study on a subsequent questionnaire. This study convincingly demonstrates that in situations of cognitive dissonance, when behaviour contradicts belief, humans alter their beliefs to match their behaviour. As has been elegantly put by others, ‘actions create—not just reveal—preferences’.

The suggestion that cognitive dissonance may arise as a result of compulsivity is not altogether new, but has been previously alluded to in the context of substance dependence. Everitt & Robbins suggested that the subjective urge to consume drugs (i.e. wanting), often considered a precursor to consumption, may be a post hoc rationalization of the objectively ‘out of control’ behaviour. In the case of OCD, the argument is analogous, wherein the irrational thoughts often considered to induce compulsive responding, may in fact be the product of the mind's attempt to resolve the discrepancy between patients' cognitions and their otherwise inexplicable urge to perform compulsive behaviours. Specifically, the experience of the irresistible urge to perform, or the very performance of, compulsive avoidance behaviours may engender cognitive dissonance that is reconciled by the development of a new irrational belief about threat in the environment. This new ‘fear’ makes sense of the need to compulsively perform avoidance responses and may of course contribute to the motivation of subsequent avoidance responding, forming a vicious cycle of sorts.

The avoidance habit paradigm discussed earlier in this article is the only study, to our knowledge, which begins to test this possibility directly. OCD patients and healthy controls were asked to provide an explanation for why they continued to make avoidance responses to the stimulus that predicted the now devalued outcome. While many patients used the word ‘habit’ or variants of it (i.e. automaticity) to describe their actions, a subset reported irrational hypotheses regarding the task procedure. For example, some patients reported that they thought they could still be shocked, in spite of the fact that they had been disconnected from the offending stimulator. These comments become particularly illuminating when considered alongside the ratings of shock expectancy and explicit contingency knowledge tests, which were taken moments before this qualitative question. Patients were unimpaired on these tests, reporting very low likelihood that they could still be shocked following devaluation and having intact knowledge of the contingency structure of the task. Like obsessions in OCD, these irrational threat beliefs were discordant with subjects' knowledge of the task structure. Although these data were collected in an exploratory manner, they provide good early evidence in support of the suggestion that irrational thinking may sometimes be a consequence of habit formation.

It may be surprising to some how irrational threat beliefs such as these could survive without being promptly disconfirmed through experience. However, the fact that compulsions in OCD are avoidant, rather than appetitive, can readily account for this. It is a feature of avoidance that performance of this response naturally precludes the extinction of irrational beliefs about contingency (e.g. fear), because when avoidance responses are continually, but unnecessarily, performed, the only demonstrable contingency the individual is exposed to is one where a state of safety follows the performance of an avoidance response. This prevents exposure to the crucial disconfirming case or extinction, i.e. when a state of safety is also followed by no response. In this way, the maladaptive cycle of compulsions, obsessions and anxiety may be cyclically maintained and reinforced, allowing for irrational fears to propagate and develop into more persistent obsessions over time.

It is possible that anxiety may arise in some patients with OCD as a product of the aforementioned ‘COD’-cycle, induced as a result of, or in tandem with, irrational threat beliefs. However, it is likely that anxiety plays a much more crucial role in OCD than an epiphenomenal one, given the high rate of co-morbidity and common shared heritability that exists between OCD and other anxiety disorders and the elevated level of trait anxiety reliably documented in the disorder itself in the absence of anxiety disorder co-morbidity. It has been consistently demonstrated in both humans and other animals that laboratory stressors promote habit formation in healthy subjects. Although no study to our knowledge has directly tested the contribution of anxiety to habit formation, there is evidence to suggest that anxiety biases attention to stimuli, and away from outcomes, potentially causing a similar failure to execute goal-directed behaviours as seen during stress manipulations. Indeed, individuals with anxiety disorders, and healthy students with high levels of trait anxiety, have deficits in their ability to ignore distracting stimuli, an attentional function, which, like goal-directed behaviour, relies on activation in the prefrontal cortex. However, unlike other anxiety disorders, attentional bias has not been consistently observed in OCD, suggesting that while anxiety-related mechanisms may contribute to habit biases in some patients, it is unlikely to fully account for them. Indeed, the available empirical data relevant to this issue suggest that there is no direct association between trait anxiety or physiological measures of conditioned fear learning and extinction and habit formation biases in OCD patients. However, as the design of this study was not capable of parsing out Pavlovian (i.e. stimulus–outcome) physiological fear responses from those that are confounded with the instrumental avoidance response, these data are not definitive.

In studies that have examined purely Pavlovian fear conditioning in OCD, the results are not altogether clear. Some studies find that OCD patients have elevated blood oxygen level dependent responses in the amygdala, a limbic structure associated with emotion processing and fear, when viewing disorder-specific stimuli (i.e. symptom–provocation). There is evidence to suggest that amygdala conditioning to more general emotionally relevant (but disorder irrelevant) stimuli may also be disrupted in OCD, but the direction of this effect is not consistent. A recent study, using disorder irrelevant conditioned stimuli, showed that like in post-traumatic stress disorder, OCD patient have deficits in the recall of extinction memories and show reduced activation in the medial portion of the OFC during extinction learning, but there were no group differences in amygdala activation. These data, although somewhat inconsistent, indicate that the contribution of anxiety to habit biases in OCD cannot be ruled out, suggesting there is room for a more classic interpretation of the relationship among obsessions, anxiety and compulsions, that can coexist with a ‘COD’ account, which hypothesizes that there is a bidirectional mechanism of maladaptive symptom reinforcement. At a minimum, it is likely that trait anxiety may play a role in targeting OCD patients' general tendency towards excessive habit learning specifically to the avoidance domain, rather than towards ‘appetitive compulsivity’, e.g. stimulant drug addiction (but see for a negative reinforcement hypothesis of addiction). This postulate awaits further study.

With this in mind, the considerable neurobiological, pharmacological and genetic heterogeneity of OCD might be explained by understanding how trait anxiety, as an independent contributor to compulsive avoidance habit learning, fits into a trans-diagnostic model of the disorders along the respective compulsive and anxiety spectrums. In other words, it may be the case that there are many routes to the OCD phenotype, and that dysfunction in habit learning and trait anxiety are independent, yet interacting diatheses. Future research will need to test this possibility, which is in the spirit of the recent National Institute of Mental Health's Research Domain Criteria initiative, a major goal of which is to develop therapeutic strategies that can target biologically defined traits that are presumed to be heterogeneous within diagnostic categories of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5. Within this framework, it is plausible that trans-diagnostic dimensions, for example, habit learning, could be specifically targeted by certain treatments, for example, dopamine (D2) receptor antagonists (which are particularly effective in patients with co-morbid tics, or behaviour modification techniques, such as response prevention or habit reversal therapy. Likewise, trait anxiety might respond preferentially to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, through their anxiolytic properties, or exposure therapy, which is aimed at extinguishing inappropriate Pavlovian fear responses.

Whether there is a specific causal role for obsessions in this formulation is unclear. It is possible that obsessions in OCD reflect dysfunction in an entirely independent process that interacts with compulsivity in a bidirectional fashion, much like what we have proposed for anxiety. However, the importance of obsessions in OCD has recently been called into question with the observation that ‘Pure O’, that is patients who experience obsessions in the absence of compulsive behaviour, may be a clinical misnomer. Williams et al. found that these patients appear to exhibit previously overlooked mental compulsions and compulsions to seek reassurance. Another interesting possibility is that the historical distinction between obsessions and compulsions in OCD may be superficial and that obsessions are a form of compulsive, automatic thought. In this way, both obsessions and compulsions could be considered products of a disrupted goal-directed system, leading to over-active automatic thoughts (obsessions) and actions (compulsions), rather than being discrete traits that interact with one another.


Summary and conclusion

The hypothesis that a shift from goal-directed to habitual control over action mediates compulsivity in OCD ties well with the neurobiological and pharmacological basis of habit learning in rodents and humans. This hypothesis also accords well with the neurocognitive profile of motor inhibition failures in OCD that are observed following repetition of action. The ‘COD’ model of OCD proposed here has implications outside of the specific domain of this disorder. It is a plausible interpretation that the experience of premonitory ‘want’, or ‘urge’, reported in not only OCD but also substance-dependent individuals and tic disorders, may be a consequence of excessive stimulus–response associations. Future research should test this exciting possibility, articulated first by George Eliot in Silas Marner [p. 17]:…repeating some trivial movement or sound, until the repetition has bred a want, which is incipient habit.


Supra-personal cognitive control and metacognition

Nicholas Shea, Annika Boldt, Dan Bang, Nick Yeung, Cecilia Heyes, Chris D Frith — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2014. PMC3989995, CC BY 4.0.

The human mind is extraordinary in its ability not merely to respond to events as they unfold but also to adapt its own operation in pursuit of its agenda. This ‘cognitive control’ can be achieved through simple interactions among sensorimotor processes, and through interactions in which one sensorimotor process represents a property of another in an implicit, unconscious way. So why does the human mind also represent properties of cognitive processes in an explicit way, enabling us to think and say ‘I’m sure’ or ‘I’m doubtful’? We suggest that ‘system 2 metacognition’ is for supra-personal cognitive control. It allows metacognitive information to be broadcast, and thereby to coordinate the sensorimotor systems of two or more agents involved in a shared task.


A novel framework for metacognition research

Converging theoretical and empirical research suggests that most animals implicitly represent properties of their cognitive processes and use these for cognitive control,. This challenges the view that only humans have metacognition, which is broadly defined as ‘cognition about cognition’, and raises the question why humans, unlike other animals, not only implicitly but also explicitly represent properties of their cognitive processes.

In this opinion article, we propose a ‘dual systems’ framework for thinking about metacognition. In our framework, metacognition is composed of a cognitively ‘lean’ system, system 1 metacognition, which operates implicitly and is for the control of processes within one agent (intra-personal cognitive control), and a cognitively ‘rich’ system, system 2 metacognition, which is likely to be unique to humans and is for the control of processes within multiple agents (supra-personal cognitive control). Whereas the former system is found in many animals, the latter system is likely to be unique to humans. Our ‘lean’ account of metacognition clarifies the minimal requirements for metacognition and thereby offers a conceptual anchor in a literature where there are many conflicting assumptions about what counts as metacognition. Further, our ‘rich’ account of metacognition addresses why humans evolved the ability to explicitly represent properties of their cognitive processes: by sharing and discussing these representations, agents can engage in novel forms of adaptive group behaviour and build cumulative culture.


Metacognition and its relation to cognitive control

The broad definition of metacognition as ‘cognition about cognition’ is often interpreted widely (p. 170), to include any cognitive process that receives information from and has a controlling influence on another cognitive process,. So-construed, metacognition would encompass every type of cognitive control. We define metacognition more narrowly, as control processes that make use of one or more metacognitive representations, that is, representations of a property of a cognitive process.


Metacognition in humans

Metacognition can be assessed with a range of different paradigms. Perceivedcorrectness of a first-order decision is often measured retrospectively through explicit second-order confidence or error detection judgements,. Moreover, post-decision wagering requires participants to place a wager on a just made decision, assuming higher bets will follow from higher confidence. Another measure often used in reward paradigms is opt-out or uncertainty response, which allow the participant to skip a response, obtaining a smaller but guaranteed reward. All these judgements are diagnostic of task performance, meaning higher confidence on correct compared with error trials. This leads to the question as to what metacognitive information is being represented by system 1 and system 2 metacognition. Studies have identified a range of candidates, which can be divided into two classes: directly accessed and inferred,.

Direct access models assume that metacognition is based on the same information as the decision itself or some property of the decision. There are cases of direct access system 1 metacognitive representations that are based on exactly the same information as the decision. For example, Gigerenzer and colleagues suggested that both decision making and confidence are based on the validity of an activated cue. A similar assumption is made by type 2 signal detection theory; in this class of direct access models, confidence corresponds to the quantity of decision evidence accumulated for one response option. Other properties of the decision evidence have been suggested to play a role, such as its quality. Both Peirce's model of confidence and Kiani and Shadlen suggest a combination of both,. The idea that external variability affects confidence has also been suggested, meaning that more variable stimuli lead to lower levels of confidence. Others have suggested cognitive conflict as a basis for metacognition, which is based on the idea of competing response tendencies. The evidence in favour of the unchosen choice option also plays a role in mismatch models, which assume that metacognition is based on an internal matching process of the intended action with the actually performed one, as well as prediction errors. Similarly, the balance-of-evidence hypothesis is another example of direct access models, according to which, confidence is a function of the evidence for the chosen and the unchosen option.

In contrast to direct access models, inferential models assume that metacognition is based on information external to the first-order decision-making process. For example, an individual may learn that information from conflicting or variable sources of evidence leads to slower responses, and thus infer her confidence from response times, either approximated internally, or through the observation of one's own or another individual's response movement. Several other inferential models, rooted in the metamemory literature, assume that metacognition is based on ease of processing, that is how accessible a representation is, how fluently it can be processed, or how familiar it is. Another inferential hypothesis is the self-consistency model (SCM), based on the consensuality principle, which assumes participants have implicit knowledge of what response others would give and approximate their confidence accordingly.


Metacognition in non-human animals

There is compelling evidence that non-human animals are more likely to seek additional information, to opt out of making decisions, and to make lower post-decision wagers, under conditions in which a human observer would describe them as uncertain; for example, when the animal is required to make a difficult rather than an easy visual discrimination, or to remember an event over a long rather than a short interval. Some recent studies of monkeys, rats, and pigeons have also indicated, using transfer tests and single neuron recording, that this type of metacognitive behaviour can be regulated by internal rather than external cues; for example, that it covaries more precisely with neural signals from the orbitofrontal cortex or the supplementary eye fields than with external stimulus values.

These data suggest that animals from a wide range of species are capable of system 1 metacognition. As we have characterised it, system 1 metacognition is undemanding (see subsection ‘Only some forms of cognitive control involve metacognition’ above). It could be mediated by simple reinforcement learning. However, the current data do not show that animals are capable of system 2 metacognition: that they are able to infer or to learn, using system 2, the metacognitive significance of system 1 cues. Even in the most compelling experiments, it is possible that a ‘high confidence’ internal system 1 signal, X, automatically triggered reward-seeking behaviour – and thereby reduced the probability of information-seeking, opt-out, and low post-decision wagers – without the animal having to use a system 2 process to learn that, in the presence of X, reward-seeking behaviour tends to be successful.

For example, a perceptual process may use the mean firing rate of a population of neurons in visual cortex to represent a perceived property such as the length of a line. Crucially, the variance of the firing rate across the population indicates the extent to which the neurons ‘agree’ about the line length and thus carries information about the reliability of the perceptual representation (metacognitive information). We propose that, if the latter type of information is used to control the relative influence of the perceptual representation on cognition, then it counts as a metacognitive representation, and the use of this representation for cognitive control should be considered to be an instance of metacognition. As well as choosing which sensorimotor dispositions are allowed to drive behaviour, metacognition thus conceived can be involved in distributing resources between rival processes, in emotion regulation, in guiding memory retrieval, allocating study time, and so on.


Only some forms of cognitive control involve metacognition

Although all metacognition is a form of cognitive control, only some forms of cognitive control are metacognitive. Cognitive control need not make use of metacognitive representations and can be guided instead by object level representations, for example, of value or of abstract goals,. By contrast, other control processes do make use of metacognitive representations, for example, they represent that mutually inconsistent actions have been activated, which prompts the use of cognitive control processes in response selection,.

Thus, our first conclusion is that, if metacognition is defined carefully, metacognition does not encompass every type of cognitive control. What, then, is distinctive about metacognition, beyond its defining feature – the use of metacognitive representations? One possibility is that metacognition is only found in the cognitive control processes carried out by higher executive systems. In considering this possibility and suggesting an alternative, we make use of the well-known distinction between system 1 and system 2. However, our proposal does not depend on the details of dual systems theory, and it is consistent with other theories of higher-level executive function,. The dual-systems model draws on evidence that there is a distinctive form of cognitive processing, type 2 processing or system 2, with respect to which various functional features tend to cluster together, underpinned by their reliance on a capacity-limited generalised working memory system,. System 2 handles problems serially, takes time to operate and is affected by general working memory load. Its effectiveness correlates with individual differences in measures of general intelligence. By contrast, system 1 processes can act quickly, with many operating autonomously in parallel, and are little affected by general working memory load. System 2 representations are characteristically explicit, that is, conscious, whereas system 1 representations need not be.

Are metacognitive processes simply those control processes that are carried out by system 2? Unfortunately, things do not fall out so neatly. Much cognitive control takes place outside system 2,. For example, experimental subjects can inhibit responses to stimuli of which they remain unaware due to visual masking and slow down after errors they do not know they have made. These system 1 types of control can make use of metacognitive representations such as decision uncertainty, for example, as evident in a neuropsychological patient whose behaviour shows adaptation to the prevailing difficulty of the task even though she has no conscious experience of mental effort. Non-human animals are similarly capable of using metacognitive information. That, however, leaves us with a pressing puzzle. If system 1 metacognition is so pervasive, in humans and other animals, what role is there for system 2 metacognition?


A hypothesis about the distinctive function of system 2 metacognition

Our answer to the puzzle – what is the role of system 2 metacognition? – will be that it comes into its own when the action-driving systems to be controlled are found in two different agents: that is, in cases of ‘supra-personal cognitive control’.

Within a single agent, domain-general processes of learning, which are part of system 1, can quickly establish – through experience – the best way to prioritise the inputs to and outputs from competing sensorimotor systems. Such processes can use system 1 metacognitive information – for example, variance of a distribution, time to completion of a process, activation of incompatible response tendencies – to improve those trade-offs, just as they can learn to use any other type of relevant cue. The result will be a form of control that is implemented within system 1 processing and relies on metacognitive representations – that is, a system 1 form of metacognition.

When sensorimotor systems have to be coordinated between two or more interacting agents it is no longer possible for learning automatically to make use of all and any metacognitive information located anywhere within the different agents: my system 1 learning processes have direct access to the metacognitive information in my head, but not to the metacognitive information in your head, and vice versa. Some forms of coordinated action do not depend on metacognitive representations, for example, bodily movements can be synchronised relying only on object level information (e.g., about the location and trajectory of limbs),. But inter-agent control will typically be more effective when it can use metacognitive representations, if relevant metacognitive representations within system 1 processes in each agent are selected for broadcast to the other agent, so that decisions about which sensorimotor processes to deploy can be taken in a space of shared metacognitive information. This, we suggest, is the distinctive role of system 2 metacognition: to select metacognitive information for broadcast, in the service of controlling the sensorimotor systems of two or more agents involved in a shared task – that is, for supra-personal cognitive control.

Ours is different from the hypothesis that metacognition is for mentalising –that is, perceiving or inferring other people's mental states,. The first difference is that the representations concern one's own cognitive processes in the first instance, rather than those of another. The second difference is that communicating metacognitive representations plays a central role. To caricature: the mentalising story says that metacognition is there to allow agent A to infer that agent B has seen a rabbit; according to us, system 2 metacognition is there to allow agent A to communicate that his visuomotor fix on the rabbit is pretty reliable at present.


How system 2 metacognition works


System 2 metacognition plays a central role in group decision making

According to our hypothesis, system 2 metacognition should play a central role in group decision making. Indeed we find that joint perceptual decision making is significantly more effective when participants communicate metacognitive representations about the stimuli,. When deciding whether to trust witness testimony, (mock) jurors make considerable use of a witness's confidence and other metacognitive representations (e.g., calibration of confidence and accuracy). People also communicate metacognitive representations when they are synchronically coordinating complex actions (e.g., communications about confidence used in team sports),. System 2 metacognition can also be used diachronically, for example, making it possible for people to discuss how metacognitive representations should be deployed, affecting their own cognitive control. Control strategies based on metacognitive representations, for example, what to do when memory fails, can be the subject of explicit instruction. For example, a person can learn socially that, following failure to produce items in a verbal fluency task to name animals, a good strategy is to consider subcategories of animals (farm animals, pets, etc.).


Three types of work done by system 2 metacognition

We can distinguish three different types of work done by system 2 metacognition. First (W1), it makes metacognitive representations available for verbal report and hence for communication. Second (W2), system 2 metacognition works out the significance of metacognitive representations that have been broadcast or selected for communication, that is, what the individual or group should do (e.g., try harder, start again, give low weighting to that person's opinion) when a metacognitive representation has a certain range of values (e.g., indicates disfluency or lack of confidence). Although system 1 processes already contain some metacognitive representations which system 2 metacognition can select to make available (‘direct access’), a third type of work done by system 2 metacognition (W3) is to construct or infer metacognitive representations from multiple sources of (sometimes weak) metacognitive information.

In addition, we can, as mentioned above, distinguish between synchronic and diachronic supra-personal cognitive control. In cases of synchronic coordinated agency, metacognitive representations are used to improve the performance of two or more people when working on the same task at the same time. Metacognitive representations can also be used diachronically in teaching other agents how to think and act in the future, to improve subsequent performance in coordinated action, and possibly also in solitary tasks. The interpretation of metacognitive representations, and what to do about them, can be altered through discussion with others, enabling the generation of cultural consensus and regulation concerning what the cues mean and why some instructions are more appropriate than others. For example, using system 2 metacognition, groups develop and pass on theories about system 1 processes (about how to think). Learnt reliance on shared metacognitive representations can be effective even though people can be very unreliable in reporting some of the object level information used by system 1 processes. For example, people are wildly incorrect about the object level information used by the system 1 processes involved in catching a ball, but can still share metacognitive information to facilitate joint performance,.

When is system 2 metacognition direct and when is it inferred (W3)? We suppose that direct access will be used where the information is available, for example, confidence in perceptual decision making; and inferred otherwise, for example, in predictive ease of learning judgements,. If direct, there should be a reasonably tight correlation between the subject's reports (e.g., of accuracy) and objective measures,. If system 2 has to infer the metacognitive significance of system 1 cues there is more room for error.


Examples and limitations of system 2 metacognition

One central source of metacognitive representations is the prediction errors generated and used by many system 1 processes to guide learning. When relied on to guide learning and behaviour prediction errors can represent the reliability of another of the system's representations (e.g., of the value of an option) and lead that representation to be revised for the future. Large prediction errors may produce feelings of perceptual disfluency or action selection disfluency. System 2 can learn the significance of these feelings and use them for cognitive control.

System 2 has limited processing capacity, thus it can only make use of a limited number of metacognitive representations. That number should decrease as other demands on general working memory increase. And indeed there is some evidence that under cognitive load subjects switch from relying on several raw cues to depending on a single summary. An example of such a summary is the z-score (derived from the mean and the standard deviation of the internal perceptual representation) communicated by subjects in social psychophysics experiments, although it is not known whether subjects could have communicated the raw cues independently. In some cases, the raw cues on which summaries are based may no longer be available. However, this mandatory fusion occurs relatively late in development (∼12 years), suggesting that adults could learn to unpack the summary if necessary.


The function of system 2 metacognition


The functional claim about system 2 metacognition comes in various strengths

We have suggested that system 2 metacognition is for supra-personal cognitive control. The functional claim – what system 2 metacognition is ‘for’ – comes in several strengths. A modest claim is that system 2 metacognition is functionally involved in cases of inter-agent cognitive control; in situations where two or more people successfully coordinate their actions to achieve an outcome that depends on sensorimotor processes found in both. A bolder hypothesis is that this is the evolutionary purpose of system 2 metacognition: that the ability to represent metacognitive information in system 2 evolved to allow people to engage in more sophisticated cooperative projects and coordination tasks.


The hypothesis that system 2 metacognition evolved for supra-personal cognitive control

There is not scope here to properly assess the evolutionary claim, but we will note an empirical consequence. Humans are a distinctively cooperative mammal, engaging in coordinated behaviour to an extent that is markedly different from even our closest primate cousins,. If the ability to use system 2 to select, construct, and broadcast metacognitive representations arose in humans in response to selection pressure for increasingly complex forms of coordinated action, then in non-human animals we would not expect to find a system 2 that processes metacognitive representations. One possibility is that non-human animals do not have a system 2 at all. Alternatively, non-human animals may have system 2 functions, such as maintenance in working memory and selective attention, that do not involve the use of metacognitive information. In this case, what evolved in the hominin line was the capacity to take metacognitive representations in system 1 and turn them into metacognitive representations for system 2.

According to this evolutionary hypothesis, supra-personal coordination was the origin of system 2 metacognition. Using conscious metacognitive representations to control one's own individual behaviour is probably the most obvious manifestation of system 2 metacognition in everyday life. But on our account, using metacognitive representations about one's own cognitive processes for intra-personal cognitive control came second, and arose as a side effect of the selection of system 2 metacognition for inter-personally coordinated action. The picture is of cooperation becoming a central feature of the human way of life, in the form of fluidly coordinated joint action and diachronically organised cooperative projects, both controlled by a supra-personal system of cognitive control. This system directs resources and activity between a variety of different sensorimotor processes that are distributed across agents. It relies on selected metacognitive representations which, because they are shared among the agents involved, enable more efficient and complex forms of coordinated action. The selection and sharing occurs not only synchronically, while a particular episode of coordinated action is in progress, but also diachronically, as system 2 metacognition allows experts to teach novices how to use metacognitive representations in future episodes of coordinated and solitary tasks.

The selection processes favouring the emergence of system 2 metacognition could have been genetic and/or cultural. To the extent that the evolutionary processes were genetic, rather than cultural, one would expect: (i) little cross-cultural variation in the extent and content of system 2 metacognition, especially when people are tested in coordinated action tasks and when adults are teaching children; and (ii) that metacognitive competence would emerge early and independently of instruction. If these predictions are false, it would suggest a role for cultural selection in the evolution of system 2 metacognition (see section on ‘Empirical predictions’ below).


An (even) more radical evolutionary hypothesis about system 2 metacognition

The evolutionary claim about the function of system 2 metacognition in turn comes in various strengths. So far, we have suggested that it was the ability to represent metacognitive information in system 2 that was selected. This allows that early hominins may already have had system 2 in place, and perhaps also natural language (which may or may not be separable from the presence of system 2). However, it is worth noting that a much more radical evolutionary claim could also be entertained: that system 2 itself evolved to perform the function of selecting, constructing, and broadcasting metacognitive representations in the service of supra-personal cognitive control. A yet further evolutionary question on which we do not venture to speculate is the relation of these various evolutionary steps to the emergence of consciousness.


Empirical predictions

We suggest several empirical predictions against which our hypothesis can be tested. The first concerns linguistic communication. It follows from our functional hypothesis that some forms of joint action are significantly aided by communication of metacognitive representations selected by system 2 metacognition. Thus, in a novel task requiring two or more agents to act jointly in pursuit of some goal (i.e., not one where an action plan has been automatised in system 1 processes in both agents), blocking the linguistic communication of metacognitive information should have a selective detrimental effect on performance, in a way that blocking the linguistic communication of object level information about the task does not.

Similarly, in such a novel coordination task, cognitive load should selectively impair performance, and should do so via an effect on the (accuracy or range) of communicated metacognitive information. By contrast, where automatic/autonomous/implicit processes rely on metacognitive information in directing behaviour or resources between sensorimotor processes, increased cognitive load should cause relatively little impairment.

A third prediction concerns individual differences. Performance in the types of novel coordination tasks just described should correlate with individual differences in measures of general intelligence.

Our final prediction concerns non-human animals. If, contrary to our hypothesis, non-human animals have system 2 metacognition, they should be able to learn that reward-seeking behaviour is successful after making decisions that are unlikely to be correct (low confidence) and unsuccessful after making decisions that are likely to be correct (high confidence). This could be tested by, for example, using a reverse transfer test after training in a wagering task.


Concluding remarks

As yet the evidence for our hypothesis is limited and there are many outstanding questions. The two key components, for which there is some preliminary evidence, are: (i) that system 2 metacognition is very malleable and readily influenced by instructions and beliefs, and (ii) that exchange of system 2 metacognitive representations can create advantages for the group. If tests of our empirical predictions provide further support, it would suggest that metacognition is a specific form of cognitive control and is not unique to system 2. Metacognitive information such as decision uncertainty is used to modulate ongoing thought and behaviour in the absence of awareness. These implicit metacognitive representations enable the many different processes that make up system 1 to work together in an optimal manner. However, when metacognitive representations are explicit in system 2 they can be readily used to enable several people to work together in an optimal manner, for example, by sharing information about decision confidence. We suggest that explicit metacognitive representations exist for this reason. This role is possible, first because the representations are in verbal form suitable for sharing, and second because they can modify the functioning of system 1. On the basis of metacognitive signals emerging from system 1, accounts are developed in system 2 designed to explain and control the functioning of system 1. These accounts can be sketchy and inaccurate, like any narrative, but are constantly updated and sometimes improved through discussion with others. This process provides a mechanism for modification of behaviour through instructions and cultural expectations. These are powerful forces that alter behaviour of whole groups of people and provide a mechanism for the emergence of cumulative culture.


Action versus valence in decision making

Marc Guitart-Masip, Emrah Duzel, Ray Dolan, Peter Dayan — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2014. PMC3989998, CC BY 4.0.

The selection of actions, and the vigor with which they are executed, are influenced by the affective valence of predicted outcomes. This interaction between action and valence significantly influences appropriate and inappropriate choices and is implicated in the expression of psychiatric and neurological abnormalities, including impulsivity and addiction. We review a series of recent human behavioral, neuroimaging, and pharmacological studies whose key design feature is an orthogonal manipulation of action and valence. These studies find that the interaction between the two is subject to the critical influence of dopamine. They also challenge existing views that neural representations in the striatum focus on valence, showing instead a dominance of the anticipation of action.


Introduction

Subjects should rationally choose which actions to emit, and with what vigor, based on the rewards or punishment potentially gained or avoided. Actions are thus instructed by valence. Because subjects might just as well act vigorously or withhold a response studiously to gain a reward or avoid a punishment, there should be no a priori dependence between action and valence and they are duly studied mostly in isolation. This research has revealed that, among other regions, supplementary motor cortex and sensorimotor sectors of the basal ganglia are involved in controlling motor performance, whereas the ventral striatum and its dopaminergic innervation, as well as medial and orbital prefrontal regions, are associated with the representation and calculation of expected affective value,.

This a priori independence between action and valence is gracefully satisfied in instrumental control,. However, instrumental control competes and cooperates with Pavlovian control, which generates prespecified responses in the light of biologically significant outcomes and their predictors. Pavlovian responses couple action and valence (promoting approach and engagement in the face of reward and inhibition or perhaps active escape in the face of punishment), forcing interactions even when they are suboptimal. The importance of these interactions is that they might help explain a wealth of behavioral anomalies such as impulsivity and addiction, where the effect of valence apparently overrides instrumental action selection,.

It is perhaps surprising that, until recently, only a few tasks have examined these interactions. For example, most imaging tasks that study the representation of valence in the human brain have either required or at least permitted particular actions. However, in such designs it is not possible to distinguish whether a signal is associated with valence (i.e., reward versus punishment) or action (i.e., go versus no-go). Thus, a fuller psychological and neural understanding depends on the simultaneous and separate manipulation of these factors.

One task (which we call the ‘orthogonalized go/no-go task’) that was explicitly designed to study the interaction of action and valence involves four conditions, each signaled by a different visual stimulus: active responses to obtain rewards (‘go to win’); active responses to avoid punishment (‘go to avoid losing’); passive responses to obtain rewards (‘no go to win’); and passive responses to avoid punishment (‘no go to avoid losing’). Variants have been used to study behavior and brain responses [as measured with functional MRI (fMRI)] when subjects were either explicitly instructed what to do or had to learn this for themselves. The effects of manipulating the dopaminergic and serotonergic systems with systemic manipulations have also been examined,.

The results of this substantial body of experiments pose two challenges. First, they reveal that the strength of coupling between valence and action has particular consequences for learning. This in turn highlights the importance of orthogonalizing them to elucidate cognitive and neuronal aspects of value representation and action selection. Second, these results indicate limits to a dominant view of the striatum that has emerged from neuroimaging; namely, that it preferentially encodes valence. Instead, these studies strongly support the idea that the striatum encodes a tendency toward action. The experiments also highlight two distinct contributions of dopaminergic neuromodulation: the control of motivation in instrumental responding and the extent to which action and valence interact to influence behavior.


Behavioral interactions between action and valence

When carefully instructed on the contingencies of the task, and given ample practice, subjects correctly choose go/no-go regardless of valence on more than 95% of trials. Nevertheless, anticipating punishment impairs performance of well-learned instrumental choices by slowing go responses, revealing the essential interaction between action and valence akin to conditioned-suppression experiments. Similarly, Crockett and colleagues showed that correct go responses are slower when feedback involves punishment,.

Further, when participants learn the action contingencies by trial and error, go performance is better when it leads to reward and no-go performance for punishment omission. These results have been replicated in independent samples, and in healthy older adults. Critically, some participants perform substantially worse than chance in the no go to win condition in which Pavlovian and instrumental systems conflict. This is a human analog of an omission schedule and suggests the danger of overlooking Pavlovian influences in seemingly straightforward instrumental contexts.

The most parsimonious of a nested sequence of reinforcement learning models that parameterize alternative accounts of this behavior recapitulates the learning asymmetry (relatively impaired learning in ‘go to avoid losing’ and ‘no go to win’ compared with ‘go to win’ and ‘no go to avoid losing’, respectively) by specifying an interaction between instrumental and Pavlovian control mechanisms. In essence, the latter promotes or inhibits go choices in the winning and losing conditions, respectively.


Computational modeling of the learning behavior

We built several nested models incorporating different instrumental and Pavlovian reinforcement-learning hypotheses. All models were fitted to the observed behavioral data and compared using Bayesian Information Criteria (BIC). All models learned separate propensities for action at (go or no-go) on trial t under condition st. The model assigned probabilities to each action using a sigmoid function. The base model (RW) was purely instrumental: w(a,s) = Q(a,s). Action values Q(a,s) were learned independently of the valence of the outcomes using the Rescorla–Wagner rule:

where ɛ is the learning rate. Reinforcements enter the equation through rt∈{-1,0,1} and ρ is a free parameter that determines the effective size of reinforcements.

This model was augmented in successive steps. In RW + noise, the model included irreducible choice noise in the instrumental system by squashing the sigmoid function:

where ξ is the noise parameter, which was free to vary between 0 and 1.

In RW + noise + bias, the model further included a value-independent and static action bias b that promotes or suppresses go choices equally in all conditions:

In RW + noise + bias + Pav, the model also included a (Pavlovian) parameter π that adds a fraction of the state value V(s) into the action values learned by the instrumental system, thus effectively coupling action and valence during learning, promoting a go choice when V(s) is positive and no-go choice when V(s) is negative:

We also considered the possibility that behavioral asymmetries arise because of differences in reward and punishment sensitivities. Thus, in RW(rew/pun) + noise + bias, the instrumental system included separate reward and punishment sensitivities allowing different values of the parameter ρ on reward and punishment trials.

Observed and modeled behavior in the orthogonalized go/no-go task

There is a formal similarity between these results and those of Pavlovian to Instrumental transfer (PIT) tasks in animals and humans, which have previously demonstrated an interaction between Pavlovian and instrumental control,. As here, go responses that result in an instrumental approach are promoted or inhibited by appetitive- or aversive-predicting stimuli, respectively. However, a notable difference is that, in PIT paradigms, the two sorts of conditioning are taught separately. The orthogonalized go/no-go task demonstrates a severe disruption of learning due to the direct coupling of action and valence characteristic of Pavlovian responses in a simpler task that lacks any such partition.

Why might such striking interactions between action and valence exist despite being deleterious? Pavlovian actions have plausibly been perfected in ancestral environments as hard-wired knowledge of good behavioral responses; for instance, given mortal threats. That such a prior can sometimes delay learning and inhibit performance in unusual environments should not detract from its huge advantage in obviating learning.

What might underlie these behavioral results? Existing neuroimaging studies that include only conditions where reward is anticipated along with action are difficult to interpret unambiguously. Thus, an important next step is to scan human volunteers using fMRI while they perform the orthogonalized go/no-go task.


Neural representations of action and valence

fMRI allows assessment of the joint contribution to neural responses of the anticipation of action or inaction and the valence of potential outcomes independently of motor performance or outcome delivery. Ample data suggest that blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signals in the striatum at choice correlate with the action values of the chosen options, thus one might expect a valence-dominated signal during anticipation. Furthermore, the Pavlovian influences implied by the best-fitting model might naturally be expected to modulate these prediction and prediction error signals. Surprisingly, neither effect emerges; in fact, no significant neural correlate of the strong interaction evident in behavior is apparent, except that only those participants who learn all task conditions well, and thus overcome the Pavlovian bias, show increased BOLD responses in the inferior frontal gyrus in trials requiring motor inhibition.

Instead, BOLD responses in the striatum and substantia nigra pars compacta/ventral tegmental area (SN/VTA) are dominated by action requirements (A),. Importantly, despite ‘go to win’ and ‘no go to win’ conditions signaling the same expected value (and thus salience), striatal BOLD responses are reliably higher in the ‘go to win’ condition. Similar results have been described in the ventral striatum when comparing active and passive avoidance of punishment. Interestingly, electrophysiological evidence in rats also shows contrasting neuronal responses in the nucleus accumbens to cues instructing a go or a no-go response despite both cues signaling the equivalent reward. However, in the latter case, there was more activity for ‘no go to win’ than for ‘go to win’. Further, in the learning version of the task, BOLD responses in the striatum and the SN/VTA track instrumental action values with a positive and negative relationship between value and brain activity for go and no-go, respectively. Subsidiary modulation of BOLD responses according to valence does not survive multiple comparisons even when restricted to just the ventral striatum. Even in an expanded dataset, the influence of valence remains significant in go conditions only, with higher BOLD responses in the ‘go to win’ condition than in ‘go to avoid losing’.

The task design precludes a detailed study of BOLD responses to outcomes. However, as expected (see for a review), responses in the ventral striatum and medial prefrontal cortex are significantly greater for winning compared with losing. Winning after go is not different from winning after no-go. However, this has been observed when go responses are more physically demanding, suggesting that the costs associated with the performance of an action may have a role in the processing of outcomes,.

In brief, these data demonstrate that, during the anticipatory phase and before any action is performed or outcome realized, the coding of action requirements dominates the coding of valence or expected value in the striatum and SN/VTA. What neural systems might contribute to this? Obvious candidates include ascending monoaminergic dopamine and serotonin systems. The dopamine system is involved in generating active motivated behavior, and instrumental learning through reward-prediction errors. The serotonin system appears affiliated with behavioral inhibition in aversive contexts,. A logical step is to manipulate these systems pharmacologically while subjects perform the orthogonalized go/no-go task.


Pharmacological modulations of the interactions between action and valence

In the instructed version of the task, boosting central dopamine levels in young, healthy participants, via systemic administration of levodopa leads to faster motor responses in both go conditions. However, neuronal effects depend on valence, with increased activity for anticipated go versus no-go choices in the striatum and SN/VTA only when the potential outcome is a reward. Only in the striatum does boosting dopamine decrease the overall striatal BOLD signal for the ‘no go to win’ condition. Remarkably, in a learning experiment, boosting dopamine levels decreased the coupling between action and valence compared with placebo, with smaller differences in performance between the two go conditions or between the two no-go conditions. In other experiments studying the role of serotonin, the only significant effect of decreasing central serotonin levels with acute tryptophan depletion is to abolish the effects of anticipatory punishment on the vigor of the go responses,.

The whole collection of results colors our picture of the striatum and the impact of dopamine away from pure valence – as, for instance, in reward-prediction errors that train predictions – and toward action invigoration. We next examine these two characteristics, along with the final effect of dopamine on reducing the coupling between the two.


Reward-prediction errors

The dominance of action over valence in striatal and SN/VTA BOLD responses during anticipation (and before execution), as observed in our imaging experiments, challenges conventional assumptions regarding the basal ganglia. This finding may appear obvious given the predominance of motor symptoms in basal ganglia disorders such as Huntington's and Parkinson's disease. However, electrophysiological and voltammetry examinations of the responses of dopamine neurons, and striatal dopamine transients, and a wealth of fMRI experiments on state-based, and action-based, values, as well as effort-based cost–benefit evaluation, all point to a main effect of valence, via the temporal-difference reward-prediction error, and not a main effect of action.

Note, however, that most experiments reporting reward-prediction errors require a choice between actions (rather than between action and inaction). Even popular Pavlovian paradigms compare rewarded actions with unrewarded foil actions or require (or engender) menial movements. Interestingly, the weak influence of valence we observed was entirely conditional on a requirement for action and was not modulated by levodopa. However, as a null result this must be interpreted with caution and does not provide evidence that the representation of valence in the striatum is independent of dopamine.

Dopamine has been implicated in two relevant processes beyond its phasic signaling of a reward-prediction error,. First, it has a prime role in the generation and invigoration of motor responses, including instrumental and Pavlovian actions directed to rewards and punishments,. This involvement in action invigoration, regardless of valence, resonates with the dominance of action over valence observed at the neuronal level. Second, dopamine also supports high-level cognitive functions such as working memory and long-term memory, functions that may be critical for learning the contingencies of the orthogonalized go/no-go task.


Dopamine and action invigoration

A role for dopamine in appetitive invigoration is apparent in the decreased motor activity or motivation to work for rewards, following dopamine depletion or the increased vigor in appetitive PIT when dopamine is enhanced in the nucleus accumbens. It is associated with the dopamine incentive salience hypothesis, which has been observed to be in consilience with temporal-difference prediction-error coding. In our task, when dopamine is enhanced systemically, bolstered brain representations of rewarded action and invigorated instrumental responding regardless of valence are observed, the latter possibly mediated by the effects of an assumed elevated average reward rate.

However, perhaps the best test bed for this role of dopamine is active avoidance, as when performing a go action to avoid losing. According to two-factor theories of active avoidance, actions that change the state of the environment and so abolish the possibility of a loss are reinforced by a consequential attainment of safety. These actions are duly associated with a positive prediction error (going from a negative value to zero). If this prediction error is represented by dopaminergic activity ‘go to avoid losing’ actions would ultimately have similar instrumental status to ‘go to win’ actions (consistent with their similar representation in striatal BOLD responses).

Dopamine's involvement in aversion and action inhibition is complex. There is evidence that dopamine is released in punishing conditions and is involved in performing active avoidance responses,. Phasic responses in dopamine neurons to aversive stimuli are widely reported,. Moreover, fMRI experiments have shown evoked striatal BOLD signals of equal magnitude to reward and punishment anticipation, when an action is required, as well as a correlation with aversive prediction errors in the striatum,. Furthermore, dopamine depletion impairs acquisition of active avoidance, as has long been described in the animal pharmacology literature. In the two-factor account, avoidance of a potential punishment is coded as a reward and thus may contribute to the average reward rate and invigoration of instrumental action. Note, however, that the relation between average reward rate and invigoration of action is not identical in rewarding and punishing contexts because the two contexts differ in terms of the Pavlovian responses.

Altogether the findings fit with a suggested role for dopamine in modulating vigor or motivation for actions independent of valence. The striatum would signal the propensity to perform an action largely independent of state values, as in original accounts of the actor in an actor–critic architecture. Note that salience accounts of dopamine gains no succor from these findings because, to the extent that striatal BOLD signal is seen as an indirect report of dopamine release, they are inconsistent with the finding that responses to reward- and punishment-predictive cues are markedly different dependent on whether an active response is required.

Of course, two-factor theories pose an extra requirement. ‘Go to avoid losing’ actions differ from ‘go to win’ actions in that the negative valence of the unsafe state must be learned (for instance by an opponent system), such that the Pavlovian effect of that negative valence might interfere with the instrumental action (as it did in our behavioral results). The effects of acute tryptophan depletion in the instructed version of the task suggest that serotonin may support some aspects of this opponent signal,. However, much less is known about the neural mechanisms of aversion and action inhibition than about reward and action invigoration. Recent research suggests that serotonin is indeed involved in circumstances where action inhibition is implemented in response to punishment or its anticipation,. Action inhibition in the face of reward, as in the stop-signal reaction-time task, has also implicated various regions, including the inferior frontal gyrus.


A role for the prefrontal cortex in overcoming Pavlovian–instrumental conflict

As we have seen, learning the appropriate behavioral response is suboptimal in conditions where Pavlovian and instrumental controllers conflict,. This poses the question of whether these two systems are segregated in the brain and compete for behavioral control. This notion is supported by evidence that, at a neuronal level, instrumental and Pavlovian responses are supported by different corticostriatal loops. The dorsal striatum is involved in learning and performance of goal-directed and habitual instrumental responding. Sectors of the ventral striatum are more closely affiliated with Pavlovian responding, with the accumbens shell supporting the expression of unconditioned behaviors to rewards and punishments and the accumbens core involved in the expression of appetitive- directed Pavlovian responses,. The amygdala is also associated with the expression of conditioned responses to punishment, and appetitive processing. Indeed, connectivity between the amygdala and the accumbens is implicated in appetitive PIT in animals and humans. However, in our experiments we did not observe any evidence of neural segregation of Pavlovian and instrumental controllers.

Alternatively, or perhaps additionally, Pavlovian and instrumental influences could be more directly intertwined. Consider, for instance, ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’ striatal pathways. These are suggested as promoting, respectively, go choices in light of reward versus no-go choices in light of foregone reward,. This functional architecture provides a plausible mechanism for instrumental learning of active responses through positive reinforcement (‘go to win’) and passive (avoidance) responses through punishment (‘no go to avoid losing’). However, this architecture cannot account for learning of go choices in the context of punishment (‘go to avoid losing’) or no-go choices in the context of reward (‘no go to win’). Therefore, learning in conditions where Pavlovian and instrumental system conflict requires a supplementary mechanism. As discussed, two-factor theories provide such a supplementary mechanism for the go-to-avoid-losing condition.

For the case of ‘no go to win’, the experiments suggest that prefrontal cortex mechanisms modulated by dopamine are involved in overcoming the Pavlovian bias. Indirect evidence for this comes from the decreased Pavlovian influence during learning after an experimental boost of dopamine levels. Various human experiments have shown an increase or a decrease in (putatively prefrontal) model-based over (striatal) model-free control when dopamine is boosted or depleted, respectively,. In rats, dopamine achieves these effects by facilitating the operation of prefrontal processes, perhaps including components of working memory (on which model-based choice depends) or rule learning,. This suggests a predominant effect at the level of prefrontal function when the dopaminergic system is systemically manipulated in humans. Whether enhanced dopamine decreases model-free control by improving prefrontal function, or by increasing the influence of the prefrontal cortex over subcortical representations, needs further study.

Of direct relevance to prefrontal involvement in ‘no go to win’ are increased BOLD responses in the inferior frontal gyrus in trials requiring motor inhibition and theta oscillations in medial frontal areas that are inversely correlated with the influence of the Pavlovian bias on a trial-by-trial basis. The prefrontal cortex may decrease Pavlovian influences through recruitment of the subthalamic nucleus, raising a decision threshold within the basal ganglia that prevents execution of a biased decision computed in the striatum,. Alternatively, the striatum could act to generate a categorical signal that distinguishes activation or inhibition of a given action. After successful learning, this signal shows a clear separation between go and no-go choices (that is enhanced by dopamine); this clarity could depend on the weighting or processing of afferent information from the prefrontal cortex. In either case, via prefrontal prevention of incorrect go choices, participants may experience the richer reward schedule associated with the no-go choice and, over the course of learning, the striatum could eventually represent the appropriate choices, as in the instructed version of the task.


Concluding remarks

Action and inaction result from interacting instrumental and Pavlovian mechanisms realized at behavioral and neural levels. As a result, action and valence are coupled, so examining the functional complexity of the basal ganglia and their dopaminergic innervation requires them to be manipulated simultaneously. Variants of a task that orthogonalizes action and valence have shown that action dominates valence in the striatum and dopaminergic midbrain. These findings suggest limits to dominant views of dopaminergic and striatal function and invite extensions to include action tendencies. A dopaminergic contribution to the control of motivation in instrumental responding is also highlighted, along with its strong effect, putatively at the level of the prefrontal cortex, in regulating the extent to which an obligatory coupling between Pavlovian and instrumental control systems is expressed.


Neural mechanisms of motivated forgetting

Michael C Anderson, Simon Hanslmayr — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2014. PMC4045208, CC BY 3.0.

Not all memories are equally welcome in awareness. People limit the time they spend thinking about unpleasant experiences, a process that begins during encoding, but that continues when cues later remind someone of the memory. Here, we review the emerging behavioural and neuroimaging evidence that suppressing awareness of an unwelcome memory, at encoding or retrieval, is achieved by inhibitory control processes mediated by the lateral prefrontal cortex. These mechanisms interact with neural structures that represent experiences in memory, disrupting traces that support retention. Thus, mechanisms engaged to regulate momentary awareness introduce lasting biases in which experiences remain accessible. We argue that theories of forgetting that neglect the motivated control of awareness omit a powerful force shaping the retention of our past.


A neglected force that shapes retention

Over the past century, memory research has focused on passive factors that make us forget. Forgetting has been proposed to result from the decay of memories over time, the accumulation of similar interfering experiences in memory, and changes in physical context that make it harder to recall the past. This historical emphasis on passive factors fits the common assumption that forgetting is a negative outcome and, thus, any process underlying it must happen involuntarily. Although forgetting is often negative, this emphasis neglects a fundamental feature of human existence: not all experiences are pleasant. When reminded of negative events, we are not well disposed towards them and we deliberately limit their tenure in awareness. This process is familiar to most people; a reminder evokes a brief flash of memory and feeling, abruptly followed by efforts to exclude the unwanted memory from awareness. We do this to preserve our emotional state, to protect our sense of self, and sometimes simply to concentrate on what needs to be done. Therefore, any scientific theory of forgetting must include an account of the considerable motivational forces that shape retention.

Here, we review the growing research on neural mechanisms underlying motivated forgetting. The term ‘motivated forgetting’ here refers to increased forgetting arising from active processes that down-prioritise unwanted experiences in service of creating or sustaining an emotional or cognitive state. For example, to sustain positive emotions or concentration, belief in some state of affairs, confidence, or optimism, it may be necessary to reduce accessibility of experiences that undermine those states. Here, we focus on neural evidence for the role of inhibitory control processes in the voluntary interruption of mnemonic processing. A core claim is that these inhibitory control processes, widely studied in psychology and cognitive neuroscience, can be targeted flexibly at different stages of mnemonic processing and at different types of representation to modulate the state of traces in memory.

In support of this view, we review evidence that inhibition can be engaged either during memory encoding or retrieval to limit retention of unwanted memories. Stopping encoding may disrupt the consolidation of traces already formed, and also prevent further reflection on the experience that would enhance its longevity. By contrast, stopping retrieval disrupts the automatic progression from cues to an associated memory, the persisting effects of which influence whether the experience remains accessible. Both encoding and retrieval stopping terminate an unfolding mnemonic process so that an experience can be excluded from conscious awareness. Through these efforts to terminate awareness, attentional control interacts with traces in episodic memory to shape what we do and do not remember of our past.


Inhibitory control at encoding

An effective way of keeping an unwanted memory from being retrieved in the future is to disrupt and truncate its encoding. These processes are investigated with directed forgetting paradigms, in which participants receive a cue to forget information that they just acquired. Hundreds of studies conducted over the past 50 years reveal that humans can readily implement such forgetting instructions, demonstrating that motivation indeed shapes encoding. Inhibition has been proposed to have a role in stopping encoding processes in these procedures, although passive factors also are likely to have a role. We focus here on evidence indicating a distinct contribution of inhibitory control in actively limiting the encoding of unwanted experience. This evidence has been collected with the item-method and list-method directed forgetting procedures.


Item and list-method directed forgetting

In studies of directed forgetting, two procedures are generally used: the item-method and the list-method. These paradigms are illustrated in. As illustrated in A, in item-method directed forgetting, participants study items one at a time, and each item is followed by a forget (F) or remember (R) instruction. Later, memory for all items is tested. As shown in B, in list-method directed forgetting, a entire list of items is first studied, followed by a F or R instruction. A second list is then studied, usually followed by a R instruction. At the end, a recall test occurs. C compares the typical behavioural results obtained in item-method (Ci) and list-method (Cii) directed forgetting. Cii shows the twofold effect of the forget cue on the recall test, with forgetting of list-1 items and enhancement of list-2 items. In both paradigms, participants do not know in advance whether they should forget or remember the respective item. Thus, the control processes mediating these effects must act on memory representations and not the initial perception of an event.


Item-method directed forgetting

Item-method directed forgetting has a long tradition in cognitive psychology. This effect is robust, as reflected by the range of conditions under which it has been reported, including both explicit and implicit memory tests. Item-method directed forgetting usually has been explained in terms of selective rehearsal according to which to-be-forgotten items are spared from further processing and are subject to passive forgetting, whereas to-be-remembered items are actively rehearsed. Interestingly, the occurrence of item-method directed forgetting in recognition tests has been used as an argument for passive, noninhibitory explanations, because some have argued that inhibition should only temporarily reduce the accessibility of the affected items and, therefore, it should be possible to release these items from inhibition later.


List-method directed forgetting

Sometimes, we may wish to forget a set of events that is extended in time (e.g., a recent doctor's visit, or dispute with an unpleasant acquaintance). This situation is modelled by the list-method of directed forgetting. A typical experiment comprises two lists (e.g., 10–20 items in each list), with a forget or remember cue given after the first list. After encoding the second list, a brief distracting task follows and then recall is tested. On this final test, people typically recall the first list more poorly when it is followed by a forget, compared with a remember, instruction. Interestingly, people recall the items following a forget cue better than they do items studied after a remember cue (Box1, C). These complementary effects are referred to as list-1 forgetting and list-2 enhancement. These effects arise on free recall, cued recall, and recognition tests, although, in the latter case, deficits are often restricted to source memory. List-method directed forgetting effects have also been observed in autobiographical memory. Poorer recall of the to-be-forgotten list is believed to reflect reduced accessibility rather than reduced availability of the forgotten material. Both active and passive mechanisms have also been proposed for this phenomenon.

As with item-method directed forgetting, imaging research with the list method indicates that instructions to forget trigger an active process that disrupts mnemonic activity. For example, two studies examined the neurophysiological mechanisms of directed forgetting by focussing on brain oscillations. Prior work established that memory formation is typically accompanied by increased large scale synchrony, a neural marker thought to reflect upregulated synaptic plasticity. Strikingly, cuing people to forget a just-studied list decreased the large-scale synchrony in a widespread cortical network in the alpha/beta frequency range. Individual differences in this effect predicted forgetting of to-be-forgotten items, suggesting that decreasing synchrony disrupts neural processes that would improve retention. This finding was replicated in a multimodal electroencephalography (EEG)–fMRI study, in which it was found to be associated with increased BOLD signal in the left DLPFC (B). Following this discovery, a combined EEG–repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) experiment demonstrated that stimulating the left DLPFC with rTMS during a forget instruction also reduced neural synchrony, significantly increasing directed forgetting (C). Enhanced forgetting following rTMS indicates that stimulation facilitated processes needed to implement directed forgetting, consistent with findings showing that rTMS can enhance, rather than disrupt processing (see for a detailed discussion of the enhancing effects of slow rTMS on forgetting). This finding supports a causal role of frontally driven processes in inducing forgetting effects and complements work showing that prefrontal lesions disrupt list-method directed forgetting.

Increased activation of the DLPFC together with decreased neural synchrony suggests that an active control process contributes to directed forgetting. However, these findings do not specify that this active process necessarily engages inhibitory control. For example, prior studies have highlighted the importance of the DLPFC in task switching. Therefore, DLPFC involvement during the forget instruction might simply reflect a voluntarily induced task switch that stops rehearsal, and not inhibition. However, this overlap between directed forgetting and task-switching activations may be driven by inhibitory processes involved during task switching, as numerous studies indicate. Furthermore, in EEG studies, task switching typically induces a pronounced increase in frontoparietal theta long-range synchrony, in stark contrast to the decreases in alpha/beta long-range synchrony observed in list-method directed forgetting. Although these findings suggest that directed forgetting activations are unlikely to arise from task switching, the relations between the processes in the two tasks merits further exploration.

The improved recall of list-2 that accompanies the forgetting of list-1 items might suggest a single mechanism that enhances list-2 encoding by reducing interference from list-1 items. However, there are reasons to doubt this. First, forgetting and enhancement are often uncorrelated. Second, list-1 forgetting often can be modulated independently of list-2 enhancement. Third, whereas all list-1 items suffer forgetting, irrespective of their serial position, the enhancement of list-2 appears to be driven by the first few items. The latter result fits electrophysiological data suggesting that the forget cue enhances subsequent encoding because it acts like a ‘reset button’ that frees cognitive resources and allows a fresh encoding start. This assumption is reflected in EEG work showing that oscillatory markers of encoding exhaustion, which gradually increase with the number of encoded items, are reset by the forget cue. This latter effect is most evident in alpha oscillatory amplitude, which usually decreases during memory encoding. Thus, forgetting and enhancement in list-method directed forgetting appear to reflect different processes that can be dissociated on a cognitive and neural level.

The list and item methods differ in the target of forgetting. Whereas the item method targets individual items, the list method typically directs people to forget a set of items defined by temporal context (i.e., ‘the previous list’). This broader targeting may be implemented by directing inhibition at representations of temporal context rather than individual items. Consistent with this, list-method directed forgetting induces a shift away from the mental context of the first list, and this context shift may make it harder to recall list-1 items. For example, a forget instruction induces forgetting effects similar to those caused by other instructions designed merely to shift mental context away from the first list, without instructing people to forget. Given that similar forgetting can be induced without instructing people to forget, some have argued that directed forgetting need not reflect inhibitory control. However, an alternative possibility is that directed forgetting instructions achieve context shifts in a mechanistically distinct way, by engaging inhibitory control to force a shift in context. Consistent with this possibility, directed forgetting and ‘mental context shift’ instructions appear to be mediated by different neural processes. Whereas mental context shift instructions mainly affect local alpha and theta synchrony, only directed forgetting disrupts long-range alpha/beta neural synchrony. Combined with evidence for a causal role of prefrontal cortex in inducing these changes in both long-range synchrony and forgetting, these findings suggest that an active inhibitory process disrupts list-1 context in directed forgetting. However, these dissociations are based on between-study comparisons because no study has yet directly contrasted EEG synchrony patterns between directed forgetting and mental context change.

Although inhibition may typically be targeted at temporal context in list-method directed forgetting, other targets are possible. For example, recent research has examined whether directed forgetting can be targeted selectively at some, but not all, of the pre-cue information. Three of these studies demonstrated this is possible. For instance, one study demonstrated selectivity of directed forgetting in three experiments using visual (colours) and auditory (words spoken by a female versus male voice) material. In one experiment, list-1 items were spoken either by a male or a female voice, alternating on an item-by-item basis, and the participants were able to forget items selectively based on the gender of the speaker. However, some studies failed to find selective directed forgetting. The reasons for these discrepancies are currently unknown. If directed forgetting is selective, it suggests that the inhibitory processes target dimensions other than temporal context.

To conclude, behavioural and neurophysiological studies indicate that encoding can be disrupted or truncated by an active inhibitory control mechanism that limits the representation of an experience in long-term memory. Similar to inhibitory control in the motor system, where higher-order control regions in the prefrontal cortex suppress activity in lower-order motor regions to stop a movement, the prefrontal cortex targets memory-related structures in the MTL. These processes reduce encoding activity and downregulate long-range neural synchrony to disrupt the formation of unwanted memories.


Inhibitory control at retrieval

Unwanted experiences are often stored in memory, despite efforts to limit encoding. When this happens, limiting awareness becomes a problem of controlling retrieval. Retrieval can of course be prevented by avoiding reminders, which is a common behaviour after an unpleasant event. However, when unwelcome reminders occur, people often try to exclude the unwanted memory from awareness. Stopping retrieval of an unwanted memory is known as ‘retrieval suppression’, a process that engages response override mechanisms formally similar to stopping a reflexive motor action. Retrieval suppression is often studied with the think/no-think paradigm (TNT), which mimics situations when we try to suppress unwelcome remindings.


The TNT paradigm

The TNT procedure mimics situations in which we encounter a reminder to a memory we prefer not to think about, and try to keep the memory out of mind. To create reminders, participants study cue–target pairs (e.g., word pairs, or picture pairs, such as ‘ordeal roach’) and are then trained to recall the second item (roach) of the pair whenever they encounter the first (ordeal) as a reminder. Participants then participate in the TNT phase, in which they are asked to exert control over retrieval. On each trial, reminders from the pairs appear in green or red; when the reminder appears in green, participants are to recall the response, whereas, for red reminders, participants are asked to avoid retrieving the response, preventing it from entering awareness. The key question concerns whether people can recruit inhibition to prevent the memory from intruding into consciousness, and whether doing so disrupts later retention of the unwanted memory.

To measure the effects of retrieval suppression, participants receive a final test in which they are given each reminder and are asked to recall the associated response. Memory performance is compared between items that participants suppressed (no-think trials), items that they retrieved (think trials), and items that they studied, but neither suppressed nor retrieved during the TNT phase (baseline trials). Comparing final recall of no-think items to either think or baseline items indicates whether retrieval suppression affects retention. Comparing no-think to baseline items is more appropriate when trying to establish that suppression makes memory worse, as opposed to merely preventing memory improvement that might arise from repeated reminders.


Behavioural effects of retrieval suppression

The TNT procedure consistently shows that people can limit retrieval. Two main findings support this conclusion. First, suppressing retrieval consistently abolishes the benefits of reminders on memory, as reflected in the sizeable difference in final recall between Think and No-Think items. Thus, at a minimum, suppressing retrieval reduces the facilitation that retrieved memories usually enjoy. Second, suppressing retrieval often reduces recall for No-Think items below that observed for baseline items, a phenomenon known as ‘suppression-induced forgetting’. Suppression-induced forgetting is especially informative because it indicates that, during retrieval suppression, reminders do not merely fail to enhance retention, but trigger processes that impair access to the unwanted memory. These findings highlight a central theme of this article: that one's disposition towards a memory affects how well it is retained. Reminders enhance retention when a person is well disposed towards a memory, but when one has motivations for excluding a memory from awareness, retrieval can be stopped, preventing the benefits of retrieval and further disrupting the memory. These symmetrical effects of reminders indicate a high level of control over the retrieval process, control that shapes accessibility.

Much is now known about suppression-induced forgetting. First, forgetting increases with the number of times a memory is suppressed, indicating that suppression yields cumulative effects. The forgetting effect can be further increased if participants are given time to prepare for suppression, indicating the importance of anticipatory processes. Suppression-induced forgetting arises with many stimuli, including word pairs, face–scene pairs, face–word pairs, word–object pairs, and pairs comprising words and nonsense shapes. Suppression-induced forgetting has even been observed with autobiographical experiences, although suppression impairs memory for event details more than access to the event itself. Some studies have reported a lack of suppression-induced forgetting when it might otherwise be expected (see for a detailed discussion with hypotheses). Forgetting effects occur whether the memory is a neutral or negatively valenced word or scene, although it remains unclear whether forgetting increases, decreases, or is unaffected with negative, compared with neutral valence. Although few studies have examined how long forgetting lasts, one study found that a single suppression session produces forgetting that lasts at least 24 h, with other evidence suggesting that it may dissipate after a week. Suppression-induced forgetting is diminished in young children and older adults, two populations hypothesised to have deficient inhibitory control function. Interestingly, individual differences in participants’ perceptions of their ability to control unwanted thoughts in daily life predict suppression-induced forgetting of aversive scenes.

Suppression-induced forgetting exhibits properties consistent with a role of inhibitory control. For example, the forgetting often generalises to novel test cues. For instance, after studying ordeal–roach, if participants suppress ‘roach’ whenever they receive ‘ordeal’ as a cue, roach will be recalled more poorly, regardless of whether it is tested with ‘Ordeal’ or ‘Insect’. Thus, suppressing a memory reduces its accessibility from a variety of cues, a property known as ‘cue independence’. Cue independence indicates that the forgetting most likely reflects disruption of the suppressed trace itself rather than the particular pathway from the reminder to the trace. This is usually taken as strong evidence for an inhibition process that suppresses the trace (although see for an alternative]. As additional support for an item-specific inhibition process, forgetting has also been found on item recognition tests for both words and abstract shapes. Moreover, the effect even occurs on indirect priming tests, such as perceptual identification: participants who suppress retrieval of visual objects are less likely to identify correctly those objects when they are presented in visual noise. Thus, suppression not only impairs conscious access to unwanted memories, but also affects their unconscious influence, at least on tests of object perception.

Although research on retrieval suppression usually asks people to recall suppressed items intentionally, this arguably does not reflect real-world circumstances. In most cases, people are unlikely to try to recall experiences they were motivated to suppress. A more appropriate measure of the impact of suppression in real terms would measure the tendency to retrieve the suppressed content, rather than the ability to do so. For instance, how likely would people be to respond with the suppressed content on a free association test? Interestingly, on such tests, suppression effects are especially pronounced. This raises the possibility that intentional recall measures underestimate the change in spontaneous retrieval patterns that arise in real life. Changes in retrieval patterns introduced by inhibition may be sustained over the long term by alternative associations that naturally arise in response to reminders. Indeed, asking people to generate alternative associations to a reminder often increases forgetting, compared with not giving specific instructions. However, as noted shortly, thought substitution is not necessary to induce forgetting, and several mechanisms contribute to suppression-induced forgetting.


Neural basis of retrieval suppression

Similar to directed forgetting, stopping retrieval appears to be achieved, in part, by control mechanisms mediated by the prefrontal cortex. Retrieval suppression engages lateral prefrontal cortex, including DLPFC and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) often in the right hemisphere. These regions resemble areas involved in stopping motor actions, suggesting that suppression engages general response override mechanisms to stop retrieval (a point to which we will return). Critically, suppression is accompanied by reduced activity in brain areas linked to episodic recollection. For example, suppression is associated with reduced hippocampal activity, sometimes along with other subregions of the MTL. Given that single-unit electrophysiology and functional neuroimaging have linked hippocampal activity to the presence of retrieved memories in awareness, these findings suggest that inhibitory control interrupts hippocampal retrieval processes to suppress mnemonic awareness. Consistent with this hypothesis, frontohippocampal interactions during suppression have been observed with a range of materials, including words, visual objects, and negatively valenced scenes, suggesting a domain general suppression process.

Although the foregoing pattern suggests that suppression engages the prefrontal cortex to reduce hippocampal activity, reduced activity during no-think trials (relative to think trials) might simply reflect hippocampal engagement during think trials. Thus, rather than showing that suppression terminates retrieval, less hippocampal activity may reflect a passive failure to engage retrieval during no-think trials. However, evidence has grown that inhibitory control reduces hippocampal activation. First, hippocampal activity is also reduced compared with activity during a fixation baseline condition, suggesting that reductions reflect more than an absence of positive activation. Second, DLPFC activation during no-think trials is often negatively correlated with hippocampal activity. Indeed, the magnitude of downregulation and the correlation with DLPFC has in some studies increased over blocks of the TNT phase, suggesting progressively improved hippocampal regulation with practice. Third, reduced hippocampal activity predicts later forgetting of unwanted memories. Finally, effective connectivity analyses show a top-down modulatory influence of DLPFC on the hippocampus, with negative coupling from DLPFC predicting the amount of suppression-induced forgetting. Although the pathways implementing this top-down influence are unknown, some data suggest the cingulum bundle is a plausible candidate for a white matter tract that could support the frontohippocampal interactions underlying suppression. Together, these findings strongly support a role of DLPFC in reducing hippocampal activity, interrupting recollection, and impairing retention. More broadly, they specify a neurobiological model of memory control that provides a framework for understanding disordered control over memory.


Clinical variation in motivated forgetting

Individual differences in memory control may cause either deficient or exaggerated rates of forgetting of life events that we might better understand and remediate with a neurobiological model of memory control.


Deficient memory control

Intrusive memories and thoughts arise in many clinical conditions, such as post-traumatic stress disorder (intrusions), depression (rumination), attention deficit disorder (distracting thoughts), obsessive/compulsive disorder (obsessive thoughts), addiction (craving related thoughts), and anxiety (worries). This symptom may originate from deficient inhibitory control over memory. Supporting this, during retrieval suppression, adults with attention deficit disorder show impaired suppression-induced forgetting, and also diminished modulation of hippocampal activity by DLPFC. Similarly, patients with post-traumatic stress disorder show impaired response inhibition, diminished engagement of lateral prefrontal cortex on response inhibition tasks, and, critically, reduced directed forgetting. Rumination, depression, and anxiety have also been linked to impaired suppression-induced forgetting.

Deficient memory control may reflect compromised function of the networks discussed in this article. For example, disordered control may originate from diminished cortical volume or white matter connectivity between prefrontal cortex and sites of modulation. Deficits in neurotransmitters relating to inhibitory control, such as dopamine, might also underpin disordered control, a possibility supported by work linking genetic variation in dopamine metabolism to memory inhibition. Alternatively, poor memory control may sometimes reflect lack of experience with intrusive memories and, thus, inadequate development of the control process, which may exhibit experience dependent plasticity. For example, after a trauma, cortical thickness in right DLPFC increases significantly over a year, with the size of the increase predicting reduced post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms. Taken together, these findings suggest that both pharmacological and training interventions could be designed to bolster memory control.


Exaggerated memory control

One striking example of motivated forgetting is psychogenic amnesia, in which a person exhibits profound amnesia for large chunks of their personal experiences in the aftermath of an intensely stressful period. Two studies suggest that such cases in part reflect exceptionally effective memory control. One study examined two psychogenic amnesia patients, with amnesia extending years before scanning. Both patients were scanned as they identified faces. Some faces were of strangers (novel faces). Others were of people the patients knew, with half drawn from people they met before their window of amnesia (identifiable faces), and the other half from during the window of time affected by amnesia (unidentifiable faces). Unsurprisingly, patients did not recognise the novel faces, and could recognise all of the identifiable faces. Intriguingly, although neither patient remembered any of the unidentifiable faces, these faces elicited increased activation in right DLPFC and VLPFC, together with reduced activity in the hippocampus, as observed in laboratory studies of retrieval suppression. After treatment, one patient recovered their memories and, upon rescanning, no longer exhibited the suppression pattern. These findings suggest that extreme psychological distress leads retrieval suppression to be engaged involuntarily in reaction to certain stimuli. In an independent study, a patient with psychogenic amnesia was shown to exhibit dramatically magnified suppression-induced forgetting in the TNT procedure, suggesting a link between their condition and suppression ability.


Opposing neural mechanisms underlie direct suppression and thought substitution

Although hippocampal downregulation is a fundamental tool of retrieval suppression, other mechanisms of controlling awareness are possible. For example, people may redirect attention to other thoughts about a reminder. Such diversionary thoughts could either prevent the entrance of the memory into awareness, or replace an intruding memory. Behavioural findings indicate that asking participants to generate thought substitutes for reminders can be effective in inducing forgetting of an unwanted memory. Clearly, however, thought substitution could not involve suppressing retrieval. Given that the substitutes themselves need to be recollected, this approach seems to require the opposite outcome sought with retrieval suppression: the upregulation of retrieval processes.

Recently, the neural mechanisms of thought substitution and inhibition in the TNT procedure have been studied. A thought substitution group was asked to avoid unwanted memories whenever they encountered reminders to them by recalling a thought substitute to distract themselves. However, the direct suppression group was urged not to generate distracting thoughts, but to instead ‘push’ the memory from awareness, if it intruded. Interestingly, although both groups showed similar forgetting, only direct suppression reduced hippocampal activation. Critically, these strategies engaged distinct networks. Whereas direct suppression recruited the right DLPFC region typically associated with retrieval suppression, thought substitution engaged the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) associated with selective retrieval. Effective connectivity analyses revealed that the right DLPFC was negatively coupled with the hippocampus during direct suppression, more so for people who forgot suppressed memories. By contrast, during thought substitution, activation in left caudal IFG predicted greater hippocampal activation during no-think trials, suggesting that it engaged hippocampal retrieval processes to sustain the substitute memory. Thus, two approaches to limiting awareness (suppression and self-distraction) recruited distinct frontohippocampal networks with opposing effects on hippocampal processing.

Direct suppression and thought substitution have also been dissociated electrophysiologically. Prior research has established an ERP component, known as the late positive component (LPC), which is sensitive to the level of episodic recollection and contextual retrieval of a test item. The LPC occurs over parietal scalp sites 400–800 ms after a recognition memory target appears, and is greater for older words than new words. If the LPC indexes recollection, measuring it during no-think trials should reveal a reduced LPC compared with that observed during think trials. This prediction has been confirmed repeatedly with word pairs, picture–word pairs and even negatively valenced face–scene pairs. Interestingly, participants can for the very same items, make the LPC come and go when instructions are changed from retrieval to suppression, suggesting highly efficient control over recollection. Importantly, direct suppression, but not thought substitution, modulates the LPC. Given that thought substitution involves recollecting substitutes (which itself would generate a LPC), the TNT conditions should be (and are) electrophysiologically similar. These findings support the view that direct suppression overrides conscious recollection, and parallel selective reductions of hippocampal activity during direct suppression.


Suppression mechanisms respond to memory intrusions

Intrusions of unwanted memories into awareness appear to have an important role in triggering inhibitory control over memory. For example, reduced hippocampal activity was closely tied to the exclusion of intrusive memories from awareness in a recent study using phenomenological reports. To link intrusions to hippocampal regulation, no-think trials on which an unwanted memory entered participants’ awareness were isolated, and the intrusions were then linked to changes in hippocampal activity. Participants classified their experience after each trial according to whether the cue triggered retrieval of its associated memory. Intrusions elicited strong modulations of hippocampal activity. Although hippocampal downregulation occurred overall during no-think trials, the depth of reduction was pronounced during intrusions, when awareness of the memory needed to be suppressed. Strikingly, the depth of the down-regulation during intrusions strongly predicted suppression-induced forgetting. However, no correlation between downregulation and forgetting arose during nonintrusions, suggesting that reactivation of a memory trace is an important condition for memory disruption. These findings link the purging of unwanted mnemonic awareness to reduced hippocampal activity. Importantly, they also show that intrusions of unwanted memories decline with repeated suppression, highlighting the outcome people seek when suppressing unwelcome remindings.

Intrusive memories seem to leap to mind automatically given reminders. The need to inhibit such automatic retrievals may engage mechanisms that are similar to those used to override reflexive actions. fMRI, behavioural, and EEG evidence supports this possibility. For example, both retrieval suppression and motor inhibition engage right DLPFC and VLPFC, consistent with the similar functional demands posed by the two forms of stopping. Indeed, activation in right lateral prefrontal cortex during retrieval suppression predicts not only later retrieval suppression effects, but also stop signal reaction time on motor tasks. Moreover, participants’ stop signal reaction time predicts the proportion of aversive pictures forgotten after retrieval suppression. Electrophysiological components, such as the N2, are larger during suppression than during retrieval, echoing findings in motor inhibition research, such as the no-go N2 and the stop signal N2. Importantly, larger N2s for no-think items compared to think items are even more pronounced for no-think items that are later forgotten. Strikingly, in one study, the enhanced N2 for no-think trials predicted N2 enhancement during stop-signal trials, even when the tasks were separated by a year. Prior work suggests that the source of the motor no-go N2 is either the anterior cingulate cortex or the lateral prefrontal cortex, consistent with areas involved in retrieval suppression. Intriguingly, biomarkers of executive function know to predict individual differences in motor response inhibition, such as heart rate variability, also predict the magnitude of suppression-induced forgetting. Taken together, these findings suggest that the inhibitory process engaged during retrieval suppression recruits general response inhibition mechanisms, although more precise comparison of these mechanisms is needed. For example, although memory and motor inhibition both often engage right DLPFC and VLPFC, the former has been emphasised more in research on memory inhibition, and the latter, by research on motor inhibition. More work is needed to understand the roles of these two regions in these forms of stopping, and if a supramodal inhibition process exists.


Inhibitory control also modulates regions outside the hippocampus in a content-specific manner

Although inhibitory control downregulates hippocampal activity during retrieval suppression, it also modulates activity in other brain areas, depending on the content being suppressed. For example, when people suppress retrieval of visual objects, downregulation is also observed in fusiform regions known to be critical for perceptual awareness of objects (Bii). Interestingly, on later perceptual identification tests, participants find it more difficult to see previously suppressed objects in visual noise, compared with either baseline or think objects (Ci), showing that motivated forgetting also impairs implicit memory. Echoing this impaired perception, neural aftereffects are observed in the same fusiform cortex regions downregulated during retrieval suppression: no-think objects show reduced neural priming (Cii). Given that neural priming is considered a signature of perceptual memory, this finding suggests that perceptual memory traces were disrupted by inhibitory control. Importantly, reductions in neural priming were well predicted by inhibitory control during the earlier TNT phase: effective connectivity analyses showed that suppressing retrieval led to negative coupling between right DLPFC and fusiform gyrus, the magnitude of which predicted the reduced neural priming in fusiform cortex on the later perception test. Thus, suppressing awareness of visual memories reduced activity not only in the hippocampus, but also in visual cortex, limiting momentary visual consciousness of the objects and disrupting later perceptual memory. This finding complements fMRI and behavioural evidence for mechanisms that purge unwanted contents from visual working memory, illustrating their inhibitory aftereffects on visual neocortex.

In the foregoing study, inhibitory control may target visual object regions to reduce reactivation arising from intrusive memories, reactivation that may arise through recurrent connections from the hippocampus. This possibility suggests a broad principle of memory control: when reminders evoke activity in content-specific areas, those areas will be targeted by control, affecting content in those regions. Suppressing emotional memories may provide a second example. When a memory elicits a strong emotional response, regions involved in affect may be suppressed. Consistent with this, suppressing aversive scenes (e.g., violence and death) reduces activity in both the hippocampus and the amygdala (although). Reducing activity in the amygdala could disrupt emotional learning associated with the event, much like hippocampal or fusiform modulation disrupts episodic memory or object priming, respectively. Such modulation may contribute to the widely observed fading affect bias in autobiographical memory. However, because it remains unknown whether DLPFC is effectively connected with the amygdala during suppression, reduced activity may instead be a passive side effect of downregulating recollective activity in the hippocampus, and the resulting exclusion of the unpleasant memory from awareness. However, even given this possibility, reduced amygdala activity may reflect success at achieving a central goal of motivated forgetting in many real-life circumstances: reduced negative affect arising from the successful voluntary control of mnemonic awareness.


Motives for motivated forgetting

Below is a sampling of motives that may trigger motivated forgetting, illustrating the breadth of contexts in which these neural mechanisms are likely to operate.


Regulating negative affect

Memories that evoke fear, anger, sadness, guilt, shame, anxiety, and embarrassment trigger people to regulate their emotions by suppressing offending memories. In the short term, emotion regulation helps to reduce negative feelings, returning to a state of homeostasis. In the long term, this may contribute to the reliably reduced frequency of negative autobiographical memories compared with positive ones for most people. It may also contribute to the fading affect bias, wherein affect associated with negative memories fades more rapidly than other affective content.


Justifying inappropriate behaviour

People sometimes engage in dishonest acts that conflict with their desire to be moral. This dissonance creates discomfort that people may reduce via motivated forgetting. In experimental settings, people show increased forgetting of moral rules after behaving dishonestly (e.g., cheating) even though they are equally likely to remember morally irrelevant rules as participants who do not cheat.


Maintaining beliefs and attitudes

People's beliefs are often resistant to contradictory evidence. This resilience may be supported by selectively forgetting information not congenial to one's beliefs. For example, republicans and democrats show enhanced directed forgetting for attitude statements that are incongruent with their beliefs, compared with congruent statements. Moreover, one's memory can be shaped by selectively recounting elements of an event, a form of thought substitution. Intriguingly, this can undermine listeners’ memories of the omitted facts, a phenomenon called ‘socially shared retrieval-induced forgetting’.


Deceiving others and oneself

Memory inhibition may contribute to creating a state of false belief, necessary to deceive others and even oneself. Consistent with this, people can use retrieval suppression to disguise guilty knowledge of a crime when confronting reminders to the crime event, effectively eliminating EEG markers of recollection.


Preserving self image

People protect their self-image by selectively remembering feedback consistent with positive traits and forgetting that which threatens their sense of self. This robust ‘mnemic neglect’ effect arises despite holding encoding time constant, and is only present for encoding traits in relation to oneself, not others. Mnemic neglect is markedly attenuated, if, before encoding, people receive positive, self-enhancing feedback on a separate task, reducing their urge for self-protection.


Forgiving others

Interpersonal relations are sometimes accompanied by the need to forgive relationship partners for offenses that provoke anger. Individual differences in forgiveness are well predicted by inhibitory control ability, and it has been argued that memory inhibition may be key in overcoming rumination about transgressions. Forgiving and forgetting may indeed be closely related.


Maintaining attachment

The need to maintain an attachment relationship with a parent, guardian, or powerful authority figure (e.g., a boss) may be essential to survive or thrive in an environment. Behaviours that promote good relations or attachment to the influential individual may motivate selective remembering of experiences compatible with attachment, and forgetting of those that are incompatible. Betrayal trauma theory, for example, posits that motivated forgetting of childhood abuse by a trusted caretaker is driven by this attachment need.

However, the paradigms discussed here differ from real-life circumstances in important ways. No directed forgetting or retrieval suppression paradigm, for example, captures the natural motivations that people have for suppressing awareness of memories that they find personally unwelcome. Although the neural mechanisms identified here likely implement motivated forgetting ‘in the wild’, this work may underestimate the impact on retention for someone with a true sustained motive. Understanding the effects of personal motivation will likely entail a step away from controlled materials, towards autobiographical experiences unique to an individual. However, for now, the fundamental control processes that limit mnemonic processing are emerging, and will inform our view of how people wilfully shape retention of their personal experiences.


Concluding remarks

In this article, we reviewed evidence for the active role that people have in shaping retention. We focussed in particular on the function of inhibitory control processes in modulating the efficacy of memory processes at both encoding and retrieval. If, upon encoding an experience, people intentionally exclude the event from awareness, retention of the experience is impaired, compared with cases in which they intend to remember the event. Although this deficit arises from several sources, one factor is the termination of encoding by inhibition, and the disruption of episodic traces formed up until that point. Similarly, upon encountering reminders to existing memories, people can engage inhibitory control to stop retrieval. In both encoding and retrieval suppression, multiple sources of evidence indicate that control mechanisms mediated by the prefrontal cortex interrupt mnemonic function and impair memory. Thus, excluding unwanted memories from awareness does not merely deprive experiences of further rehearsal, it contributes to forgetting by disrupting the suppressed memory. However, much remains to be understood about the pathways and neural mechanisms of this suppression.


Active inference, communication and hermeneutics

Karl J. Friston, Christopher D. Frith — Cortex; a Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System and Behavior, 2015. PMC4502445, CC BY 4.0.

Hermeneutics refers to interpretation and translation of text (typically ancient scriptures) but also applies to verbal and non-verbal communication. In a psychological setting it nicely frames the problem of inferring the intended content of a communication. In this paper, we offer a solution to the problem of neural hermeneutics based upon active inference. In active inference, action fulfils predictions about how we will behave (e.g., predicting we will speak). Crucially, these predictions can be used to predict both self and others – during speaking and listening respectively. Active inference mandates the suppression of prediction errors by updating an internal model that generates predictions – both at fast timescales (through perceptual inference) and slower timescales (through perceptual learning). If two agents adopt the same model, then – in principle – they can predict each other and minimise their mutual prediction errors. Heuristically, this ensures they are singing from the same hymn sheet. This paper builds upon recent work on active inference and communication to illustrate perceptual learning using simulated birdsongs. Our focus here is the neural hermeneutics implicit in learning, where communication facilitates long-term changes in generative models that are trying to predict each other. In other words, communication induces perceptual learning and enables others to (literally) change our minds and vice versa.


Introduction

The term hermeneutics refers to the art of interpreting written texts such as holy scriptures. The key problem for hermeneutics rests on developing criteria for deciding when an interpretation is correct. This problem is not restricted to the interpretation of ancient texts. When talking to you, I cannot access your mind to check whether my interpretation of what you have just said corresponds to what you meant. I can invent a coherent story or narrative, but I can never independently verify my interpretations (Frith & Wentzer, 2013). Nevertheless, people seem to understand each other most the time. How is this achieved? In this paper, we suggest the criteria for evaluating and updating my interpretation of your behaviour are exactly the same criteria that underlie action and perception in general; namely, the minimisation of prediction error or (variational) free energy.

In a companion paper (Friston and Frith, 2015), we considered communication in terms of inference about others, based on the notion that we model and predict our sensations – sensations that are generated by other agents like ourselves. This leads to a view of communication based on a generative model or narrative that is shared by agents who exchange sensory signals. Given a shared narrative, communication can then be cast as turn taking (Wilson & Wilson, 2005), by selectively attending and attenuating sensory information. Attending to exteroceptive sensations enables the shared narrative to predict the sensory input generated by another (while listening). Conversely, attenuating exteroceptive input enables one to articulate the narrative by realising proprioceptive predictions (while speaking). Using simulations, we demonstrated this turn taking by assuming that both agents possessed the same generative model. In this paper, we consider how and why generative models learned by agents – who exchange sensory signals – become the same (shared) model.

Our underlying premise is that we are trying to model the causes of our sensations – and adjust those models to maximise Bayesian model evidence or, equivalently, minimise surprise (Brown & Brün, 2012; Kilner, Friston, & Frith, 2007). This perspective on action and perception has broad explanatory power in several areas of cognitive neuroscience – and enjoys support from several lines of neuroanatomical and neurophysiological evidence (Egner & Summerfield, 2013; Rao & Ballard, 1999; Srinivasan, Laughlin, & Dubs, 1982). In communication and the interpretation of intent, the very notion of theory of mind speaks directly to inference, in the sense that theories make predictions that have to be tested against (sensory) data. Imagine two brains, each mandated to model the (external) states of the world causing sensory input. Now imagine that sensations can only be caused by (the action of) one brain on the other. This means that the first brain has to model the second. However, the second brain is modelling the first, which means the first brain must have a model of the second brain, which includes a model of the first – and so on ad infinitum. At first glance, the implicit infinite regress appears to preclude a veridical modelling of another's brain. However, this infinite regress dissolves if each brain models the sensations caused by itself and the other as being generated in the same way. In other words, if there is a shared narrative or dynamic that both brains subscribe to, then they can predict each other exactly – at least for short periods of time. This is the basic idea that we pursue in the context of active inference and predictive coding.

In our previous paper, we focused on the dynamical phenomena that emerge when two dynamical systems try to predict each other. Mathematically, this dynamical coupling is called generalised synchrony (aka synchronisation of chaos) (Barreto, Josic, Morales, Sander, & So, 2003; Hunt, Ott, & Yorke, 1997). Generalised synchrony was famously observed by Huygens in his studies of pendulum clocks – that synchronized themselves through the imperceptible motion of beams from which they were suspended (Huygens, 1673). This nicely illustrates the action at a distance among coupled dynamical systems. Put simply, generalised synchronisation means that knowing the state of one system (e.g., neuronal activity in the brain) means one can predict the another system (e.g., another's brain).

We will consider a special case of generalized synchronization; namely, identical synchronization, in which there is a one-to-one relationship between the states of two systems. Identical synchronisation emerges when the systems that are coupled are the same. In the context of active inference, this means the two generative models are identical. But why should two agents have the same generative model? The answer is rather obvious – when they share the same generative model they can predict each other more accurately and minimise their prediction errors or surprise. The key point here is that the same principle that leads to generalised synchrony also applies to the selection or learning of the model generating predictions. This learning is the focus of the current paper, which provides an illustrative proof of principle that the hermeneutic cycle can be closed by simply updating generative models and their predictions to minimise prediction errors. Crucially, these prediction errors can be computed without ever knowing the true state of another; thereby solving the problem of hermeneutics.

The treatment of communication in this paper is rather abstract and borrows mathematical concepts from dynamical systems theory. Although we will use birdsong as a vehicle to illustrate the ideas, we do not pretend this is a meaningful model of linguistic communication (or indeed songbirds). Rather, we try to understand the dynamic coordination of richly structured behaviours, such as singing and dancing, without ascribing any (semantic) meaning or syntax to sensory exchanges. Having said this, there is growing interest in applying the principles of predictive coding to language: e.g., (Arnal & Giraud, 2012; Hickok, 2013; Pickering & Clark, 2014; Wang, Mathalon, et al., 2014) – and understanding the algebra of dynamical systems in terms of communication; e.g., (Scott-Phillips & Blythe, 2013). Furthermore, predictive coding is starting to shed light on spectral asymmetries – in coupling within the auditory hierarchy – evident in electrophysiological studies of speech processing (Arnal, Wyart, & Giraud, 2011).

This paper comprises five sections. The first sections reprise the material in (Friston and Frith, 2015), which provides a brief review of active inference and predictive coding in communication. In the second section, we described the particular (birdsong) model used to illustrate communicative inference. This model has been used previously to illustrate several phenomena in perception; such as perceptual learning, repetition suppression, and the recognition of stimulus streams with deep hierarchical structure (Friston & Kiebel, 2009; Kiebel, Daunizeau, & Friston, 2008). In the third section, we provide a simple illustration of omission related responses – that are ubiquitous in neurophysiology and illustrate the basic nature of predictive coding. In the fourth section, we use this model to simulate two (identical) birds that are singing to themselves (and each other) and examine the conditions under which generalised synchrony emerges. In the final section, we repeat the simulations using two birds that start off with different generative models. We will see that perceptual learning produces a convergence of the two generative models over time – leading to the emergence of generalised synchrony and implicit communication. We offer this as a solution to the problem of hermeneutic inference that can be resolved by neuronally plausible schemes – with the single imperative to minimise prediction error or free energy.


Active inference and predictive coding

Recent advances in theoretical neuroscience have produced a paradigm shift in cognitive neuroscience. This shift is away from the brain as a passive filter of sensations – or an elaborate stimulus-response link – towards a view of the brain as an organ that generates hypotheses or fantasies (fantastic: from Greek phantastikos, the ability to create mental images, from phantazesthai), which are tested against sensory evidence (Gregory, 1968). This perspective dates back to the notion of unconscious inference (Helmholtz, 1866/1962) and has been formalised to cover deep or hierarchical Bayesian inference – about the causes of our sensations – and how these inferences induce beliefs, movement and behaviour (Clark, 2013; Dayan, Hinton, & Neal, 1995; Friston, Kilner, & Harrison, 2006; Hohwy, 2013; Lee & Mumford, 2003).


Predictive coding and the Bayesian brain

Modern formulations of the Bayesian brain – such as predictive coding – are now among the most popular explanations for neuronal message passing (Clark, 2013; Friston, 2008; Rao & Ballard, 1999; Srinivasan et al., 1982). Predictive coding is a biologically plausible process theory for which there is a considerable amount of anatomical and physiological evidence. In these schemes, neuronal representations – in higher levels of cortical hierarchies – generate predictions of representations in lower levels (Friston, 2008; Mumford, 1992; Rao & Ballard, 1999). These top-down predictions are compared with representations at the lower level to form a prediction error (usually associated with the activity of superficial pyramidal cells). The resulting mismatch signal is passed back up the hierarchy to update higher representations (associated with the activity of deep pyramidal cells). This recursive exchange of signals suppresses prediction error at each and every level to provide a hierarchical explanation for sensory inputs that enter at the lowest (sensory) level. In computational terms, neuronal activity encodes beliefs or probability distributions over states in the world that cause sensations (e.g., my visual sensations are caused by a face). The simplest encoding corresponds to representing the belief with the expected value or expectation of a (hidden) cause. These causes are referred to as hidden because they have to be inferred from their sensory consequences.

In summary, predictive coding represents a biologically plausible scheme for updating beliefs about states of the world using sensory samples: see. In this setting, cortical hierarchies are a neuroanatomical embodiment of how sensory signals are generated; for example, a face generates surfaces that generate textures and edges and so on, down to retinal input. This form of hierarchical inference explains a large number of anatomical and physiological facts as reviewed elsewhere (Adams, Shipp, & Friston, 2013; Bastos et al., 2012; Friston, 2008). In brief, it explains the hierarchical nature of cortical connections; the prevalence of backward connections and many of the functional and structural asymmetries in the extrinsic connections that link hierarchical levels (Zeki & Shipp, 1988). These asymmetries include the laminar specificity of forward and backward connections, the prevalence of nonlinear or modulatory backward connections and their spectral characteristics – with fast (e.g., gamma) activity predominating in forward connections and slower (e.g., beta) frequencies that accumulate evidence (prediction errors) ascending from lower levels.


Precision engineered message passing

One can regard ascending prediction errors as broadcasting ‘newsworthy’ information that has yet to be explained by descending predictions. However, the brain has to select the channels it listens to – by adjusting the volume or gain of prediction errors that compete to update expectations in higher levels. Computationally, this gain corresponds to the precision or confidence associated with ascending prediction errors. However, to select prediction errors the brain has to estimate and encode their precision (i.e., inverse variance). Having done this, prediction errors can then be weighted by their precision so that only precise information is assimilated at high or deep hierarchical levels. The dynamic and context-sensitive control of precision has been associated with attentional gain control in sensory processing (Feldman & Friston, 2010; Jiang, Summerfield, & Egner, 2013) and has been discussed in terms of affordance in active inference and action selection (Cisek, 2007; Frank, Scheres, & Sherman, 2007; Friston et al., 2012). Crucially, the delicate balance of precision at different hierarchical levels has a profound effect on veridical inference – and may also offer a formal understanding of false inference in psychopathology (Adams, Stephan, Brown, Frith & Friston, 2013; Fletcher & Frith, 2009).

In (Friston and Frith, 2015) we illustrated the role of precision in mediating sensory attenuation and its necessary role in enabling (open loop) motor control during action. See also (Brown, Adams, Parees, Edwards, & Friston, 2013). In brief, this leads to an alternation between sensory attention and attenuation in the action–perception cycle, which involves a temporary suspension of attention to the consequences of acting during the act itself: see (Numminen, Salmelin, & Hari, 1999). We will use the same approach in this paper to model turn taking (Wilson & Wilson, 2005) in the switching between speaking (singing) and listening.


Active inference

Hitherto, we have only considered the role of predictive coding in perception through minimising surprise or prediction errors. However, there is another way to minimise prediction errors; namely, by re-sampling sensory inputs so that they conform to predictions: in other words, changing sensory inputs by changing the world through action. This is known as active inference (Friston, Mattout, & Kilner, 2011). In active inference, action is regarded as the fulfilment of descending proprioceptive predictions by classical reflex arcs. In other words, we believe that we will execute a goal-directed movement and this belief is unpacked hierarchically to provide proprioceptive, and exteroceptive predictions generated from our generative or forward model. These predictions are then fulfilled automatically by minimizing proprioceptive prediction errors at the level of the spinal cord and cranial nerve nuclei: see (Adams, Shipp, et al., 2013) and. Mechanistically, descending proprioceptive predictions provide a target or set point for peripheral reflex arcs – that respond by minimising (proprioceptive) prediction errors.


Perception and learning

The preceding aspects of active inference are concerned with expectations about hidden states and causes of sensations and how these expectations minimise prediction error. However, exactly the same arguments apply to the parameters of generative models. Model parameters are quantities that do not change over time and encode causal regularities and associations. Formally, these are the parameters of the functions in. Neurobiologically, the parameters of a generative model are thought to be encoded by synaptic connection strengths and their Bayesian updates look very much like (experience-dependent) associative plasticity that mediates short and long-term changes in synaptic connectivity: see the and (Friston, 2008) for details. The distinction between states and parameters of generative models induces the distinction between perceptual inference and learning that proceed over different timescales. Because parameters do not change with time, they accumulate prediction errors over time and are therefore updated at a slower timescale. Equipped with a formal description of perceptual inference and learning, we can now examine the nature of communication using simulations for any given generative model. In the next section, we will apply the computational scheme above to a model of auditory exchange between two systems that are actively trying to infer each other.


Birdsong and attractors

This section introduces the simulations of birdsong that we will use to illustrate active inference and communication in subsequent sections. The basic idea here is that the environment unfolds as an ordered sequence of states, whose equations of motion induce attractor manifolds that contain sensory trajectories. If we consider the brain has a generative model of these trajectories, then we would expect to see attractors in neuronal dynamics that are trying to predict sensory input. This form of generative model has a number of plausible characteristics:

Models based upon attractors can generate and therefore encode structured sequences of events, as states flow over different parts of the attractor manifold (a subset of states to which the flow is attracted). These sequences can be simple, such as the quasi-periodic attractors of central pattern generators or can exhibit complicated sequences of the sort associated with itinerant dynamics (Breakspear & Stam, 2005; Rabinovich, Huerta, & Laurent, 2008). Furthermore, hierarchically deployed attractors enable the brain to predict or represent sequences of sequences. This is because any low-level attractor embodies a family of trajectories. A natural example here would be language (Jackendoff, 2002). This means it is possible to generate and represent sequences of sequences and, by induction sequences of sequences of sequences etc. This rests upon the states of neuronal attractors at any cortical level providing control parameters for attractor dynamics at the level below (Kiebel, von Kriegstein, Daunizeau, & Friston, 2009). In the example below, we will show how attractor dynamics furnish generative models of sensory input, which behave much like real brains, when measured electrophysiologically.

We first reproduce the simulations reported in (Friston and Frith, 2015) to illustrate the basic nature of the generalised synchrony induced by predictive coding. We then present new results showing that the acquisition of this synchrony emerges naturally, when two predictive coding schemes try to predict each other. This acquisition resolves the hermeneutic problem by underwriting online inference about the causes of shared sensory consequences. A more detailed description of the birdsong model can be found in (Friston & Kiebel, 2009).


A synthetic songbird

The example used here deals with the generation and recognition of birdsongs. We imagine that birdsongs are produced by two time-varying states that control the frequency and amplitude of vibrations of the syrinx of a songbird. There is an extensive modelling effort using attractor models to understand the generation of birdsong at the biomechanical level (Mindlin & Laje, 2005). Here, we use attractors to provide time-varying control over the resulting sonograms. We drive the syrinx with two states of a Lorenz attractor, one controlling the frequency (between two to five KHz) and the other controlling the amplitude or volume. The parameters of the Lorenz attractor were chosen to generate a short sequence of chirps every few hundred milliseconds or so. The Lorenz form for these dynamics is a somewhat arbitrary choice but provides a ubiquitous model of chaotic dynamics in the physical (Poland, 1993) and biological (de Boer & Perelson, 1991) sciences.

To give the generative model a hierarchical structure, we placed a second Lorenz attractor, whose dynamics were an order of magnitude slower, over the first. The first state of the slow (extrasensory) attractor provided a control parameter for the fast (sensory) attractor generating the sonogram. In fluid dynamics, this control parameter is known as a Rayleigh number and reflects the degree of convective or turbulent flow, which we will associate with dynamical prosody. In other words, the state of the slower attractor changes the manifold of the fast attractor. This manifold could range from a fixed-point attractor, where the states collapse to zero; through to quasi-periodic and chaotic behaviour associated with a high Rayleigh number. Because higher states evolve more slowly, they modulate the chaotic behaviour of the sensory attractor, generating songs, where each song comprises a series of distinct chirps. As shown in, the Rayleigh number linking hierarchical levels depends on a model parameter θ that controls the influence of the higher attractor over the lower attractor. High values of this parameter increase the dynamical prosody of the song (inducing successive bifurcations:). We will use this parameter later to demonstrate perceptual learning and closure of the hermeneutic circle.


Omission and violation of predictions

To illustrate the predictive nature of predictive coding, perceptual inference was simulated by integrating the above scheme. Formal details of the generative model and integration scheme are provided in the equations in and the respectively. A more detailed description of this simulation can be found in a companion paper (Friston and Frith, 2015). In brief, a sonogram was produced using the above composition of Lorentz attractors (with θ = 1) and played to a synthetic bird – who tried to infer the underlying hidden states of the sensory and extrasensory attractors (associated with the HVC and area X respectively). Crucially, we presented two songs to the bird, with and without the final chirps. The corresponding sonograms and percepts (predictions) are shown with their prediction errors in.

The left panels show the stimulus and percept, while the right panels show the stimulus and responses to omission of the last chirps. These results illustrate two important phenomena. First, there is a vigorous expression of prediction error after the song terminates prematurely. This reflects the dynamical nature of inference because, at this point, there is no sensory input to predict. In other words, the prediction error is generated entirely by descending predictions. It can be seen that this prediction error (with a percept but no stimulus) is larger than the prediction error associated with the third and fourth chirps that are not perceived (stimulus but no percept). Second, there is a transient percept when the omitted chirp should have occurred. As noted in (Friston and Frith, 2015), this simulation of omission-related responses as measured with ERPs (Bendixen, SanMiguel, & Schröger, 2012) is particularly interesting, given that non-invasive electromagnetic signals arise largely from superficial pyramidal cells. These are the cells thought to encode prediction error (Bastos et al., 2012).


A Duet for one

We now turn to the perceptual coupling or communication by simulating two birds that can hear themselves (and each other). Each bird listened for 2 sec, with a low proprioceptive and a high exteroceptive precision (log-precisions of −8 and 2 respectively) and then sang for 2 sec, with high proprioceptive and attenuated auditory precision (log-precisions of 0 and -2 respectively). The log-precisions at the higher level were fixed at 4. Crucially, when one bird was singing the other was listening. This turn taking (Wilson & Wilson, 2005) is a natural consequence of active inference because attending to the consequences of action interferes with descending predictions about movement – predictions that are generated before their consequences are evident. There are many examples of the implicit sensory attenuation during self-made acts (Hughes, Desantis, & Waszak, 2013). A physiological illustration can be found in (Agnew, McGettigan, Banks, & Scott, 2013), who show that articulatory movements attenuate auditory responses to speech using fMRI. Furthermore, recent TMS studies suggest that the motor system plays an explicit role in semantic comprehension (Schomers, Kirilina, Weigand, Bajbouj, & Pulvermuller, 2014). We illustrated the importance of sensory attenuation in the context of simulated birdsong in (Friston and Frith, 2015) by showing sensorimotor delays – implicit in articulating a song – destroy the songs dynamical prosody. This means, the birds can only listen or sing but not do both at the same time.

We initialised the simulations with random expectations. This meant that if the birds cannot hear each other, the chaotic dynamics implicit in their generative models causes their expectations to follow divergent trajectories, as shown in. However, if we move the birds within earshot, so that they can hear each other, they synchronise almost immediately. See. This is because the listening bird is immediately entrained by the singing bird to correctly infer the hidden (dynamical) states generating sensations. At the end of the first period of listening, the posterior expectations of both birds approach identical synchrony, which enables the listening bird to take up the song, following on from where the other bird left off. This process has many of the hallmarks of interactive alignment in the context of joint action and dialogue (Garrod & Pickering, 2009).

Note that the successive epochs of song are not identical. In other words, the birds are not simply repeating what they have heard – they are pursuing a narrative prescribed by the dynamical attractors (central pattern generators) in their generative models that have been synchronised through sensory exchange. The example in highlights the fact that the songs articulated by both birds have a rich dynamical vocabulary (including frequency glides, low frequency warbles and amplitude modulated chirps) that is anticipated and reciprocated during the exchange. This means that the birds are singing from the same hymn sheet, preserving sequential and hierarchical structure in their shared narrative. It is this phenomenon – due simply to generalised (in this case identical) synchronisation – that we associate with communication.

Technically speaking, this simulation of communication shows that two identical dynamical systems – that are predicting each other – necessarily show identical synchronisation. In the language of measure-preserving dynamical systems, generalised synchronisation implies the existence of a random dynamical attractor called a synchronisation manifold. The synchronisation manifold is just a set of states to which states are attracted to and thereafter occupy. The simplest example of a synchronisation manifold would be the identity line on a graph plotting homologous states from each system against each other (e.g., the dashed line in). This corresponds to identical synchronisation. Crucially, the attractor (which contains the synchronisation manifold) generally has a low measure or volume. A measure of the attractor's volume is provided by its measure theoretic entropy (Sinai, 1959). Although formally distinct from information theoretic entropy, both reflect the volume of the attracting set or manifold. This means that minimising prediction errors or free energy (information theoretic entropy) reduces the volume (measure theoretic entropy) of the random dynamical attractor (synchronisation manifold); thereby inducing generalised synchrony. The synchronisation in the example above is identical because both birds share the same generative model. In the next section, we will illustrate generalised synchronisation using simulations were the birds have different models – and how they learn each other's model to produce identical synchronisation.


Closing the hermeneutic cycle

In this final section, we consider how shared narratives emerge as a natural consequence of perceptual learning driven by, and only by, the minimisation of prediction errors or free energy. Using free energy minimisation, Yildiz, von Kriegstein, and Kiebel (2013) have shown that a hierarchy of nonlinear dynamical systems can learn speech samples rapidly and recognize them robustly, even in adverse conditions. Here, we pursue the same theme but when two birds learn from each other; specifically focussing on sensorimotor learning during which individuals learn to vocalise: see Bolhuis & Gahr (2006) for discussion of birdsong learning. In brief, we repeated the above simulations but reduced the first bird's parameter. This reduces the sensitivity to top-down modulation and suppresses the prosody and richness of the lower attractor. This introduces an asymmetry that precludes identical synchronisation and induces prediction errors that drive learning. This learning corresponds to (epoch by epoch) changes in the posterior expectations of the parameter. In principle, when and only when the parameters are the same is prediction error (free energy) minimised; at which point identical synchronisation should emerge. This effectively closes the hermeneutic cycle to enable precise communication.

Technically, this sort of perceptual learning is a difficult problem and it took us several tries to find a parameterisation that could be learned efficiently. This is because the inference scheme has to estimate unknown parameters in the context of hidden states that also have to be inferred. Furthermore, the generative model is not only dynamical and nonlinear but chaotic. The example we chose is fairly arbitrary but sufficient to show that a biologically plausible inference scheme can solve this class of learning problem. Our particular parameterisation focuses on the link between the sensory and extrasensory attractors and can therefore be regarded as a translation of a narrative into a dynamical vocabulary. This means that our two birds start off with a different mapping between (the same) high-level narrative and the way it is articulated. To understand each other, they have to learn each other's mapping (i.e., vocabulary).

In detail, the first bird's parameter was reduced to θ = 0.5, while leaving the second bird's parameter at θ = 1. This means the second bird retained a rich prosody, in relation to the first. After each bird sang to the other, their parameters were updated using a simple form of Bayesian belief updating: the prior expectation was replaced by the posterior expectation (retaining a prior precision of 64). The results of this learning are shown in. The upper panel shows the trajectory of the parameter for both birds over 32 (1 sec) exchanges. It can be seen that the parameters of both birds converge towards each other, so that they both come to articulate a relatively rich sequence of songs. With successive exchanges, the parameter of the first bird (blue line) approaches that of the second bird (green line) and synchronisation emerges (lower right panel). The excursions from the synchronisation manifold during the first exchange highlight the initial difficulties the birds have in predicting each other fluently.

This acquisition and maintenance of this rich discourse can be contrasted with the equivalent learning when the birds cannot hear each other. The resulting trajectories are shown as dashed lines and demonstrate that both birds lose the capacity to maintain their Rayleigh number or dynamical prosody. This is because learning occurs predominantly during listening, when the precision of auditory prediction errors (that drive learning) is not attenuated: note the step-like changes in the parameters. However, when they are listening, each bird only hears silence, which is best explained by an attractor with a Rayleigh number of zero. In this situation, both birds emit progressively simpler, low-frequency warbles that disappear by about the 16th exchange (results not shown).

Taken together, these simulations illustrate the circular causality inherent in communicative inference and learning. In other words, one needs to infer or predict a structured sensory exchange before learning can occur; while learning is necessary to render sensory exchanges predictable. Furthermore, although the second bird appears to teach the first bird when they hear each other, both are teaching each other – as evidenced by the fact that the second bird ‘forgot’ how to sing when it could not hear the first. The simulations should not be taken as proof of concept of these points; they simply illustrate the sorts of phenomena that can emerge when dynamical systems are trying to predict and learn from each other.


Conclusion

The treatment above builds on the ideas introduced by (Friston and Frith, 2015); namely, that generalised synchrony – or synchronisation of chaos – provides a formal metaphor for communication and is a natural consequence of active inference. The contribution of the current paper is to show that the same principle (minimisation of free energy or prediction error), also explains the convergent evolution of hierarchical models that generate mutually sympathetic predictions. We have considered this convergence in terms of perceptual learning that closes the hermeneutic cycle.

There are many issues that we have not considered in the domain of neural hermeneutics and communication. Among these is the possibility that we are equipped with multiple generative models that can be deployed depending upon the situation in which we find ourselves, or the person that we are communicating with. In this instance, the selection of an appropriate generative model – that approximates the model selected by you – would be better understood in terms of Bayesian model selection or averaging (FitzGerald, Dolan, & Friston, 2014). This is an interesting possibility that speaks to inferring the context in which we are communicating and who we are communicating with. This represents another (hierarchical) inference problem. The model selection perspective is interesting because, if correct, it implies a multilateral internal model of how we behave that is entirely dependent upon who we are communicating with. In turn, this begs the question of agency and how it is represented in generative models. For example, if our conceptual narratives are context-sensitive and truly shared, am I the same person (in my mind) when speaking to you, as opposed to somebody else? Furthermore, if I do not have a narrative (or appropriate mapping to a vocabulary) that corresponds to your narrative (or mapping), will I ever be able to communicate with you? This is where perceptual learning comes into its own; enabling the acquisition of new narratives (and vocabularies) or repurposing of existing models; e.g., (Adank, Hagoort, & Bekkering, 2010; Skoe, Krizman, Spitzer, & Kraus, 2014). However – as anyone who has tried to learn a foreign language can testify – learning can be a difficult and slow process, especially for Englishmen like us.


Conflict of interest statement

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


A meta-analysis of threats to valid clinical inference in preclinical research of sunitinib

Valerie C Henderson, Nadine Demko, Amanda Hakala, Nathalie MacKinnon, Carole A Federico, Dean Fergusson, Jonathan Kimmelman, M Dawn Teare — eLife, 2015. PMC4600817, CC BY 4.0.

Poor study methodology leads to biased measurement of treatment effects in preclinical research. We used available sunitinib preclinical studies to evaluate relationships between study design and experimental tumor volume effect sizes. We identified published animal efficacy experiments where sunitinib monotherapy was tested for effects on tumor volume. Effect sizes were extracted alongside experimental design elements addressing threats to valid clinical inference. Reported use of practices to address internal validity threats was limited, with no experiments using blinded outcome assessment. Most malignancies were tested in one model only, raising concerns about external validity. We calculate a 45% overestimate of effect size across all malignancies due to potential publication bias. Pooled effect sizes for specific malignancies did not show apparent relationships with effect sizes in clinical trials, and we were unable to detect dose–response relationships. Design and reporting standards represent an opportunity for improving clinical inference.

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.08351.001

Research organism: mouse, rat

Developing a new drug can take years, partly because preclinical research on non-human animals is required before any clinical trials with humans can take place. Nevertheless, only a fraction of cancer drugs that are put into clinical trials after showing promising results in preclinical animal studies end up proving safe and effective in human beings.

Many researchers and commentators have suggested that this high failure rate reflects flaws in the way preclinical studies in cancer are designed and reported. Now, Henderson et al. have looked at all the published animal studies of a cancer drug called sunitinib and asked how well the design of these studies attempted to limit bias and match the clinical scenarios they were intended to represent.

This systematic review and meta-analysis revealed that many common practices, like randomization, were rarely implemented. None of the published studies used ‘blinding’, whereby information about which animals are receiving the drug and which animals are receiving the control is kept from the experimenter, until after the test; this technique can help prevent any expectations or personal preferences from biasing the results. Furthermore, most tumors were tested in only one model system, namely, mice that had been injected with specific human cancer cells. This makes it difficult to rule out that any anti-cancer activity was in fact unique to that single model.

Henderson et al. went on to find evidence that suggests that the anti-cancer effects of sunitinib might have been overestimated by as much as 45% because those studies that found no or little anti-cancer effect were simply not published. Though it is known that the anti-cancer activity of the drug increases with the dose given in both human beings and animals, an evaluation of the effects of all the published studies combined did not detect such a dose-dependent response.

The poor design and reporting issues identified provide further grounds for concern about the value of many preclinical experiments in cancer. These findings also suggest that there are many opportunities for improving the design and reliability of study reports. Researchers studying certain medical conditions (such as strokes) have already developed, and now routinely implement, a set of standards for the design and reporting of preclinical research. It now appears that the cancer research community should do the same.

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.08351.002


Introduction

Preclinical experiments provide evidence of clinical promise, inform trial design, and establish the ethical basis for exposing patients to a new substance. However, preclinical research is plagued by poor design and reporting practices (van der Worp et al., 2010; Begley, 2013a; Begley and Ioannidis, 2015). Recent reports also suggest that many effects in preclinical studies fail replication (Begley and Ellis, 2012). Drug development efforts grounded on non-reproducible findings expose patients to harmful and inactive agents; they also absorb scarce scientific and human resources, the costs of which are reflected as higher drug prices.

Several studies have evaluated the predictive value of animal models in cancer drug development (Johnson et al., 2001; Voskoglou-Nomikos et al., 2003; Corpet and Pierre, 2005). However, few have systematically examined experimental design—as opposed to use of specific models—and its impact on effect sizes across different malignancies (Amarasingh et al., 2009; Hirst et al., 2013). A recent systematic review of guidelines for limiting bias in preclinical research design was unable to identify any guidelines in oncology (Henderson et al., 2013). Validity threats in preclinical oncology may be particularly important to address in light of the fact that cancer drug development has one of the highest rates of attrition (Hay et al., 2014), and oncology drug development commands billions of dollars in funding each year (Adams and Brantner, 2006).

In what follows, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of features of design and outcomes for preclinical efficacy studies of the highly successful drug sunitinib. Sunitinib is a multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib (SU11248, Sutent) and is licensed as monotherapy for three different malignancies (Chow and Eckhardt, 2007; Raymond et al., 2011). As it was introduced into clinical development around 2000 and tested against numerous malignancies, sunitinib provided an opportunity to study a large sample of preclinical studies across a broad range of malignancies—including several supporting successful translation trajectories.


Results


Study characteristics

Our screen from database and reference searches captured 74 studies eligible for extraction, corresponding to 332 unique experiments investigating tumor volume response. Effect sizes (standardized mean difference [SMD] using Hedges' g) could not be computed for 174 experiments (52%) due to inadequate reporting (e.g., sample size not provided, effect size reported as a median, lack of error bars). Overall, 158 experiments, involving 2716 animals, were eligible for meta-analysis. The overall pooled SMD for all extracted experiments across all malignancies was −1.8 [−2.1, −1.6]. Mean duration of experiments used in meta-analysis was 31 days (±14 days standardized deviation of the mean (SDM)).


Design elements addressing validity threats

Effects in preclinical studies can fail clinical generalization because of bias or random variation (internal validity), a mismatch between experimental operations and the clinical scenario modeled (construct validity), or idiosyncratic causal mediators in an experimental system (external validity) (Henderson et al., 2013). We extracted design elements addressing each using consensus design practices identified in a systematic review of validity threats in preclinical research (Henderson et al., 2013).

Few studies used practices like blinding or randomization to address internal validity threats. Only 6% of experiments investigated a dose–response relationship (3 or more doses). Concealment of allocation or blinded outcome assessment was never reported in studies that advanced to meta-analysis. It is worth noting that one research group employed concealed allocation and blinded assessment for the many experiments it described (Maris et al., 2008). However, statistics were reported in a way that did not align with those we needed to calculate SMD. We found that 58.8% of experiments included active drug comparators, thus, facilitating interpretation of sunitinib activity (however, we note that in some of the experiments, sunitinib was an active comparator in a test of a different drug or drug combination). Construct validity practices can only be meaningfully evaluated against a particular, matched clinical trial. Nevertheless, shows that experiments predominantly relied on juvenile, female, immunocompromised mouse models, and very few animal efficacy experiments used genetically engineered cancer models (n = 4) or spontaneously arising tumors (n = 0). Malignancies generally scored low (score = 1) for addressing external validity, with breast cancer studies employing the greatest variety of species (n = 2) and models (n = 4).

Implementation of internal validity practices did not show clear relationships with effect sizes. However, sunitinib effect sizes were significantly greater when active drug comparators were present in an experiment compared to when they were not (−2.2 [−2.5, −1.9] vs −1.4 [−1.7, −1.1], p-value <0.001).

Within construct validity, there was a significant difference in pooled effect size between genetically engineered mouse models and human xenograft (p-value <0.0001) and allograft (p-value 0.001) model types. For external validity, malignancies tested in more and diverse experimental systems tended to show less extreme effect sizes (p < 0.001).


Evidence of publication bias

For the 158 individual experiments, 65.8% showed statistically significant activity at the experiment level (p < 0.05), with an average sample size of 8.03 animals per treatment arm and 8.39 animals per control arm. Funnel plots for all studies, as well as our renal cell carcinoma (RCC) subset suggest potential publication bias. Trim and fill analysis suggests an overestimation of effect size of 45% (SMD changed from −1.8 [−2.1, −1.7] to −1.3 [−1.5, −1.0]) across all indications. For high-grade glioma and breast cancer, the overestimation was 11% and 52%, respectively. However, trim and fill analysis suggested excellent symmetry for the RCC subgroup, suggesting coverage of the overall effect size and confidence intervals and not overestimation of effect size.


Preclinical studies and clinical correlates

Every malignancy tested with sunitinib showed statistically significant anti-tumor activity. Though we did not perform a systematic review to estimate clinical effect sizes for sunitinib against various malignancies, a perusal of the clinical literature suggests little relationship between pooled effect sizes and demonstrated clinical activity. For instance, sunitinib monotherapy is highly active in RCC patients (Motzer et al., 2006a, 2006b) and yet showed a relatively small preclinical effect; in contrast, sunitinib monotherapy was inactive against small cell lung cancer in a phase 2 trial (Han et al., 2013), but showed relatively large preclinical effects.

Using measured effect sizes at a standardized time point of 14 days after first administration (a different time point than in to better align our evaluation of dose–response), we were unable to observe a dose–response relationship over three orders of magnitude (0.2–120 mg/kg/day) for all experiments. We were also unable to detect a dose–response relationship over the full dose range (4–80 mg/kg/day) tested in the RCC subset. The same results were observed when we performed the same analyses using the last time point in common between the experimental and control arms.


Discussion

Preclinical studies serve an important role in formulating clinical hypotheses and justifying the advance of a new drug into clinical testing. Our meta-analysis, which included malignancies that respond to sunitinib in human beings and those that do not, raises several questions about methods and reporting practices in preclinical oncology—at least in the context of one well-established drug.

First, reporting of design elements and data was poor and inconsistent with widely recognized standards for animal studies (Kilkenny et al., 2010). Indeed, 98 experiments (30% of qualitative sample) could not be quantitatively analyzed because sample sizes or measures of dispersion were not provided. Experimenters only sporadically addressed major internal validity threats and tended not to test indication-activity in more than one model and species. This finding is consistent with what others have observed in experimental stroke and other research areas (Macleod et al., 2004; van der Worp et al., 2005; Kilkenny et al., 2009; Glasziou et al., 2014). Some teams have shown a relationship between failure to address internal validity threats and exaggerated effect size (Crossley et al., 2008; Rooke et al., 2011); we did not observe a clear relationship. Consistent with what has been reported in stroke (O'Collins et al., 2006), our findings suggest that testing in more models tends to produce smaller effect sizes. However, since a larger sample of studies will provide a more precise estimate of effect, we cannot rule out that the trends observed for external validity reflect a regression to the mean.

Second, preclinical studies for sunitinib seem to be prone to publication bias. Notwithstanding limitations on using funnel plots to detect publication bias (Lau et al., 2006), our plots were highly asymmetrical. That all malignancy types tested showed statistically significant anti-cancer activity strains credulity. Others have reported that far more animal studies report statistical significance than would be expected (Wallace et al., 2009; Tsilidis et al., 2013), and our observations that two thirds of individual studies showed significance extends these observations.

Third, we were unable to detect a meaningful relationship between preclinical effect sizes and known clinical behavior. Although a full analysis correlating trial and preclinical effect sizes will be needed, we did not observe obvious relationships between the two. We also did not detect a dose–response effect over three orders of magnitude even within an indication—RCC—known to respond to sunitinib and even when different time points were used. It is possible that heterogeneity in cell lines or strains may have obscured the effects of dose. For example, experimenters may have delivered higher doses to xenografts known to show slow tumor growth. However, RCC patients—each of whom harbors genetically distinct tumors—show dose–response effects in trials (Faivre et al., 2006) and between trials in a meta-analysis (Houk et al., 2010). It is also possible that the toxicity of sunitinib may have limited the ability to demonstrate dose response, though this contradicts demonstration of dose response within studies (Abrams et al., 2003; Amino et al., 2006; Ko et al., 2010). Finally, the tendency for preclinical efficacy studies to report drug dose, but rarely drug exposure (i.e., serum measurement of active drug), further limits the construct validity of these studies (Peterson and Houghton, 2004).

One explanation for our findings is that human xenograft models, which dominated our meta-analytic sample, have little predictive value, at least in the context of receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors. This is a possibility that contradicts other reports (Kerbel, 2003; Voskoglou-Nomikos et al., 2003). We disfavor this explanation in light of the suggestion of publication bias; also, xenografts should show a dose–response regardless of whether they are useful clinical models. A second explanation is that experimental methods are so varied as to mask real effects. However, we note that the observed patterns on experimental design are based purely on what was reported in ‘Materials and methods’ section. Third, experiments assessing changes in tumor volume might only be interpretable in the context of other experiments within a preclinical report, such as with mechanistic and pharmacokinetic studies. This explanation is consistent with our observation that studies testing effect along a causal pathway tended to produce smaller effect sizes. A fourth possible explanation for our findings is that the predictive value of a small number of preclinical studies was obscured by inclusion of poorly designed and executed preclinical studies in our meta-analysis. Quantitative analysis of preclinical design factors that confer greater clinical generalizability awaits side-by-side comparison with pooled effects in clinical trials. Finally, it may be that design and reporting practices are so poor in preclinical cancer research as to make interpretation of tumor volume curves useless. Or, non-reporting may be so rampant as to render meta-analysis of preclinical research impossible. If so, this raises very troubling questions for the publication economy of cancer biology: even well-designed and reported studies may be difficult to interpret if their results cannot be compared to and synthesized with other studies.

Our systematic review has several limitations. First, we relied on what authors reported in the published study. It is possible certain experimental practices, like randomization, were used but not reported in methods. Further to this, we relied only on published reports, and restriction of searches to the English language may have excluded some articles. In February of 2012, we filed a Freedom of Information Act request from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for additional preclinical data submitted in support of sunitinib's licensure; nearly 4 years later, the request has not been honored. Second, effect sizes were calculated using graph digitizer software from tumor volume curves: minor distortion of effect sizes may have occurred but were likely non-differential between groups. Third, subtle experimental design features—not apparent in ‘Materials and methods’ sections—may explain our failure to detect a dose–response effect. For instance, few reports provide detailed animal housing and testing conditions, perhaps leading to important inter-laboratory differences in tumor growth. It should also be emphasized that our study was exploratory in nature; findings like ours will need to be confirmed using prespecified protocols. Fourth, our study represents analysis of a single drug, and it may be our findings do not extend beyond receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors, or sunitinib. However, many of our findings are consistent with those observed in other systematic reviews of preclinical cancer interventions (Amarasingh et al., 2009; Sugar et al., 2012; Hirst et al., 2013). Fifth, our analysis does not directly address many design elements—like duration of experiment or choice of tissue xenograft—that are likely to bear on study validity. Finally, we acknowledge that there may be funding constraints that limit implementation of validity practices described above. We note, nevertheless, that other realms, in particular, neurology, have found ways to make such methods a mainstay.

Numerous commentators have raised concerns about the design and reporting of preclinical cancer research (Sugar et al., 2012; Begley, 2013b). In one report, only 11% preclinical cancer studies submitted to a major biotechnology company withstood in-house replication (Begley and Ellis, 2012). The Center for Open Science and Science Exchange has initiated a project that will attempt to reproduce 50 of the highest impact papers in cancer biology published between 2010 and 2012 (Morrison, 2014). In a recent commentary, Smith et al. fault many researchers for performing in vitro preclinical tests using drug levels that are clinically unachievable due to toxicity (Smith and Houghton, 2013). Unaddressed preclinical validity threats like this—and the ones documented in our study—encourage futile clinical development trajectories. Many research areas, like stroke, epilepsy, and cardiology, have devised design guidelines aimed at improving the clinical generalizability of preclinical studies (Fisher et al., 2009; Galanopoulou et al., 2012; Curtis et al., 2013; Pusztai et al., 2013); and the ARRIVE guidelines (Kilkenny et al., 2010) for reporting animal experiments have been taken up by numerous journals and funding bodies. Our findings provide further impetus for developing and implementing guidelines for the design, reporting, and synthesis of preclinical studies in cancer.


Materials and methods


Literature search

To identify all in vivo animal studies testing the anti-cancer properties of sunitinib (‘efficacy studies’), we queried the following databases on 27 February 2012 using a search strategy adapted from Hooijmans et al. (2010) and de Vries et al. (2011): Ovid MEDLINE In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations and Ovid MEDLINE (dates of coverage from 1948 to 2012), EMBASE Classic and EMBASE database (dates of coverage from 1974 to 2012) and BIOSIS Previews (dates of coverage from 1969 to 2012). Search results were entered into an EndNote library and duplicates were removed. Additional citations were identified during the screening of identified articles. See for detailed search strategy and PRISMA flow diagram.

Screening was performed at citation level by two reviewers (CF and VCH), and at full-text by one reviewer (VCH). Inclusion criteria were (a) original reports or abstracts, (b) English language, (c) contained at least one experiment measuring disease response in a live, non-human animals, and (d) employed sunitinib in a control, comparator, or experimental context, (e) tested anti-cancer activity. To avoid capturing the same experiment twice, in rare cases where the same experiment was reported in different articles, the most detailed and/or recent publication was included.


Extraction

All included studies were evaluated at the study-level, but only those with eligible experiments (e.g., those evaluating the effect of monotherapy on tumor volume and that were reported with sample sizes and error measurements) were forwarded to experiment-level extractions. We excluded experiments when they had been reported in a previous publication after specifically searching for duplicates during screening and analysis. For each eligible experiment, we extracted experimental design elements derived from a prior systematic review of validity threats in preclinical research (Henderson et al., 2013).

Details regarding the coding of internal and construct validity categories are given in. To score for external validity, we created an index that summed the number of species and models tested for a given malignancy and awarded an extra point if more than one species and model was tested. For example, if experiments within a malignancy tested two species and three different model types, the external validity score would be 4 (1 point for the second species, one point for the second model type, one point for the third model type, and an extra point because more than one model and species were employed).

Our primary outcome was experimental tumor volume and we extracted necessary information (sample size, mean measure of treatment effect, and SDM/SEM) to enable calculation of study and aggregate level effect sizes. Since the units of tumor volume were not always consistent between experiments, we extracted those experiments for which a reasonable proxy of tumor volume could be obtained. These included physical caliper measurements (often reported in mm3 or cm3), tumor weights (often reported in mg), optical measurements made from luminescent tumor cell lines (often reported in photons/second), and fold differences in tumor volumes between the control and treatment arms. We extracted experiments of both primary and metastatic tumors, but not experiments where tumor incidence was reported. To account for these different measures of tumor volume, SMDs were calculated using Hedges' g. Hedges' g is a widely accepted standardized measure of effect in meta-analyses where units are not always identical. For experiments where more than one dose of sunitinib was tested against the same control arm, we created a pooled SMD to adjust appropriately for the multiple use of the same control group. Data were extracted at baseline (Day 0 and defined as the first day of drug administration), Day 14 (the closest measured data point to 14 days following first dose), and the last common time point (LCT) between the control group and the treatment group. The LCT was variable between experiments and the last time point for which we could calculate SMD and often represented the point at which the greatest difference was observed between the arms. Data presented graphically were extracted using the graph digitizer software GraphClick (Arizona Software). Extraction was performed by four independent and trained coders (VCH, ND, AH, and NM) using DistillerSR. There was a 12% double-coding overlap to minimize inter-rater heterogeneity and prevent coder drift. Discrepancies in double coding were reconciled through discussion, and if necessary, by a third coder. The gross agreement rate before reconciliation for all double-coded studies was 83%.


Meta-analysis

Effect sizes were calculated as SMDs using Hedges' g with 95% confidence intervals. Pooled effect sizes were calculated using a random effects model employing the DerSimonian and Laird (1986) method, in OpenMeta[Analyst] (Wallace et al., 2009). We also calculated heterogeneity within each malignancy using I2 statistics. To assess the predictive value of preclinical studies in our sample, we calculated pooled effect sizes for each type of malignancy. Subgroup analyses were performed for each validity element. p-values were calculated by a two-sided independent group T-test. Statistical significance was set at a p-value <0.05; as this was an exploratory study we did not adjust for multiple analyses.

Funnel plots to assess publication bias and Duval and Tweedie's trim and fill estimates were generated using Comprehensive Meta Analyst software (Dietz et al., 2014). Funnel plots were created for all experiments in aggregate, and for the three indications for which greater than 20 experiments were analyzable.

Dose–response curves are a widely used tool for testing the strength of causal relationships (Hill, 1965), and if preclinical studies indicate real drug-responses, we should be able to detect a dose–response effect across different experiments. Dose–response relationships were found in post-analysis of sunitinib clinical studies in metastatic RCC and Gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST) (Houk et al., 2010). We tested for all indications in aggregate, as well as for RCC, an indication known to respond to sunitinib in human beings (Motzer et al., 2006a, 2006b). To eliminate variation at the LCT between treatment and control arms, dose–response curves were created using data from a time point 14 days from the initiation of sunitinib treatment. Experiments with more than one treatment arm were not pooled as in other analyses, but expanded out so that each treatment arm (with it's respective dose) could be plotted properly. As we were unable to find experiments that reported drug exposure (e.g., drug serum levels), we calculated pooled effect sizes in OpenMeta[Analyst] and plotted against dose. To avoid the confounding effect of discontinuous dosing, we included only experiments that used a regular administration schedule without breaks (i.e., sunitinib administered at a defined dose once a day instead of experiments where sunitinib was dosed more irregularly or only once).

As this meta-analysis was exploratory and involved development of methodology, we did not prospectively register a protocol.


Funding Statement

The funder had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.


Funding Information

This paper was supported by the following grant:

Canadian Institutes of Health Research (Instituts de recherche en santé du Canada) EOG 111391 to Jonathan Kimmelman.


How the Brain Analyzes Object Shape to Support Grasping Behavior

Janelle Weaver — PLoS Biology, 2015. PMC4331522, CC BY 4.0.

Reaching out and grasping an object is second nature to us, but this simple task requires various brain regions to analyze visual features, such as the 3-D shape of the object, and use that information to plan and execute actions. Past studies have shown that neurons in a brain region called the anterior intraparietal area (AIP) respond selectively to 3-D shape and are active during object grasping. But there has been a lack of research on the causal effects of AIP neuronal activity on other brain regions involved in visual analysis and motor planning, limiting knowledge about the organization of neuronal networks that support grasping behavior.

In a study published this week in PLOS Biology, Peter Janssen, of KU Leuven, and his collaborators combined two unique approaches to shed light on the function of AIP and its fine-scale connections with other parts of the brain. Using electrical microstimulation and functional magnetic resonance imaging (EM-fMRI) in macaque monkeys, the researchers discovered that the posterior subsector of AIP is a critical site of convergence of the dorsal and ventral visual processing streams, which are involved in analyzing the location and identity of objects, respectively. The findings provide new insights into the organization of the network of brain regions involved in analyzing 3-D shape to support behavior.

The researchers first identified 3-D shape-selective sites in AIP by recording neural activity in monkeys presented with pictures of convex and concave surfaces. Both the anterior and posterior parts of the AIP, which in some cases were separated by no more than 3 mm, contained a high proportion of neurons that were selective for 3-D shape. Then they used electrodes to electrically stimulate those sites while recording brain activity with fMRI. Stimulation of the anterior AIP led to an increase in neural activity in a network of somatosensory and motor areas implicated in reaching and grasping. By contrast, stimulation of the posterior AIP increased neural activity in brain regions involved in object processing.

These findings demonstrate that neighboring AIP neurons with similar response properties are connected with markedly different networks of brain regions in parietal, temporal, and frontal cortices. This distinction between the posterior and anterior portions of AIP could not be readily detected in anatomical studies, highlighting the crucial advantage of the EM-fMRI approach over anatomical tracer studies for identifying the connections of specific clusters of neurons with subsectors of other brain regions. Unlike tracer experiments, EM-fMRI studies do not require animals to be sacrificed, so animals are spared and the same animals can then be used to further the same line of investigation. According to the authors, this study is the first to apply EM-fMRI to the macaque AIP, and it provides the first causal evidence relating the properties of individual neurons to their in vivo neural connections in posterior parietal cortex.

Taken together, the patterns of neuronal connections strongly suggest that 3-D shape information is transmitted from posterior AIP to anterior AIP and subsequently to the motor system—a collection of brain regions involved in producing body movements. Before contact with an object, AIP regions may access information about object identity through connections with the ventral stream to help with selecting the appropriate grasp.

Moreover, the results help to explain several anatomical and physiological observations. For example, neurons in the posterior AIP tend to be more responsive to visual features, whereas neurons in the anterior AIP tend to be more active during grasping behavior. This visual-to-motor gradient in the AIP can now be linked to connections between the posterior AIP and the ventral stream as well as connections between the anterior AIP and somatosensory and motor areas.

In summary, the results clearly demonstrate that the posterior AIP is a pivotal brain region where the dorsal and ventral visual streams interact during object analysis. More broadly, the study shows that charting the connections of functionally defined patches of neurons provides novel insights into the widespread neuronal networks that support behavior.


Multisensory Causal Inference in the Brain

Christoph Kayser, Ladan Shams — PLoS Biology, 2015. PMC4339834, CC BY 4.0.

At any given moment, our brain processes multiple inputs from its different sensory modalities (vision, hearing, touch, etc.). In deciphering this array of sensory information, the brain has to solve two problems: (1) which of the inputs originate from the same object and should be integrated and (2) for the sensations originating from the same object, how best to integrate them. Recent behavioural studies suggest that the human brain solves these problems using optimal probabilistic inference, known as Bayesian causal inference. However, how and where the underlying computations are carried out in the brain have remained unknown. By combining neuroimaging-based decoding techniques and computational modelling of behavioural data, a new study now sheds light on how multisensory causal inference maps onto specific brain areas. The results suggest that the complexity of neural computations increases along the visual hierarchy and link specific components of the causal inference process with specific visual and parietal regions.


Introduction

Our brain is continuously faced with a plethora of sensory inputs impinging on our senses. At any moment we see, hear, touch, and smell, and only the coordinated interplay of our senses allows us to properly interact with the environment. How the brain organizes all these sensory inputs into a coherent percept remains unclear. As shown in a new study by Rohe and Noppeney, important insights can be obtained by combining computational models with carefully crafted analysis of brain activity.

The brain needs to solve several computational problems to make sense of its environment. Besides the analysis of specific sensory attributes (for example, to segment a scene into its constituent objects), two critical problems involve the inputs to different senses. One is the “multisensory integration problem”: how information is synthesized (or fused) across the senses. For instance, speech perception usually relies on the integration of auditory and visual information (listening to somebody’s voice while seeing his or her lips move). This integration problem can be challenging, as each sense only provides a noisy and possibly biased estimate of the respective attribute.

In addition, the brain needs to solve the “causal inference problem”: it has to decide which sensory inputs likely originate from the same object and hence provide complementary evidence about this and which inputs originate from distinct objects and hence should be processed separately. One example is at a cocktail party, where many faces and voices can make it a challenge to know who called our name. Another example is at a ventriloquist’s performance, where we attribute the voice to the puppet rather than the actor. In practice, the tasks of inferring the causal structure and of obtaining precise estimates of sensory attributes are highly intertwined, as causal inference depends on the similarity of different sensory features, while the estimate of each attribute depends on the inferred causal origin. For example, the association of a face and a voice depends on both the perceived location of each as well as the match between sematic, social, or physical attributes derived from faces and voices. Hence, solving the causal inference problem has to rely on a number of factors such as spatial, temporal, and structural congruency, prior knowledge, and expectations.

In the 19th century, von Helmholtz already noted that perception requires solving multiple inference problems. Yet, laboratory studies on multisensory integration often avoid the causal inference problem by crafting multisensory stimuli that leave little doubt as to whether they provide evidence about the same sensory object. However, the brain mechanisms underlying multisensory perception in everyday tasks can probably only be understood by considering both the integration and causal inference problems. Fortunately, the field of Bayesian perception has provided a conceptual framework in which both can be cast in unified statistical terms.


Bayesian Approaches to Multisensory Perception

Bayesian statistics describes sensory representations in probabilistic terms, attributing likelihoods to each possible encoding of a sensory attribute. Moreover, it describes how different variables interact in determining the outcome, such as how prior knowledge affects perceptual estimates or how inputs from two senses combine. As shown in, when considered independently, each sensory modality can be conceptualized as providing a noisy (probabilistic) estimate of the same attribute. Yet, under the assumption of a common source, Bayesian inference predicts the multisensory estimate arising from the combination of both senses by weighing each input in proportion to its reliability.

This approach has provided invaluable insights about various aspects of perceptual multisensory integration and helped to identify the sensory computations likely to be carried out by the underlying neural processes. For example, studies on visual-vestibular integration have shown that the mathematical rules by which neural populations combine visual-vestibular information follow Bayesian predictions and that the relative weights attributed to each modality in the neural code scale with sensory reliability analogous to the perceptual weights.


Probabilistic Models for Causal Inference

The Bayesian approach can be extended to model the causal inference problem by including inference about the environment’s causal structure. Depending on the task that the nervous system has to solve, different perceptual decision-making strategies can be used to derive estimates of sensory attributes based on the probabilities of each possible causal structure. For example, when trying to minimize the error in the perceptual estimate, e.g., to precisely localize a speaker, the optimal estimate is the nonlinear weighted average of two terms: one estimate derived under the assumption that two inputs originate from a single source (fusion) and one derived under the assumption that they have separate sources (segregation), with each estimate weighted by the probability of the respective causal structure. This strategy is known as “model averaging”.

In testing whether Bayesian causal inference can account for human perception, localization tasks have been proved useful. When visual and acoustic stimuli are presented with a small spatial disparity, they are likely perceived as originating from the same source, hence their evidence about the spatial location should be fused. In contrast, if their spatial disparity is large, the two inputs likely arise from distinct sources and should be segregated. Interestingly, the model also predicts a more surprising behaviour in conditions in which spatial disparity is moderate. In this case, the two senses get partially integrated, weighted by the relative likelihood of one or two origins—assuming that the brain adopts a model averaging strategy, which seems to be the case in many observers. Therefore, Bayesian causal inference successfully explains perceptual judgements across the range of discrepancies, spanning a continuum, from fusion to partial integration to segregation.

Again, its success in describing human perception suggests that this Bayesian model could also provide a framework to map the underlying neural processes onto distinct sensory computations. For example, an important question is whether the same or distinct brain regions reflect the integration process and the causal inference computation. This is precisely what the study by Rohe and Noppeney addressed.


Mapping Causal Inference onto Sensory Pathways

In their study, participants localized audiovisual signals that varied in spatial discrepancy and visual reliability while their brain activity was measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The authors first fit the causal inference model to the perceptual data, which enabled them to investigate the mapping between brain activity and the different spatial estimates predicted by the model; the estimates were predicted by either unisensory input (corresponding to the distinct causal origins hypothesis), by the fusion of the two sensations (corresponding to the single causal origin hypothesis), or by the causal inference model (the weighted combination of fusion and segregation). Addressing this question required an additional step of data analysis: linking the selectivity to spatial information reflected in distributed patterns of fMRI activity to the spatial estimates predicted by each model component. Luckily, methods of decoding analysis provide a means to establish such a link and allowed the authors to associate each brain region of interest with the best-matching sensory estimate predicted by the inference model.

As may be expected, some regions (early visual and auditory cortices) predominantly reflected the unisensory inputs and hence were only a little affected by any multisensory computation. Other regions, e.g., those involved in establishing spatial maps (posterior regions in the intraparietal sulcus), reflected the fused estimate. Thus, in these regions, automatic integration processes seem to occur that merge the spatial evidence provided by different modalities, weighted by their reliability, but regardless of how likely it is that these relate to the same object. And finally, regions more anterior in the intraparietal sulcus encoded the spatial estimate as predicted by the causal inference model, hence adapting their sensory representation based on the likely causal origin.

Overall, the new results show that different neural processes along the sensory pathways reflect distinct estimates about the localization of sensory events. Some estimates seem to arise mostly in a simple unisensory manner, while others exhibit the computationally complex nature required for causal inference. In addition, they suggest that sensory fusion and causal inference, at least in the context of spatial perception, are distributed processes not necessarily occurring in the same regions. And finally, they reveal a gradual emergence of multisensory computations along “visual” pathways. The data support both the traditional notion that multisensory perception is mostly implemented by higher-level association regions and the more recent notion that early sensory regions also participate in multisensory encoding. Most importantly, however, they show how model-driven neuroimaging studies allow us to map complex sensory operations such as causal inference onto the sensory hierarchies.

One conclusion from this and previous studies is that multisensory perception does not result from a single and localized process—that would fit the often and sometimes abused term “multisensory integration”. Rather, multisensory perception arises from the interplay of many processes and a network of interacting regions that implement these, each possibly relying on a different assumption about the causal structure of the environment and implementing a different sensory computation. Ultimately, it may be impossible to fully understand localized multisensory processes without considering them in the big picture of a possibly hierarchical but certainly distributed organization.


Conclusions

As with any major step forward, the results pose many new questions. For example, judging the environment’s causal structure relies on prior knowledge and experience, but we don’t know whether the processes of causal inference and incorporating prior information are implemented by the same neural processes. It will also be important to see whether there are brain regions generically involved in multisensory inference and not specific to spatial attributes. Furthermore, it seems natural to look for similar gradual changes in multisensory computations along other sensory pathways. For example, our understanding of auditory pathways may benefit from such model-based decoding studies. Finally, the roles of attention and task relevance for multisensory perception remain controversial. Attentional selection modulates multisensory integration, and multisensory coincidences attract attention and amplify perception. It remains unclear how attentional state or task relevance influence which sensory variables are represented in any brain region, and recent studies reveal complex patterns of mixed selectivity to task- and sensory-related variables in higher association regions. Disentangling the impact of attention and task nature on multisensory encoding and what can actually be measured using neuroimaging signals remains a challenge for the future.

Neuroimaging studies provide critical insights into the large-scale organization of perception, but the underlying local mechanisms of neural population coding remain to be confirmed. Signatures of multisensory encoding at the single neuron level can be subtle, and the mixed selectivity of higher-level sensory regions can render the link between neural populations and neuroimaging ambiguous. Again model-driven approaches may help, for example, by providing testable hypothesis about large-scale population codes that can be extracted from electrophysiological recordings or neuroimaging.

On a methodological side, recent work has shown how combining fMRI with probabilistic models of cognition can be a very powerful tool for understanding brain function. In line with this, Rohe and Noppeney show that the combination of statistical models of perception and brain decoding has the power to enlighten our understanding of perception far beyond more descriptive approaches. Yet, studies such as this require carefully crafted models and efficient paradigms to overcome the poor signal-to-noise ratio sometimes offered by neuroimaging. As a result, further advances in both perceptual models and signal understanding and analysis are required to eventually uncover why we sometimes benefit from seeing a speaker in a noisy environment and why we get fooled by the ventriloquist’s puppet.


How One-Shot Learning Unfolds in the Brain

Janelle Weaver — PLoS Biology, 2015. PMC4412441, CC BY 4.0.

Imagine you go out to a restaurant and order oysters for the first time, then for the main course you order your usual plate of chicken. Later that evening, your stomach becomes upset and you start to develop hives on your skin. Because you have eaten chicken many times before without becoming ill, you conclude after this one experience that the oysters caused your symptoms.

When humans and other animals encounter an outcome they have never previously experienced, it may be necessary to rapidly learn the link between cause and effect in order to survive. After experiencing two events that are paired together for the first time, animals can quickly learn that one caused the other. This phenomenon, called one-shot learning, is very different from incremental learning, in which new knowledge is acquired gradually through trial and error. While much evidence supports the notion of dissociable memory systems for one-shot and incremental learning, little is known about how one-shot learning unfolds at the neural level or how the brain is capable of switching between different types of learning strategies.

In a study published in this issue of PLOS Biology, Sang Wan Lee, John O’Doherty, and Shinsuke Shimojo of the California Institute of Technology combined computational, behavioral, and brain-imaging techniques to shed light on these questions. According to the authors, their model is the only framework to date that is optimized to account for one-shot learning. Their evidence suggests that the hippocampus is selectively switched on when one-shot learning is predicted to occur, and the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex may act as a switch to turn on and off one-shot learning as required.

Their novel computational framework suggests that individuals learn causal relationships more quickly when they are less certain about whether one event caused another. The authors reasoned that when the uncertainty about cause and effect is high, more focus is required to learn the causal relationship, resulting in the high learning rate associated with one-shot learning. To test their computational hypothesis, the researchers analyzed behavioral data and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data acquired from individuals who performed a simple causal inference task in which learning could occur from a single experience. In each trial, participants were presented with a sequence of pictures followed by a positive or negative number reflecting a monetary outcome. At the end of each round of trials, participants were then asked to rate the likelihood that individual pictures would cause particular outcomes; these ratings were used to determine causal uncertainty. If a participant learned the association between a picture and an outcome that were paired together only one time, that trial was considered a one-shot learning event.

When the researchers tested whether their causal uncertainty model best explains the behavioral data, they found that it outperformed all seven alternative learning models typically used to account for incremental learning. Analysis of the fMRI data revealed that higher causal uncertainty was associated with increased activation of the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, while the hippocampus was activated during one-shot learning events but not incremental learning events. Moreover, activity in the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex was coupled to hippocampal activity for very high learning rates but not learning rates associated with more incremental learning. This finding suggests that the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex uses knowledge about causal uncertainty to control a switch that turns on the hippocampus when one-shot learning is needed.

Taken together, the findings suggest that the brain may solve the problem of one-shot learning by computing uncertainty about the causal relationship between events and adjusting learning rates to accommodate rapid learning about those events. Developing a detailed account of when rapid learning takes place and which brain areas are engaged in this process might shed new light on more efficient learning strategies, in addition to superstitions, delusional reasoning, and erroneous attributions of an outcome to the wrong cause. The study may ultimately have substantial implications for real-world situations such as medical diagnoses, lawsuit cases, and psychiatric diseases, such as schizophrenia.


Song Circuit in Bird Brain Contains Map of Space and Time

Janelle Weaver — PLoS Biology, 2015. PMC4454554, CC BY.

Many brain regions involved in perception and movement are characterized by orderly maps, with neighboring neurons responding to similar features of sensory input or motor output. For example, brain circuits involved in motor control contain maps for distinct muscle groups and preferred direction of movement. However, it has not been clear whether higher-order features, such as time in a movement sequence or serial order, are represented topographically. Even though temporal sequence generation is integral to many forms of learned behavior, the underlying mechanisms are not well understood.

One attractive brain region for addressing the question of how time is mapped in space is the premotor nucleus HVC in songbirds. This brain region plays a crucial role in the learning and production of bird song and is responsible for generating extremely precise, learned temporal sequences. HVC neural activity drives downstream areas controlling the vocal organ and also projects to the basal ganglia, which is thought to guide exploratory trial-and-error learning. However, past technical limitations have prevented scientists from exploring the spatiotemporal organization of HVC activity in singing birds.

In a study published this week in PLOS Biology, Timothy Gardner of Boston University and his collaborators provide the first experimental evidence of how HVC ensemble activity is organized in space and time in singing zebra finches. To accomplish this feat, they developed new methods for multi-channel electrophysiology and calcium imaging in singing birds. They found that the activity patterns of HVC neurons are spatially clustered, and that two HVC cell types fire in alternating phases of a 30 Hz rhythm. According to the authors, this spatial and temporal organization may be an evolutionarily conserved feature of motor circuits across species.

Using calcium imaging in freely behaving, singing zebra finches, the researchers examined the spatial organization of the neural activity of projection neurons, which send signals from the HVC to the vocal organ and basal ganglia. They found that neighboring neurons showed similar patterns of neural activity, but cells that did not fire at the same time were not located close to one another. The spatial correlations in HVC calcium activity were characterized by a patchwork of domains organized in stereotyped sequences, with an average distance of 143 μm separating coactive cells.

The researchers next addressed whether inhibitory interneurons in HVC show a similar spatial and temporal organization as projection neurons. Because the timescale of the calcium indicator they used could not resolve the fast firing patterns of the interneurons, they combined multi-channel electrophysiology with local field potentials (LFP) recordings, which can reflect synchronous ensemble neural activity over roughly 100 μm. They found that HVC neurons fired in synchrony about 30 times per second, or 30 Hz. Moreover, LFPs recorded from nearby electrodes were more similar than those recorded from electrodes separated by about 200 μm. Averaging over all recording sites in all birds, they found that synchronous neural activity at 30 Hz occurred across a distance of 108–125 μm. Taken together with the calcium imaging results, these findings indicate that HVC activity during singing is correlated over a distance of roughly 100 μm.

When comparing the timing of activity in the two cell types, the researchers found that projection neurons fire during peaks in the 30 Hz LFP, whereas interneurons fire in the troughs. These observations indicate that the two cell types fire in opposition to generate a local 30 Hz rhythm in the LFP, and that synchronous pauses in inhibition could provide a window of opportunity for projection neurons to fire. Given that little was previously known about the interaction between inhibitory neurons and projections neurons in singing birds, the findings shed new light on the fundamental rules that relate the activity of these two classes of cells.

More broadly, a comparison with past studies reveals commonalities across species and behavioral contexts. For example, the 100 μm length scale observed during singing has also been observed in the motor cortex of mammals in the context of running, grooming, and simple forelimb movements. In addition, the 30 Hz rhythm has parallels in primate motor control as well as speech perception and production in humans. According to the authors, the recurrence of these length scales and timescales raises the possibility that spatial clustering and 30 Hz rhythmic alternation of excitatory and inhibitory neural activity may be a fundamental feature of motor circuits and could be critical for the sequential organization of behavior.


Representations of Value in the Brain: An Embarrassment of Riches?

Jeffrey J. Stott, A. David Redish — PLoS Biology, 2015. PMC4472787, CC BY 4.0.

Over the past two decades, neuroscientists have increasingly turned their attention to the question of how the brain implements decisions between differently valued options. This emerging field, called neuroeconomics, has made quick progress in identifying a plethora of brain areas that track or are modulated by reward value. However, it is still unclear how and where in the brain value coding takes place. A primate study by Strait and colleagues in this issue of PLOS Biology finds overlapping signals of value coding in two brain regions central to the valuation process: the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the ventral striatum. This finding reconciles the primate and rodent literatures, provides valuable insight into the complexity of value computation, and helps set the agenda for future work in this area.


The (Neuro)Economic Model of Choice

A central axiom of economic models of choice is that there exists a single, common scale of value that the decisionmaker uses to compare options, and that this common currency can be revealed through the actions of the animal (see for a glossary of terms used in this preview). This hypothesis matches our intuitive notion that when we make decisions, we weigh them against each other. Mathematically, this principle is necessary for internally consistent (i.e., rational) choices. Decisions arise from computations occurring in neural systems. Under the assumption of this central axiom of economic choice, one would expect to find abstract representations of value somewhere in the nervous system. Therefore, it generated a great deal of excitement when neuroscientists studying decision making started finding correlates of value within the brain.


Box 1. Glossary of Terms

Value: An integration of factors that affect how desirable a reward is, including the magnitude of reward, probability of receiving the reward, delay to the reward, effort needed to obtain the reward, etc. Economics tells us that value has to be revealed through an agent’s actions.

Subjective value: Because value reflects the specific needs and preferences of the individual, value is inherently subjective. Subjective value is contrasted with objective value.

Common currency: A metric for measuring or representing the value of an option so that all things can be measured on the same scale. In neural terms, a common currency coding scheme refers to a reliable relationship between the activity of a neuron (or brain region) and the value of a specific option.

State-based representations: Representations about the “state of the world.” In terms of reward, a state-based representation could include factors beyond immediate value such as reward identity (i.e., flavor), when or where the reward occurs (contextual information), the motor action needed to obtain the reward (i.e., “go left” versus “go right”), etc.

Expectations of reward: Explicit knowledge about potential rewards. In neural terms, this would be reflected in changes in neural firing that are elicited by cues (external or internally generated) that predict reward.

Orbitofrontal cortex (OFC): Part of the prefrontal cortex located behind the orbit of the eyes (in primates) and in the anterior (frontal) region of the cerebral cortex in rodents. The OFC is activated by reward receipt and by stimuli that predict reward.

Ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC): Part of the prefrontal cortex medial to the OFC. However, some papers use these two terms synonymously. The vmPFC is activated by reward receipt and by stimuli that predict reward.

Ventral striatum (VS): The striatum is the major input nucleus of the basal ganglia, a series of interconnected brain nuclei that form a loop with the cerebral cortex. The ventral (toward the bottom) aspect of the striatum is activated by rewards and reward-predicting stimuli. It also receives dense inputs from the dopamine system, and this input is thought to mediate reward learning.

A number of studies that recorded activity from single neurons in the monkey orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) found neurons that changed their firing rate according to the subjective value of the reward being offered, showing a common currency for value, independent of (or “abstracted from”) the sensory and motor variables of the task. In agreement with this model, previous experiments by Strait and colleagues have found evidence for common currency signaling in a nearby cortical structure, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC).

In contrast, neuroeconomic experiments in rodents have largely failed to find these representations of abstract value signaling in the orbitofrontal cortex, instead finding more state-based representations of expectations of reward. Moreover, the rodent studies have identified a prominent role for value coding in the ventral striatum (VS), calling into question a unique role for the OFC in signaling value.

While it is certainly possible that this discrepancy could be chalked up to species-specific differences in brain architecture, and/or differences in task design, the study reported in this issue of PLOS Biology by Strait and colleagues argues against these interpretations. Strait et al. find overlapping signatures of value coding in monkey vmPFC and VS, including evidence for abstract value coding, as required by the common currency model of decision making.

This result highlights a fundamental open question in the field of neuroeconomics: If multiple brain regions contain value signals, are these brain regions performing similar or distinct functions during the decision-making process? How do we account for the multiplicity of value signals found throughout the brain?


Computation

The fundamental question to ask about neural signals is: what computation are these signals providing to the behavior? Neural systems are computational processes evolved to select appropriate actions from information taken from one’s past (memory), one’s needs and goals (motivation), and one’s information about the world (sensory cues).


The Question of Timing

Comparing the timecourse of representations in the vmPFC and VS, Strait et al. found that neural signals related to the value of the chosen action emerged earlier in the VS. Interestingly, neural activity in the VS was able to predict the animal’s decision ahead of the choice period, but the neural activity in the vmPFC did not.

These results closely match a recent study in rodents where neural signals were recorded simultaneously from the OFC and VS in rats performing a neuroeconomic decision-making task. shows a side-by-side comparison of the recording study in monkeys by Strait et al. featured in this issue with a recording study in rodents by Stott and Redish. In the study by Stott and Redish, reward expectation coding occurred earlier in the VS than in the OFC during trials in which the rat deliberated at the choice point. Strait et al. find a similar result of an earlier appearance of value-related signals in the VS than the vmPFC in the monkey. Both studies show that the VS contains value-related information before the OFC/vmPFC, hinting at potentially different roles for these structures, despite their similarity along other dimensions of value signaling. In particular, the precise timing of activity in these two brain regions suggests that the VS activity arises earlier in the chain of events leading to action selection than the OFC or vmPFC.


A Multiplicity of Value Signals in the Brain

Neuroeconomic experiments have identified a number of brain regions that exhibit neural responses related to reward value. The data presented by Strait et al. in this issue of PLOS Biology adds to this body of work, showing similar representations of value in the VS and vmPFC on the same task, albeit with differences in the timing of activity. Still, the broad overlap in value signaling between different structures invites the question of what these multiple brain regions are contributing to choice. There are three hypotheses that could explain the presence of value-related neural firing in multiple brain structures.

First, trivially, multiple structures could be contributing the same valuation computations to the system, at which point one would expect to see multiple copies of value-related signals. This hypothesis is unlikely to be correct, because studies have consistently found subtle differences between the representations of value, and because value-related signals have been found across the brain, including in structures well-known to be involved in other functions (such as sensorimotor integration) and even in primary sensory areas such as the visual cortex.

Second, value representations could serve as a modulator of other signals. Value is important in a number of domains, including sensory, motor, and cognitive activities. In perceptual discrimination tasks, increasing the value of a target has been shown to increase neural firing in cells that detect sensory stimuli, in cells that are tuned to specific motor actions, and in cells that are more aptly described as “sensorimotor,” integrating sensory and motor information. Therefore, value signals are important in focusing attention toward salient stimuli and in biasing motor commands toward more valuable actions. These forms of secondary modulation (wherein a cell has a primary response to a stimulus or concept but shows firing rate modulation of that primary tuning) occur throughout the brain, such as attentional modulation of visual stimuli in the primary visual cortex or task-related modulation of place representations in the hippocampus.

Third, when interpreting the role of different brain regions involved in choice, it is important to keep in mind that the brain may accomplish a given task using a variety of different solutions. A broad body of work now supports the view that the brain contains several functionally and anatomically distinct decision-making systems, each of which selects actions (makes decisions) using a different underlying computational algorithm. These different decision-making systems could also be considered as different valuation systems, under the assumption that decisions reflect value. This interpretation could explain the existence of overlapping value signals seen in the vmPFC and VS. Both areas may routinely generate representations of value, as seen by Strait et al., but these brain areas may be differentially recruited depending on which action selection system is being engaged.

Each of these hypotheses call into question the centralized common currency hypothesis of value and opens new unanswered questions.


The Concept of Value

As intriguing and logical as the common currency concept is, it has recently come under scrutiny. Strait et al. and others have found multiple representations of value in the brain, but we do not yet know if these representations must agree with each other or not. If they do not, then we come to an interesting question of arbitration and mediation and what drives behavior in these conflict situations. The relationship between these valuation signals and the decisions being made by the animal is a very intriguing open and interesting question that will require additional experiments.


Brain Signature Predicts Negative Emotion in Individuals

Janelle Weaver — PLoS Biology, 2015. PMC4476724, CC BY.

Emotions are central to our daily lives and are at the root of disorders such as anxiety, depression, drug abuse, and cardiovascular disease. The importance of understanding the emotional brain has motivated hundreds of neuroimaging studies in healthy humans and patients with psychological disorders. But there has been a pressing need to identify neural signatures that predict emotional experiences in individuals in order to translate brain-imaging data into clinical applications.

In a study published this week in PLOS Biology, Luke Chang and Tor Wager of the University of Colorado at Boulder and their collaborators used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and machine-learning algorithms to identify a sensitive and specific brain signature that predicts the intensity of negative emotion in individuals. Strikingly, this signature encompasses multiple widely distributed neural networks rather than a few individual emotion-related brain regions. According to the authors, the neural signature could be used to diagnose mental illness, predict responses to treatment, and guide the development of new brain-based therapies.

In the new study, the researchers used fMRI to measure brain activity in 183 individuals who viewed a sequence of 15 negative photographs and 15 neutral photographs and rated the emotional intensity of each image on a five-point scale. The negative photographs depicted bodily illness and injury, acts of aggression, members of hate groups, transportation accidents, and human waste, whereas the neutral photographs consisted of inanimate objects or nonevocative scenes.

The researchers then used machine-learning algorithms to find global patterns of brain activity that best predicted participants’ ratings. This neural signature, called the picture-induced negative emotion signature (PINES), accurately predicted ratings of negative emotional experience in 94% of the participants. In more than 90% of the subjects, the PINES accurately distinguished between aversive pictures whose ratings were separated by two or more points on the five-point scale.

As expected, aversive pictures produced activity in brain regions typically associated with negative emotion, including the amygdala, anterior insula, and anterior cingulate cortex. However, activity in each of these regions was not strong enough to predict emotion ratings. Moreover, the PINES more accurately predicted emotion ratings than did activity in seven other previously reported neural networks associated with diverse functions such as rest, vision, attention, touch, and movement.

The researchers next used algorithms to separate the PINES brain regions into discrete subnetworks based on similar patterns of activity from trial to trial. They identified nine subnetworks involved in diverse functions such as vision, arousal, memory, social cognition, and action. Several of these subnetworks individually performed well at predicting emotion ratings, but all of them were less accurate than the PINES. Using a virtual lesion analysis, the researchers found that removing individual subnetworks from the PINES resulted in only negligible decreases in performance. The findings demonstrate that no specific subsystem is either necessary or sufficient for predicting negative emotion.

Finally, the researchers determined whether the PINES is specific to negative emotion and is not driven simply by general arousal. To do so, they compared the PINES to their previously reported neurologic pain signature (NPS)—a brain map that predicts the intensity of thermal pain. Similar to the PINES, the NPS was generated by a combination of fMRI and machine-learning algorithms. Comparison of the two signatures revealed that the experiences of negative emotion and pain are predicted by distinct patterns of neural activity. The PINES accurately predicted negative emotion but showed no response to increasing pain intensity. Conversely, the NPS responded robustly to increasing pain but showed no response to increasing negative emotion.

Taken together, the results suggest that the neural signature predicting negative emotion spans multiple brain systems and cannot be boiled down to a single network or a few brain regions that are traditionally associated with negative emotion. Therefore, the study calls into question theories that have treated emotion as an isolated experience that is localizable to a specific neural system. By providing an alternative, more nuanced model for the brain representation of emotion, the findings have broad implications for future attempts to identify biomarkers for mental health disorders.


Understanding How Exercise Promotes Cognitive Integrity in the Aging Brain

Benjamin M Laitman, Gareth R John — PLoS Biology, 2015. PMC4641709, CC BY.

Alterations in the structure and organization of the aging central nervous system (CNS), and associated functional deficits, result in cognitive decline and increase susceptibility to neurodegeneration. Age-related changes to the neurovascular unit (NVU), and their consequences for cerebrovascular function, are implicated as driving cognitive impairment during aging as well as in neurodegenerative disease. The molecular events underlying these effects are incompletely characterized. Similarly, the mechanisms underlying effects of factors that reduce the impact of aging on the brain, such as physical exercise, are also opaque. A study in this issue of PLOS Biology links the NVU to cognitive decline in the aging brain and suggests a potential underlying molecular mechanism. Notably, the study further links the protective effects of chronic exercise on cognition to neurovascular integrity during aging.


Introduction

Age-associated alterations in the structure and organization of the central nervous system (CNS) result in cognitive impairment and increase susceptibility to individual overt neurodegenerative pathology and clinical disease. Thus, understanding the factors that contribute to age-related changes in structure and function within the CNS may lead to novel approaches to prevent the associated cognitive decline as well as reduce the incidence of neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer disease (AD).


Links between Cerebrovascular Function and Cognitive Function in Aging

Changes in both neuronal and non-neuronal populations within the CNS have been associated with functional deficits in the aging brain. For example, alterations in synaptic morphology and activity of neurons, notably in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, have been associated with impairments in cognition during aging. Notably, and perhaps less intuitively, important roles for non-neuronal lineages have also been demonstrated in cognitive decline. Chronic inflammatory changes in resident and invading cells of the innate immune system, such as microglia/monocytes and astrocytes, occur with aging and may predispose to neural pathology in the CNS. In addition, age-related changes to the neurovascular unit (NVU), and associated cerebrovascular alterations, have also been implicated as impacting neural integrity and function. However, the relative contribution of alterations of the NVU to these age-related changes in brain structure and function, and the molecular events that drive them, are incompletely characterized. Thus, an important question is how exactly cerebrovascular function, particularly integrity of the NVU, impacts cognitive function during aging. Examination of underlying mechanisms presents an interesting avenue to discover and develop treatments to prevent cognitive decline and/or neurodegeneration.

The NVU comprises the cerebral microvascular endothelium, its basement membrane, and associated pericytes and astrocytes. The endothelium provides the structural and functional basis for the blood–brain barrier (BBB), while astrocytes and pericytes control barrier induction and maintenance. Notably, defects in the NVU have been linked to cognitive decline in the context of neurodegenerative conditions. For example, vascular defects in mice deficient for the AD risk factor, apolipoprotein E (ApoE), or transgenic for the human APOE4 isoform, display vascular defects that precede neuronal dysfunction. Furthermore, human APOE4 carriers may be susceptible to age-dependent breakdown of the BBB prior to the onset of clinical AD deterioration.

Studies have also linked neurovascular dysfunction to cognitive decline in aging. Cerebral microvascular pathology together with reductions in cerebral blood flow (CBF) and glucose and oxygen metabolism are known to occur during human aging. Moreover, use of a novel high-resolution MRI technique has also shown that vascular leakage is an early event in the aged human brain, beginning in the hippocampus and correlating with cognitive deficit. These studies, and others like them, suggest that changes in the NVU may be significant in driving deterioration in the structure and organization of the CNS, and therefore cognitive deficits, during aging as well as in neurodegenerative disease.


The Mechanism by Which Exercise Impacts the Aging Brain Is Incompletely Understood

Interestingly, the mechanisms underlying effects of factors that reduce the impact of aging on the brain are similarly opaque. A good example is physical exercise, which is strongly associated with protection against age-related decline in cognitive and sensorimotor function. Exercise is known to improve cardiovascular function, and blood flow within the CNS, and is associated with improved cognitive, sensory, and motor test outcomes, angiogenesis, and neurogenesis. However, the molecular events that drive this protective effect remain incompletely understood.

A study in this issue of PLOS Biology by Soto and coauthors builds on these previous findings, linking the NVU to cognitive decline in the aging brain and suggesting a potential underlying molecular mechanism. Notably, the study further links the protective effects of exercise on cognition to neurovascular integrity. The authors present RNA sequencing data from young (4 mo) and aged (21 mo) mice that suggest that aging causes regional compromise of the NVU. They confirm these findings using immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy, which reveals deterioration of neurovascular structures in the aging brain, including basement membrane reduction, loss of pericytes, and astrocyte dysfunction. Importantly, these neurovascular changes result in vascular leakage. Interestingly, these events further correlate with microglial/monocyte activation and complement induction, implicated in age-related cognitive decline in mice. Collectively, these data suggest a connection between neurovascular dysfunction and innate inflammation in the context of cognitive decline in aging. The authors then turn their focus to the long-term impact of aerobic exercise on age-related neurovascular dysfunction. They show that exercise strongly protects against neurovascular decline in aged mice, and that this correlates with improved behavioral outcomes and markers of neuroplasticity and reduced inflammation and complement induction.

What are the molecular mechanisms responsible for these outcomes? Interestingly, the authors’ data in the final section of their paper returns us to ground familiar to those in the fields of neurodegeneration and AD. Their findings implicate the AD risk factor ApoE as also regulating neurovascular integrity during aging and, moreover, suggest involvement of ApoE in the protective effects of exercise. They show that astrocytic ApoE decreases in aged mice concomitant with age-related neurovascular decline and complement activation, and that this effect is prevented by exercise. These data extend previous studies showing that ApoE deficiency in mice leads to progressive age-related neurovascular dysfunction and suggest a potential link between astrocytic ApoE, age-related neurovascular dysfunction, and microglial/monocyte activation. To test this hypothesis, the authors examine the effect of regular exercise from life to old age on ApoE-deficient mice. Importantly, In contrast to wild-type mice, they show that exercise has no effect on age-related neurovascular decline or microglia/monocyte activation in the absence of ApoE.


Future Directions

Collectively, the findings presented by Soto et al. connect the NVU to cognitive decline in the aging brain and suggest that exercise can prevent or attenuate age-related indices of both neurovascular decline and inflammation. They further propose that the beneficial effects of exercise on neurovascular integrity and inflammation, and neuroplasticity, may be mediated at least in part by ApoE. How then might these findings be extended, and what might be the logical next steps in the current work? Several interesting questions spring to mind, some of which are discussed by the authors. For example, do the increases in microglia/monocytes seen in aging mice in the current study occur as a result of proliferation of resident microglia, infiltration of peripheral monocytes, or both? How do these responses impact cognitive function during aging, given that increase of proinflammatory markers in the blood is correlated with poor cognitive performance in older adults? And does complement induction seen in aged mice precede neurovascular decline, or occur as a consequence to it?

An additional point that should be addressed is how this work extends to age-related cognitive decline in humans. While several studies, including Soto et al., provide encouraging evidence of the positive effects of exercise on age-related cognitive decline, findings in humans have been inconsistent. In a study that examined a combination of dietary changes and aerobic exercise, the authors found exercise only improved cognition when combined with a high flavanol diet. Unexpectedly, the exercise program alone failed to improve cognition. While this same research group has previously demonstrated exercise to be beneficial for human cognitive tasks, the authors bring up the possibility that the exercise regimen used in their diet-exercise study was not stringent enough for the older population investigated. The benefit of exercise on age-related cognitive decline is still inconsistent in humans, even if it strongly protects against the cognitive decline in aged rodents. More robust studies in human populations are thus warranted.

However, perhaps the most important questions that the current study suggests are those that are more directly translational. Notably, what is the detailed molecular mechanism of action by which ApoE preserves neurovascular integrity and cognitive function in the aging brain, and can we develop targeted therapies based on those results? Based on recent studies, might neurovascular and cognitive decline in the brain be reduced by pharmacologically targeting the cyclophilin A-nuclear factor κB-matrix metalloproteinase-9 axis, as has been proposed for APOE4-mediated neurovascular injury? Furthermore, as noted by the authors, the constitutive ApoE-deficient mice used in the manuscript already displayed a dysfunctional NVU prior to the start of exercise studies, in contrast to wild-type mice. Thus, it would be interesting to repeat these studies using an inducible conditional allele. This may answer the question of whether, in addition to protecting against neurovascular dysfunction in aging mice, exercise might be used as an intervention to repair (or restore) existing neurovascular breakdown. Such findings could be translationally useful, in the prevention or amelioration of age-related and pathologic cognitive decline in the growing geriatric population.


Funding Statement

The work was supported by NINDS R01NS085103 and R01NS062703 (GRJ). BML is the recipient of NIH NRSA Fellowship F30NS090718. This study was also supported by NMSS Research Grants RG4127 and RG5024 (GRJ), and the Beker Foundation, Noto Foundation, and Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.


Motor Learning Unfolds over Different Timescales in Distinct Neural Systems

Janelle Weaver — PLoS Biology, 2015. PMC4672876, CC BY 4.0.

Anyone who has learned how to play a musical instrument knows that translating notes on a sheet into finger movements is effortful at first, but gradually becomes more automatic over time. This widely appreciated feature of motor learning was described in 1967 by Paul Fitts and Michael Posner. In a book entitled Human Performance, the well-known psychologists proposed three stages of learning motor skills: a cognitive phase, an associative phase, and an autonomous phase.

In the first stage, movements are slow, inconsistent, and inefficient, and large parts of the movement are controlled consciously. In the second stage, movements become more fluid, reliable, and efficient, and some parts of the movement are controlled automatically. And in the third stage, movements are accurate, consistent, and efficient, and movement is largely controlled automatically. However, it has not been clear exactly how the different stages of motor learning map onto neural systems in the brain.

In a study published in this issue of PLOS Biology, Nicolas Schweighofer of the University of Southern California and Hiroshi Imamizu of the University of Tokyo combined computational modeling with behavioral and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data to create a brain-wide map of motor memories with different timescales. According to the authors, the findings shed new light on a classical psychological theory and could potentially be used to improve strategies for the rehabilitation of motor skills after brain damage.

In the new study, 21 healthy volunteers performed visual-motor adaptation tasks while their brain activity was measured with fMRI. At the beginning of each trial, a white cross (cursor) appeared at the center of the screen, and subjects then manipulated a joystick to move the cursor to a red or blue circle that appeared at the top of the screen. But there was a visual-motor mismatch: The cursor was rotated by 40 degrees relative to the actual movement direction. Over time, the subjects learned to adapt to this rotation by adjusting the joystick movement in the opposite direction.

The behavioral data revealed multiple stages of motor learning, with fast adaptation occurring within blocks of nine trials and slow adaptation occurring across the blocks. The researchers then developed a model to determine which neural systems were involved in the different stages of motor learning. They found that fast learning taking place within five seconds was associated with activity in frontal and parietal brain regions. By contrast, intermediate learning between two minutes and about one and a half hours was associated with activity in the anterior region of the inferior parietal lobe. The slowest learning stage, which unfolded over hours, was associated with activity in the anterior to medial portions of the cerebellum—a brain region that plays an important role in motor control.

These findings are consistent with past research showing that frontal regions are involved in early learning stages of attention, arousal, visual motion analysis, spatial working memory, memory of hand movements, and movement planning. Similarly, parietal regions are known to play a role in early learning stages of mental and visual-motor rotation. Taken together, the findings suggest that the initial cognitive and associative phases of motor learning recruit frontal and parietal brain regions, whereas the late stage of autonomous learning depends on the anterior-medial cerebellum. Thus, by combining multiple complementary techniques, the researchers provided deeper insights into a classical and influential psychological theory proposed several decades ago.


Memory, modelling and Marr: a commentary on Marr (1971) ‘Simple memory: a theory of archicortex’

D J Willshaw, P Dayan, R G M Morris — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4360131, CC BY 4.0.

David Marr's theory of the archicortex, a brain structure now more commonly known as the hippocampus and hippocampal formation, is an epochal contribution to theoretical neuroscience. Addressing the problem of how information about 10 000 events could be stored in the archicortex during the day so that they can be retrieved using partial information and then transferred to the neocortex overnight, the paper presages a whole wealth of later empirical and theoretical work, proving impressively prescient. Despite this impending success, Marr later apparently grew dissatisfied with this style of modelling, but he went on to make seminal suggestions that continue to resonate loudly throughout the field of theoretical neuroscience. We describe Marr's theory of the archicortex and his theory of theories, setting them into their original and a contemporary context, and assessing their impact. This commentary was written to celebrate the 350th anniversary of the journal Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society.

Keywords: hippocampus, theoretical neuroscience, memory


Introduction

After burning so brightly with his neuroscience work and his later contributions at the birth of the field of computational vision, David Marr died tragically young. His archicortex paper comes from the initial phase of his career, in which he constructed whole intellectual edifices concerning how the cerebellar cortex, the neocortex and the hippocampus could function as networks for learning and memory. In his first paper, he discussed how the Purkinje cells of the cerebellar cortex could learn motor commands. He then outlined how the neocortex could perform unsupervised learning to store highly processed information about inputs and thereby extract categories. His third theory described how the archicortex, the hippocampus and associated structures, could function as a simple memory by storing information directly and temporarily, prior to further processing in the neocortex. It was this paper that was published in the Philosophical Transactions. A posthumous book contains a notable and comprehensive collection of these papers and his other work, including invited commentaries.

The three early papers were strikingly different from all that had come before, and indeed most since: Marr articulated computational problems, posed in mathematical terms, to be solved by these structures; he suggested how existing anatomical and physiological knowledge related directly to the computations; finally, he nailed his modelling colours firmly to the mast, making numerous predictions that were starkly graded according to the severity of their consequences for the theory were they to be refuted.

Have such refutations indeed happened? We examine this question with a focus on his theory of the hippocampus, also looking more widely at how it has stood the test of time. Despite being wrong in some details, this work has been hugely inspirational for other theories and experiments. Marr's early studies are of even greater note for the concerns about the overall philosophy and practice of modelling that were inherent in the original three papers, and that he and Poggio, his close colleague, later crystallized. This analysis was reported in the book Vision. Their ideas about different levels of analysis—computational, algorithmic and implementational—have much resonance today, and are especially relevant to the current debate within the neuroscience community about attempts to build large-scale models of the brain.

Already in his schooldays, David Marr was developing his interests far beyond those provided by his formal education in mathematics and physics. Stimulated by reading books such as J. W. Dunne's An Experiment with Time and W. Grey Walter's The Living Brain, he became enthused about the possibility of a ‘mathematical theory of the brain itself’. He then went up to Trinity College Cambridge as a mathematics scholar. After graduating, he studied physiology and anatomy before becoming a PhD student with Giles Brindley who inspired him to produce his first theory paper on the cerebellar cortex. He then secured a Prize Fellowship at Trinity; notably, three of the four awards that year were to neuroscience, the other recipients being Tony Gardner-Medwin and Oliver Braddick—later to become a distinguished physiologist and experimental psychologist, respectively. During this Fellowship, he completed his two other early neural papers including the theory of archicortex. In 1970, he joined Sydney Brenner at the MRC Laboratory for Molecular Biology at Cambridge. Sydney encouraged him to experience at first hand the rising discipline of Artificial Intelligence by visiting Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert at MIT. This eventually led him to shift his focus towards computation rather than implementation, and to his long partnership with Tommy Poggio. Following a brave battle with leukaemia, David Marr died in 1980.


2. Mathematical and computational modelling in neuroscience

There are three main varieties of theoretical approaches in neuroscience: data analysis, mathematical modelling and the one that became clearer through Marr's later work, namely computational modelling.

Data analysis involves developing and deploying advanced computational and statistical methods for analysing the gargantuan volumes of data now being generated by an ever wider variety of experimental techniques and assessing the complex interactions among the multiple entities contained within these data.

Mathematical modelling involves building formal reductions based on descriptive and mechanistic models of natural phenomena associated with the brain over the huge range of spatial and temporal scales that characterize it. These reductions have to take into account the complexity and heterogeneity of the brain's components. Mathematical methods and computer simulations are used to explore whether the mechanisms proposed are capable of accounting for the phenomena they are intended to explain.

Computational modelling most interested Marr. He looked upon the brain as a physical device that is performing computational tasks involving representing, processing and acting upon information. That the brain can be interpreted as processing information provides a rich set of constraints on the mathematical models, whose structure and dynamics have to be appropriate to accomplish the computational tasks.

Marr distinguished three levels of computational modelling—implicitly in his early writing, but later, transparently. Examples are given in:

(1) The computational level, at which the task and the logic of its solution is described;

(2) the algorithmic level, which specifies how the information associated with the computation is represented and the procedures for performing the relevant manipulations; and

(3) the implementational level, which describes how the algorithms are realized in the nervous system.

One recurring theme in his work was the interaction between levels. This was fluid in his early work, as seen most clearly in his cerebellar cortex theory, which he developed to address the beautiful three-dimensional structure of the neuronal network of the cerebellar cortex, and that had such an impact among cerebellar physiologists. Equally, his neocortical theory blended categorization, as an implication of the exciting observations from Hubel & Wiesel of single neurons in the visual cortex responding selectively to moving lines and edges tilted at a particular angle, with statistical notions of this operation associated with the then emerging field of numerical taxonomy, an established focus of research at Cambridge. This was all under the guidance of a very careful analysis of neocortical anatomy as implementation. The algorithmic rendition of his theory of the hippocampus was strongly influenced by what was then known about the neuroanatomy, at least up to an impressive point. Some facets were omitted—for instance, it did not incorporate the substantial mechanistic complexities of actual neural elements known at the time, such as the details of spike generation or synaptic integration via extended dendritic trees.

Marr's subsequent work, perhaps influenced by the Artificial Intelligence community at MIT, and perhaps as a reaction to the overly precise predictions made from the neurobiology in these earlier papers, focused on insulating computational and algorithmic levels from the requirements of implementation. Indeed, a tenet of computational theory is that the same algorithm can be implemented in distinct ways in different hardware. Read strictly, this could imply that it is impossible to generate strong constraints that apply across computational levels, a restriction that would undermine the programme of theoretical neuroscience. However, recent thinking has recognized the potential for well-founded computational accounts that exploit both weak and strong constraints across levels, and that furthermore tightly integrate computational and mathematical modelling.

This discussion of Marr's approach provides a basis for understanding the sort of theory of the hippocampus for which he was aiming, and equally a framework within which to evaluate the extent to which these aims were met. After discussing the model and its impact in these terms, we will return to assess the wider impact of Marr's modelling philosophy and methodology.


Marr's theory of archicortex

Marr regarded the archicortex's computational task as acting as a temporary store of raw information derived from sensory experience: the hippocampus should memorize patterns of neural activity representing events as they happen through the day, with previously memorized patterns being retrieved when cued by partial information. According to his neocortex theory, the information stored in the hippocampus would then be transferred periodically to the neocortex, to be recoded via self-organization into a more categorical form. While the hippocampal model, therefore, lacked the sophistication of the neocortex, building a model of ‘simple memory’ was nevertheless, he asserted, still a ‘necessary technical exercise’. A more detailed explication of this exercise is provided in Willshaw & Buckingham.

As in Marr's two other contemporary neural models, the archicortex model comprised several layers of interconnected neurons with the connections specified probabilistically. This network structure can be traced to the more abstract Perceptron, an elegant mathematical account of the latter's capabilities having just been published by Minsky & Papert. The items to be stored in the model (called events) are represented by patterns of activity over the so-called input layer of neurons, storage being achieved through synaptic plasticity. Retrieval occurs when a portion of a previously stored event is presented to the input layer. Activity is propagated to all the remaining layers through synapses connecting one to the next, ultimately leading to a pattern of excitation over the neurons in the final (or output) layer. This output pattern is called the simple representation of the input pattern. It is then passed through another set of return synapses of variable strength directly back to the input layer. The synapses each have a binary-valued modifiable component, being strengthened by the coincidence of presynaptic and postsynaptic activity. Together with these Hebbian synapses, Marr proposed the existence of synapses with a weak or ‘baseline’ unmodifiable component that would enable postsynaptic cells to fire when activated (Brindley synapses—named after Marr's PhD advisor, Giles Brindley).

On the basis of reasonable calculations, Marr asserted that events could be stored no faster than one per second, and that information would be transferred to neocortex overnight, when there would be no sensory input to provide unwanted synaptic modification. He, therefore, set the memory capacity at 105 (approx. the number of seconds in a day). He estimated the number of neocortical pyramidal nerve cells to be used as the input layer at 105, and the number in the output layer at 104. Arguing that there would be no capacity for the return synapses to take part in pattern completion during retrieval, he assumed that the simple representation was completed in the output layer before being fed back to the input layer. No detail was provided about the return projection—the intended topic of a subsequent paper that sadly did not materialize.

Using his main mathematical result from the cerebellum paper concerning the number of events that can be stored and retrieved by a single Purkinje cell, he calculated that a simple two-layer model with the modifiable synapses connecting the input layer to the output layer directly would be inadequate, as the proportion of nerve cells active (the activity level) in a simple representation would be too low to be reliable.

He, therefore, concentrated on a three-layer model, with information flowing from input to output through a middle or codon layer. He assumed that there was a recurrent feedback loop with modifiable synapses between output layer neurons. The resulting collateral effect enabled a partially reconstructed simple representation to be improved gradually, so that the full simple representation could be reconstructed and sent back to the input layer through the return pathway.

Marr sought to ensure that (i) the activity levels in the various layers were not too low; and (ii) each event had a unique representation in each layer. This implied mathematical constraints on the parameter values of the system—principally the activity levels in each layer, the number of cells in the middle layer and the density of connections within each group of synapses. It then became crucial to set the firing thresholds for each nerve cell receiving input through modifiable synapses, something that he suggested, as in the cerebellum paper, could be achieved by a combination of divisive (somatic) and subtractive (dendritic) inhibition. In the reconstruction of the simple representation in the output layer, some cells may be inactive when they should be active, whereas others may be spuriously active; via what was described candidly as ‘suitable juggling’ of the thresholds [p. 80], the number of genuinely active cells would be expected to increase and the number of spuriously active cells to decrease, maintaining a constant activity level, until the full simple representation emerges with an accuracy of a few per cent. Appropriate settings for the thresholds depend on information about both the number and proportion of a nerve cell's afferent synapses that are active in storage or retrieval. Marr calculated possible values of these two parameters that, in combination, would yield the desired memory capacity. He made calculations for different configurations of (probabilistic) connectivity. In some configurations, connections between all cells in one layer were allowed to the cells in the next; in others the connections were restricted, to reflect the topographic organization believed to exist within some parts of the archicortex. All calculations were made for 105 cells in the output layer rather than the figure of 104 used initially when he rejected the two-layer model.

Marr incorporated the then available knowledge of the neuroanatomy of the hippocampus and related brain structure in great detail. In particular, he suggested that it is the anatomy of the principal cell types that determines the function of the archicortex to be a memorizer (in the same way that the different cell types of the neocortex specify it as a classifier). The paper is replete with diagrams showing connectivity among neurons within the hippocampal formation. The input layer was proposed to be the pyramidal cells in neocortex, the stellate cells in entorhinal cortex and presubiculum formed the codon layer, and the output layer embraced the dentate gyrus and the CA1, CA2 and CA3 pyramidal cells of the hippocampus; modern interpretations identify the codon layer with the dentate gyrus and the output layer with CA3, where there is a known feedback loop. Marr also suggested how particular memorizing cell types could be used for threshold setting through inhibition. Finally, he furnished a large list of predictions accompanied by numbers of stars: a three-star prediction would dismantle the theory were it to be disproved; a no-star prediction was merely a strong hint.


Marr's theory in its own time

Marr's theory hails from an era when much less was known about the psychological and computational roles of the hippocampus, and indeed its neurobiology. However, there was still a considerable contemporary psychological and physiological context which he did not mention (perhaps a relief to the reader of what is an intricate paper, lacking the relaxed style of his book Vision).

The development of Marr's simple memory idea may have been influenced by the striking observations made on a series of patients who had been given bilateral surgical resection of the temporal lobes for the relief of epilepsy. The best known of these, Henry Molaison (patient HM), experienced relief from seizures following the operation but, more strikingly, he displayed profound anterograde amnesia: while he could hold information in short-term memory for a few minutes, he could not form long-term memories. Detailed study of HM through the 1960s until his death in 2008 by Brenda Milner, Suzanne Corkin and their students substantiated and elaborated upon the initial clinical observations.

This unexpected finding led immediately to attempts to model the syndrome in non-human primates and rats. These efforts were largely unsuccessful as there was no deficit in learning after damage to the hippocampus. Indeed, contemporary hypotheses suggested that the hippocampus may be a behavioural inhibition system on the basis that hippocampal lesioned rats could learn but had great difficulty in either giving up or changing learned habits. It was not until some years later that the first successful animal models of amnesia were developed, building on the idea that memory for events and the capacity to acquire new habits are mediated by distinct neural systems. Either Marr did not know of these initial unsuccessful attempts to model the syndrome or, wisely ignoring them, he focused on the fascinating anatomy of the hippocampal formation as being ideal for ‘simple memory’—keeping track of the events of the day in precisely the way that patient HM could not.


Evaluation of the modelling

As noted, Marr's archicortex model bears a strong family resemblance to his three other network models of learning and memory with their three layers of nerve cells (input→codon→output), linked together randomly with modifiable synapses. They use the same mechanisms for synaptic modification and for setting the thresholds on the firing of cells in the codon and output layers. The principal differences between the three lie in whether they act as classifying or memorizing devices (determined by the anatomy) and the use to which the codon layer is put.

In the cerebellar model, the single output cell is taught to respond selectively to many different input patterns. An efficient way of producing high storage capacity is to use patterns with low activity levels. The codon layer acts to transform the input patterns with high but variable activity levels into patterns of more constant and lower activity so as to make any two patterns more distinct from one another (pattern separation). This is most easily done if the codon layer contains many more neurons than the input layer, as in the cerebellum. Marr calculated that 7000 mossy fibres (inputs) would influence the single Purkinje cell (output cell) through 200 000 granule cells (codons), achieving a reduction in activity level from between 1 and 25% in the input to 0.25% in the codon layer. By contrast, in the neocortex model, the codon cells act to pick out common features of the input patterns to enable each output cell to learn all patterns of a particular class. For the archicortex model, without ascribing a specific function to the codon layer, he may have thought it would facilitate pattern completion (recovery of a stored pattern from a fragment). There is no pattern separation as the activity levels are roughly the same in each layer of the model.

Marr's calculations showed that in his model, simple representations could be established and recalled from partial information. Had it been possible to carry out computer simulations, he might have been able to extend his model to: (i) investigate how to incorporate the missing final step in his model of reconstructing the input pattern through the final feedback pathway and (ii) specify a working threshold-setting strategy. Most significantly, had he kept the same number of output layer cells (105) from the outset, rather than switching from 104 to 105, there would have been no reason to reject the two-layer model. One major simulation which confirmed the validity of his assumptions (albeit on a 1/100 size model) found that the performances of two- and the three-layer models were broadly equivalent. His choice of a three-layer rather than a two-layer model seems to rest on using constraints from an implementational rather than a computational perspective. Similar simulation techniques verified Marr's calculations for the cerebellum model and explored the computations performed in the neocortex model.

Marr discussed how to clear the memory periodically, but without coming to a clear algorithmic solution. Instead of setting all synapses to zero overnight once the patterns had been re-presented to neocortex, he considered either the selected deletion of the synapses activated by particular simple representations or the gradual decay of all synapses (which he said requires simpler assumptions). Subsequent work by a variety of authors has shown that having all synapses decay lowers memory capacity.


Marr's theory in modern terms

Later in his career, Marr became focused on the computational level, leading to much debate about his own views about his earlier models. At the very least, we can see this work as a noble failure—it was an astonishing achievement for a mathematician to synthesize so much disparate data into a whole. A later review reminded a new generation of neuroscientists how the combination of specific features of hippocampal anatomy coupled with activity-dependent synaptic plasticity could mediate distinct components of memory. It also discussed further concepts such as pattern completion, pattern separation and the role of sleep in memory reactivation, all mentioned in Marr's original works.


Systems consolidation

Marr's theory that the archicortex acts as a temporary store to enable events to be appropriately recoded in the neocortex lies firmly within the domain of long-term memory, rather than being a limited capacity short-term memory of the kind used to remember, e.g. telephone numbers. Its interaction with neocortex is now referred to as ‘systems memory consolidation’. This has been the subject of experimental work for over a century, but only more recently considered theoretically. The complementary learning systems framework of McClelland et al. is perhaps the best worked out computational model of systems memory consolidation, and is very much in the spirit of Marr's original ideas. Consolidation is best seen as a process by which memory traces become stabilized and integrated into neocortical networks that sustain and expand upon the memory. The standard view is that this process is a long and gradual one, whereas according to Marr it would happen over the course of a single night. This distinction has quantitative implications for understanding the temporal characteristics of retrograde amnesia, which refers to the forgetting of information learned prior to damage to the hippocampus. The experimentally somewhat controversial prediction is that older memories should be remembered more proficiently.

The consolidation idea has been refined in several ways. First, the concept of ‘transfer’ of information from hippocampus to cortex is no longer accepted. Instead, parallel encoding is now considered explicitly, with hippocampal–neocortical interactions serving to stabilize neocortical traces selectively. Second, according to a multiple trace theory, event memory can be subdivided into context-specific episodic memory that is stored in hippocampus (‘what, where and when’), and semantic memory for ‘facts’ stored in neocortex. Episodic memory is analogous to Marr's recording of events—the memory of things that happen during the day. Semantic memory is the corpus of factual knowledge acquired through formal training or from our interpretation and recoding of events. Third, new work on frameworks of semantic knowledge in both animals and humans suggests that activated prior knowledge can guide or at least influence the process of systems memory consolidation, and thereby decrease the time it takes. These challenge the notion that the simple memory is the only fast component of the system. Even in the complementary learning systems framework, the gradual creation of categories in neocortex occurs using plasticity mechanisms that are just as fast in the neocortex as in the hippocampus.


Spatial memory

One important algorithmic assumption was that the hippocampus and related structures are incapable of generating systematic representations of their own and instead merely inherit random representations from neocortical input. The first hints that this is incorrect had already been evident in the discovery of hippocampal place cells. This led to the suggestion that the hippocampus processes places and contexts. The observation of place cells was followed by that of head-direction cells reflecting directionality; and of grid cells which provide a metric for transitions through space. Research on the human brain, using both intracranial electrophysiological recording and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has confirmed the presence of place and grid cells in humans. The huge interest in spatial learning and memory continues to this day.

This research has led to the conjecture that critical processing by the hippocampal formation includes representation of location within an orientationally anchored metric representation of space, with recovery of past events involving remembering where they took place. Much recent neural circuit analysis is endeavouring to work out implementational details. How discrete events are represented, and how they are anchored in present or future time and space to a specific context, remains poorly understood—though the notion of the hippocampus acting as a type of distributed associative memory that binds events to context has been discussed extensively in the neuroscience literature. Certainly, the recovery of the stored representation of an event may now be seen to be one that involves remembering where that event took place, a less abstract process than that envisaged by Marr.


Cellular and subcellular processing

Marr provided what looked like a very clear guide to testing the implementation of his model. However, it actually turns out to be very difficult to do so convincingly. For instance, the degree of abstraction necessary in treating all the complexities of the internal connections within the hippocampus as being just part of the output layer renders many of the implementational suggestions rather moot. Thus, it can be criticized even at the coarse level of connectivity at which the model could have made contact with the neural substrate—the more so for lacking any information about the input–output relationship with the neocortex. The theory was on far firmer ground at the level of synaptic plasticity; and indeed, Marr mentioned (in a footnote) Lømo's initial observations about synaptic potentiation later collected and expanded in the well-known paper of Bliss & Lømo.

Certainly, he was prescient in imagining that the axonal targets of inhibitory neurons could be on the cell soma or the dendrites (e.g. figs. 3–5 of). It took many years and the elegant work of Somogyi and his colleagues in Oxford before their combined electrophysiological, immunocytochemical and ultrastructural studies at the single-cell level confirmed that distinct types of inhibitory neuron within the hippocampal formation (now at least 25 types) have differential patterns of connectivity.

The existence of oscillatory activity in the hippocampus had been established at the time of Marr's paper, but he made no reference to it. A theta rhythm (5–12 Hz) could be gating the memory-encoding activity of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, or acting as a rapid phase-regulator of encoding and retrieval. Additional noteworthy rhythms include hippocampal sharp waves seen in field-potentials, which Buszáki has suggested may be mediating hippocampal–neocortical interactions during consolidation and which have also been implicated in hippocampal replay after sleep. New work has suggested that gamma rhythms (30–80 Hz) may play a role in gating the inputs to the hippocampal formation from layer II and layer III of the entorhinal formation. All these ideas are at the forefront of experimental work with many details to be worked out, but it seems certain that Marr would have been excited by this more ‘dynamic’ conception of his simple memory.

An implementational absentee from Marr's theory was neuromodulation. As well as their possible role in novelty, dopamine neurons are also known to report prediction errors associated with rewards, with similar potential consequences for memory. Acetylcholine has been implicated in modern versions of Marr's theories, regulating synaptic drive and efficacy so that retrieval of existing memories and storage of new ones can be appropriately separated.

Regulation of synaptic efficacy is central to the capacity of the memory to store information. Of the two types of synapse envisaged by Marr, the Hebb synapse was later identified with long-term potentiation (LTP); the Brindley synapse may exist but there is no firm evidence. Since 1971, once the actions of glutamate on the four receptor subtypes, AMPA, NMDA, kainate and mGLUR were understood (GLU-A,N,K and M, respectively), many aspects of synaptic plasticity such as associativity and cooperativity could be accounted for. Marr might have been intrigued that the NMDA receptor has the biophysical properties necessary for detecting the conjunction of presynaptic activity and postsynaptic depolarization, that is then signalled with a different ion (Ca2+) from that mediating fast synaptic transmission by AMPA receptors (Na+); and that metabotropic glutamate receptors could inform postsynaptic signalling cascades about the magnitude of presynaptic input without regard to the level of postsynaptic depolarization. In addition, the hippocampal slice preparation, allowing studies in which drugs could be washed out as well as into living brain, led to increased understanding of activity-dependent synaptic plasticity, including the critical role that NMDA receptors play at the time of induction. Synapses are now regarded as bidirectionally modifiable, exhibiting both LTP and long-term depression (LTD), which has been shown to have implications for storage capacity. There are numerous observations such as that blocking NMDA receptors impairs memory formation, and the recent finding that synaptic plasticity is also shown by inhibitory interneurons.


Pattern separation and pattern completion

Arising out of the modern interpretation of the dentate gyrus and CA3 cells as the codon layer and the output layer, respectively, there has been both experimental and theoretical work on the role of the collaterals in taking partial patterns and returning their original, complete, matches. One such study involved the restricted genetic ablation of NMDA receptors on pyramidal neurons in CA3 in mice, leaving fast synaptic transmission intact but impairing plasticity. When trained on a spatial task with a rich set of extra-maze cues, the knock-out mice were impaired when required to recall with all but one cue absent (a). In rats whose CA3 had undergone an excitotoxic lesion, there was a parametric disintegration in performance when required to remember a maze location for a short period of time as more spatial cues were removed (b).

Similar studies have been used to examine pattern separation, a function that Marr studied in great detail for his cerebellum model. The modern notion is that granule cells of the dentate gyrus (DG) have a similar function to granule cells in Marr's model of the cerebellum in mapping similar input patterns to dissimilar representations. One study showed that rats trained to distinguish the locations of two objects were impaired selectively after DG lesions as an inverse function of the spatial distance between the objects, suggesting that pattern separation had been impaired (c). Likewise, selective deletion of the NR1 subunit of NMDA receptors in the DG of the mouse (impairing plasticity rather than activity) resulted in animals able to learn a context fear-conditioning task, but unable to distinguish two similar contexts associated with the learning task (d). Single-unit recordings from CA3 (e, upper) and DG (e, lower plot) by Leutgeb et al. have shown that signals from the entorhinal cortex could be decorrelated by changes in the pattern of firing in the dentate gyrus by the recruitment of non-overlapping cell assemblies in CA3, consistent with the expectations of Wills et al.. Similar studies in humans, using fMRI, have also been conducted.


A broader view of archicortex

Other computations have also been ascribed to the archicortex. For instance, it may be as involved in constructing (i.e. imagining) possible future events as it is in reconstructing (i.e. remembering) past events. This implicates it in mechanisms for planning, such as of possible trajectories in space. Equally, the hippocampus might offer abstract representations for sensory stimuli, effectively binding together disparate information about objects in just the way that place cells bind together disparate information to generate a code for location. A third idea is that the hippocampus is a comparator, detecting and highlighting unpredictability and anomalies. This has implications for issues such as anxiety, and the influence of novelty on memory processing. Dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area (one of the neuromodulatory absentees mentioned above) might communicate novelty to the hippocampus and thereby enhance the synaptic persistence of associated events as outlined in the synaptic-tagging and capture theory, although the possibility of a contribution by other neuromodulatory afferents needs also to be considered. In either case, the simple memory could hold information for longer periods and enable the overnight, sleep-associated, memory consolidation process to favour these events, giving rise to very long-lasting representations.


An appreciation

Neuroscience is maturing as a discipline and, despite frequent comments to the contrary, we now know a great deal more about the brain than we did in 1971. However, the relationship between its empirical and theoretical branches is far from mature. The modelling philosophy and methodology that Marr created for his three detailed models of the 1970s, and then substantially refined in Vision in 1982, remains influential in theoretical circles. However, it is at risk of being forgotten by the wider community where addressing mechanistic issues without thinking about the functions or algorithms performed in a brain area appears prevalent. In an essay broadly sympathetic to the original tri-partite structure, Marr's former colleague Tommy Poggio finds himself wondering how evolution and learning would fit in and whether they also should be considered as separate levels. An additional concern is that the field is now polarizing around either implementational or computational explanations, with the danger of the two never meeting. Marr's legacy bears significantly on the profitability of current endeavours of each type, including hypothesis-free ‘omic’ neuroscience; for example, the collection of immense amounts of data about the connections between all neural elements or global-scale mathematical modelling without a specific computation in mind, such as attempts by the Human Brain Project to build huge-scale simulations of the brain (see https://www.humanbrainproject.eu). The same could be said of implementation-free computational approaches that aim to explore whether the brain functions according to optimality principles.

Within the milieu of theoreticians seeking support for their general theories of the brain, Marr was one of the first to investigate whether specific computational tasks can be implemented on the available neural machinery. A common reading of his later work is that it is appropriate and sufficient to start from the computational level; divorced from implementational considerations, information processing can be readily formulated as optimal inference and control, using ideas from fields such as statistics, operations research, economics and machine learning. However, as recognized throughout the book Vision, these accounts are limited. In all but the very simplest circumstances, optimal inference and control are radically intractable for animal or machine alike, and so are formally limited or even useless. It is essential to use heuristics and approximations to the original computational specification. The viability and ultimate performance of a heuristic depends critically on the properties of the substrate on which it is implemented. This opens a critical channel of reverse communication between Marr's three levels. Marr recognizes this point in Vision [ch. 7], which features imaginary dialogues between a defender of the top-down approach and a sceptic, based on conversations between himself, Tommy Poggio and Francis Crick. In one exchange he accepts that the available neural infrastructure may force a ‘poor man's version’ of the computation to be implemented rather than the computation itself [p. 339].

Bottom-up accounts that focus purely on the implementation are attractive because they treat neuroscience as any other natural science. This provides a transparent way to construct models of neural phenomena at multiple scales of investigation. However, these endeavours face two problems. The first is that, as explained at length in Vision, such accounts ignore the information processing problems—including the fundamental problem of representation that is central to understanding the brain but is irrelevant, or certainly less relevant, in most other domains of natural science. For example, for the case of memory, without the notion of adequate retrieval of past patterns from partial information, the elements and neural circuits of the hippocampus would seem incomprehensibly complicated. As evident in Marr's treatments, such concepts can be a key source of constraints on the structure of the implementation, which is most valuable in the face of the magnitude of the problem. The second problem is one of heterogeneity, which is more subtle and also more pernicious. Conventional approaches to modelling natural phenomena over multiple scales depend critically on homogeneity, i.e. that the innumerable entities at the finer levels of description (such as the sextillions of molecules in a gas, or the million or so cortical nephrons in a human kidney, or the roughly 6000 sodium channels at a node of Ranvier of an axon) can be treated as being at least statistically equivalent. These statistics can then be averaged over time and/or space to derive approximate laws of bulk behaviour applicable at a less detailed temporal or spatial scale (such as the gas laws in physics, or the Hodgkin–Huxley equations). This approach is the bread-and-butter of statistical physics, with the macroscopic measures reflecting the average properties of microscopic interactions. However, many aspects of the brain are highly heterogeneous over many temporal and spatial scales.

One implementational approach to heterogeneity is just to measure it in all its complex richness—the ‘omics’ strategy. However, the number of such measurements is impossibly large even for a single organism (e.g. the location of every ion channel on every dendrite). Worse, in a strongly nonlinear system such as the brain in which microscopic changes can have macroscopic effects, generalization across time, and between individuals, is very hard. Building a nominally faithful bottom-up simulation, as the Human Brain Project aims to do, is equally problematic.

A second implementational approach is to assume that the heterogeneity of the brain arises from a deeper form of homogeneity, for instance, through a statistical sampling process, and to try to work with the latter. One example is Marr's assumption that the input patterns of activity are generated from independent samples drawn from a simple distribution. Another is Peter's principle that neurons choose to make synapses randomly whenever an axon is sufficiently close to a dendrite. Unfortunately, such simple relationships do not seem to hold—input patterns will actually contain substantial correlations from shared coding; in consequence, cortical wiring exhibits higher order relationships in which generating and verifying more complicated forms is hard.

An alternative approach to the heterogeneity problem is to argue that it arises through contingency, being tightly regulated to realize algorithmic goals. The heterogeneity will therefore reflect the developmental trajectory of the organism—the explanation for the precise strength of connections between excitatory and inhibitory cells would be merely that it occurs to ensure that excitation does not outweigh inhibition and cause instability. Such effects would only be apparent in deeply buried patterns of correlations in ‘omic’ observations, ones that it would probably be impossible to extract without the algorithmic understanding.


Conclusion

David Marr sits comfortably with such luminaries as Norbert Wiener, Warren McCulloch, Walter Pitts, Horace Barlow and Donald MacKay as one of the most notable early theoretical neuroscientists. Marr's Philosophical Transactions paper appeared in 1971, ironically the year of the first annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience—a meeting that now attracts 30 000 attendees. Few of them may now know of Marr, though many should. As we have tried to reflect, for a paper that firmly embraces the complexities of the hippocampus (as opposed to concentrating on important but narrower questions such as the mechanism by which spikes are generated), it is quite remarkable how relevant it remains to this day despite so much more now being known. Marr was notably visionary, as well as impressively brave, and he went to great lengths to show how his theories can, at least in principle, be falsifiable. The Royal Society can take credit for recognizing a special talent and allowing him to publish his ideas at length in its journals.

Nevertheless, despite the prescience of this and his other papers, their enduring legacy comes through their influence on contemporary ideas about understanding particular systems of the brain in terms of the computations they carry out with the neural hardware available. His methodology gave the intellectual infrastructure within which almost all subsequent modelling has been performed. He thereby provided a means to establish the communication between levels that is necessary to make lasting progress, a lesson that modern attempts that focus too narrowly on one level at the expense of others ignore at their peril.


Author profiles

David Willshaw is Emeritus Professor of Computational Neurobiology at the University of Edinburgh. Prior to this, he was a member of MRC External Scientific Staff and then University of Edinburgh staff, with Programme Grant support from both MRC and The Wellcome Trust. His main research interest is in modelling the development of nerve connections in both visual and neuromuscular systems. His earlier research was on models of learning and memory, as represented by his PhD topic on modelling distributed associative memory, contemporary with David Marr's study on the archicortex. Together with students, he has used computer simulation studies to explore the properties of Marr's models of cerebellar cortex, neocortex and archicortex.

Peter Dayan is Director of the Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit at UCL. He did his PhD with David Willshaw in the University of Edinburgh, and completed postdocs with Terry Sejnowski at the Salk Institute and Geoff Hinton at the University of Toronto. He was appointed an assistant professor at MIT, and then moved to London in 1998. His interests span decision-making, representational and reinforcement learning, and associative memory.

Richard Morris is Professor of Neuroscience at the University of Edinburgh. He completed a DPhil at the University of Sussex and was first appointed as a lecturer in St Andrews prior to moving to Edinburgh in 1986. His main research interests are in the neurobiology of learning and memory, with a particular focus on hippocampal function. He was instrumental in creating the interdisciplinary organization ‘Edinburgh Neuroscience’ which endeavours to bring together scientists interested in the brain using a variety of distinct approaches, encompassing both basic and clinical approaches.


The BRAIN Initiative: developing technology to catalyse neuroscience discovery

Lyric A. Jorgenson, William T. Newsome, David J. Anderson, Cornelia I. Bargmann, Emery N. Brown, Karl Deisseroth, John P. Donoghue, Kathy L. Hudson et al. — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4387507, CC BY 4.0.

The evolution of the field of neuroscience has been propelled by the advent of novel technological capabilities, and the pace at which these capabilities are being developed has accelerated dramatically in the past decade. Capitalizing on this momentum, the United States launched the Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) Initiative to develop and apply new tools and technologies for revolutionizing our understanding of the brain. In this article, we review the scientific vision for this initiative set forth by the National Institutes of Health and discuss its implications for the future of neuroscience research. Particular emphasis is given to its potential impact on the mapping and study of neural circuits, and how this knowledge will transform our understanding of the complexity of the human brain and its diverse array of behaviours, perceptions, thoughts and emotions.


Introduction

The human brain is the most complex biological entity in the known universe and understanding how it works—that is, how its molecules, cells, circuits and systems enable behaviour, perception, thought and emotion—is the overarching goal of neuroscience. This goal remains elusive, although not from a lack of collective drive or intellectual curiosity on the part of researchers. Rather, progress frequently has been limited by the technologies available during any given era. Over the past decade, however, remarkable technological advances have created entirely new possibilities for studying and understanding the brain. Just as the advent of the microscope enabled Ramón y Cajal to lay the foundation for the ‘neuron doctrine’, innovative technologies from diverse but increasingly convergent disciplines will spur groundbreaking discoveries that will change how we think about the brain.

Recognizing that we are on the threshold of a revolution in modern neuroscience, President Obama launched the Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) Initiative as a bold new research effort focused on ‘giving scientists the tools they need to get a dynamic picture of the brain in action’. Given the audacious nature of this goal, the President called for the BRAIN Initiative to be an ‘all hands on deck’ effort involving not only agencies within the United States government, but also companies, health systems, patient advocacy organizations, philanthropists, state governments, research universities, private research institutes, scientific societies and more. The envisioned long-term pay-off of the BRAIN Initiative is a more comprehensive understanding of how the brain produces complex thoughts and behaviours that will provide an essential guide to progress in diagnosing, treating and potentially curing neurological and psychiatric diseases and disorders that devastate so many lives.

As the world's largest funder of biomedical research, it was natural for the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to lead the charge. To ensure a rigorous scientific plan, NIH convened a orking group of neuroscientists—of which we were members—to survey the field and identify key opportunities, milestones and goals for the Initiative's future. While a daunting challenge, members of the working group (hereafter WG) felt privileged to venture outside of our laboratories and clinics, assess the overall state of the field during a period of remarkable change, and make thoughtful recommendations about how to drive the field forward in bold new ways. In this paper, we provide a synopsis of our final report to the NIH, aiming to convey succinctly both the substance and the excitement of our journey. It is particularly appropriate that we share this summary of our scientific vision in a special issue of Philosophical Transactions devoted to the future of cerebral cartography.


The BRAIN Initiative: charting the course

Our charge from the NIH was to ‘catalyse an interdisciplinary effort of unprecedented scope’ that will ‘accelerate the development and application of new technologies to construct a dynamic picture of brain function that integrates neuronal and circuit activity over time and space’. Throughout our 14-month process, we enriched our discussions and sharpened our insights through broad consultation within and outside the scientific community. We held four summer workshops with invited experts to discuss technologies in chemical and molecular approaches; large-scale recording technologies and structural neurobiology; computation, theory and data analysis; and human neuroscience. Workshop discussions addressed the value of appropriate experimental systems and behavioural analysis—in both animal and human models. Each workshop included opportunity for public comments, which we received both at meetings and on a designated website from multiple sources including patient advocacy groups and members of the general public. The WG issued a preliminary report in September 2013 that recommended high-priority areas for an initial investment of research funding in fiscal year 2014. The scientific community embraced these findings, and NIH used these initial high-priority areas to craft a set of novel funding announcements focused on developing tools and technologies for visualizing the brain in action, culminating in $46 million of new awards in fiscal year 2014.

The release of the interim report was followed by a period of extended discussion between the WG and the broader community. The leadership of the Society for Neuroscience was consulted and an open town hall held at the Society's annual meeting in November 2013. In addition, we consulted with the presidents of clinical societies in neuroscience-related fields, seeking their advice for the best approaches to the unsolved problems in their fields. The WG met with the leadership of the initial BRAIN Initiative partner organizations, including the NIH, the National Science Foundation, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute Janelia Research Campus, the Allen Institute for Brain Science, the Kavli Foundation and the Food and Drug Administration. Open solicitation of advice continued through the NIH BRAIN Initiative website and through numerous one-on-one conversations with colleagues who argued with us throughout the year and educated us in the process. We delivered our final report to NIH in June 2014. We believe that the salient recommendations and principles articulated in our final report and in the synopsis below represent a ‘best-current-projection’ for a bold and scientifically rigorous BRAIN Initiative.


BRAIN 2025: a scientific vision

In considering our charge and the current state of neuroscience, the WG identified the analysis of circuits of interacting neurons as being particularly rich in opportunity, with potential for revolutionary advances. This area of research represents a real knowledge gap. We can now study the brain at very high resolution by examining individual genes, molecules, synapses and neurons, or we can study large brain areas at low resolution with whole-brain imaging. The challenge remaining is what lies in between—the thousands and millions of neurons that constitute functional circuits. Analysis of circuits is only one of many areas of neuroscience worthy of attention. However, the WG agreed that accelerating technology development in this area could drive a qualitative shift in what is possible, and progress in this area will benefit many other areas of neuroscience as well. The focus is not on technology per se, but on the development and use of tools for acquiring fundamental insight about how the nervous system functions in health and disease. Thus, the WG identified the central challenges of the BRAIN Initiative to be: accelerating the development of technologies for mapping the circuits of the brain, measuring the fluctuating patterns of electrical and chemical activity flowing within those circuits, and understanding how their interplay creates our unique cognitive and behavioural capabilities.


Priority research areas

The WG identified seven areas of investigation as essential for achieving the ambitious goals of the BRAIN Initiative. In each target area, new technological and conceptual advances are catalysing rapid change in what is achievable, together creating the potential for remarkable new advances. To some extent, segregation into seven target areas is entirely artificial, because each sheds critical light onto the others—a theme that we will bring into sharper focus under #7 (§11). Nevertheless, this division is useful in organizing initial research plans, because many of the immediate goals and experimental techniques are recognizably different from one area to the next.

Throughout our planning process, the WG was acutely aware that the intellectual activity and discoveries that drive the science forward will be made through the initiative of small groups of investigators in hundreds of laboratories around the world, not by a central planning committee. We therefore sought to identify fundamental problems and particularly promising approaches to those problems, not to specify answers or dictate specific actions, which are best left to the initiative of individual research teams. In that spirit, we summarize our seven high-priority target areas and the rationale behind them.


#1. Discovering diversity: identify and provide experimental access to the different brain cell types to determine their roles in health and disease

The mammalian brain contains approximately 108 (mouse)–1011 (human) neurons and even greater numbers of glia. These cells are not homogeneous, but consist of diverse subpopulations with genetically, anatomically, physiologically and connectionally distinct properties. Defining these cell types and their functions in different brain regions, and providing methods for experimental access to them in a variety of animals and in humans, is essential to generating a comprehensive understanding of neural circuit function.

A consensus definition and taxonomy of brain cell types has yet to be achieved. Nevertheless, objective classification schemes can be built based on a principled approach combining electrophysiological, gene expression, and anatomical and connectional data. It is likely that the best working definitions of natural cell types will emerge from empirical classifications based on functionally relevant phenotypic dimensions. Working definitions will be updated continuously as more data are collected and a deeper understanding emerges.

Important contributions to the conceptual definition of cell type will also come from iterative interactions with theory and modelling. For example, theoretical considerations may specify the level of granularity of cell type identification that is necessary to understand the computations in a particular brain region, providing a guide for experimental analysis. In turn, the level of cellular heterogeneity observed in a given brain region can constrain models and generate new predictions concerning circuit function or disease intervention.

More concretely, we believe that a cell types inventory should focus initially on a few key brain regions in model organisms such as Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila, zebrafish, mouse and non-human primate. The inventory should include molecular, anatomical and electrophysiological descriptions as well as the development of tools for genetic access to all of these cells. The model organisms and brain regions should be prioritized based on their interest to large communities of neuroscience researchers and their relevance to behaviour and human disease. In the mouse, for example, relevant areas might include the retina, spinal cord, hippocampus, striatum, amygdala/hypothalamus and prefrontal cortex. This strategy would identify challenges and opportunities for iterative tactical improvements in technology and process. A long-term goal of this project—on the order of 10 years out—is to achieve proof-of-principle cell type-specific targeting for therapeutic manipulations in humans.

A comprehensive, rigorous inventory of cell types will enable neuroscientists to begin answering questions of fundamental importance such as — What level of granularity of cell type definition is necessary for understanding the function of a given neural circuit?— What are the fundamental principles guiding the organization of the various cell types throughout the brain?— Do well-defined cell types shape neural circuit function to a greater extent in some brain regions than in others?— Can we target specific human cell types to develop new therapies for neurological and psychiatric disorders?


#2. Maps at multiple scales: generate circuit diagrams that vary in resolution from synapses to the whole brain

Throughout the brain, the flow and processing of information is mediated by anatomical connections that unify cells into circuits and circuits into systems. These connections include both local connections within a specific brain region and long-range connections spanning multiple areas and distances. Maps of anatomical connectivity at various levels of detail provide an essential foundation for understanding the functional signals underlying cognition and behaviour.

Existing methods for mapping anatomical connectivity have provided numerous valuable insights but remain inadequate for making the next leap in understanding. For instance, our direct knowledge of human brain connectivity derives almost exclusively from macro-connectomic measurements based on magnetic resonance imaging, but these methods achieve at best a spatial resolution of 2 mm (isotropic), provide only indirect measures of connectivity, and yield little information about directionality. Improvements in resolution of macro-connectomic techniques are feasible and would enable new sets of questions to be asked about human brain connectivity. In addition to improved resolution, another high priority for the near future is to validate macro-connectomic maps in animal models where macro-scale maps can be compared directly to finer scale maps.

Meso-connectomic approaches (millimetre-to-micrometre resolution), capable of mapping both local and interarea connections with cellular resolution, provide the bulk of our knowledge of anatomical connectivity in animal models. Ongoing efforts to apply these techniques systematically to large numbers of brain structures, and with cell-type specificity, are extremely valuable. Retrograde and anterograde trans-synaptic tracers are beginning to allow direct study of cell-to-cell connectivity at the mesoscale, which is essential for identifying repeating circuit motifs that characterize individual brain structures or are common across brain structures. However, these methods are inadequately validated and viral vectors are toxic to living tissue. The greatest need in this area is to improve the specificity and reliability of methods for projectome and cell-type-to-cell-type tracing. Newer methods that render the brain transparent and leave its connections intact, such as CLARITY, Scale, SeeDB and others, are poised to make a significant impact. Importantly, mesoscale connectivity maps have the greatest potential for direct alignment with large-scale activity measurements obtained through calcium imaging. To make this vision a reality, we will need new optical and computational methods for efficient, high-resolution collection of multidimensional anatomical datasets from large brain volumes and registration of these datasets with cellular-resolution activity information (see #7).

Micro-connectomic maps (micrometre-to-nanometre resolution), involving dense electron microscope reconstruction at level of individual cells and synapses, are considered by many neuroscientists to be the gold standard for connectomics. Currently, it takes orders of magnitude more time to generate electron microscope reconstructions than it does to obtain the original data, resulting in data analysis rather than data acquisition being the most significant barrier to progress. The BRAIN Initiative must spur improvements in segmentation and reconstruction methods; machine learning, crowd-sourcing and other promising approaches can be pursued in parallel to accelerate the image analysis process. Importantly, segmentation methods developed in this effort will be applicable to light as well as electron microscopic datasets.

The first few years of the BRAIN Initiative will focus on improving current technologies at all scales and exploring the broadest possible space in search of new technologies. In later years, we anticipate that these improved technologies will enable complete sparse reconstructions of key areas in brains of normal animals and in selected animal models of human brain disorders. Likewise, we anticipate that initial segmentation of key areas within typical and pathological human brains will be feasible within 10 years. Combining these datasets into a common bioinformatic framework and registering them with other streams of information describing the cell populations and projections of interest, such as molecular phenotype and activity patterns during behaviour, will increase their depth and scientific utility.

Armed with improved maps at all three scales we can begin to answer the following questions — Can macro-connectomic connectivity patterns serve as biomarkers for human brain disorders? How widely can they be used for differential diagnosis of brain disorders, monitoring disease progression, and predicting or monitoring responses to therapy?— Do some brain disorders result from anatomical ‘connectopathies’ with stereotyped defects in neural circuitry?— What changes in circuits accompany, and perhaps cause, age-related cognitive decline?— How different are connectivity patterns in genetically identical organisms in a species, ranging from isogenic flies and worms to identical twin humans?— Can individual variations in connectivity be related to or even predict individual differences in brain function?


#3. The brain in action: produce a dynamic picture of the functioning brain by developing and applying improved methods for large-scale monitoring of neural activity

Large-scale monitoring of neural activity is fundamental to the goals of the BRAIN Initiative, providing critical data for measuring and understanding the changes in electrical and chemical signalling underlying mental processes and behaviour. Ultimately, neural population activity must be measured across dispersed circuits, diverse cell types and at multiple timescales, creating unique technological challenges.

Currently, there are two important classes of methods for recording neuronal activity with cellular resolution, both possessing their own limitations. Classically, direct measurement of electrical activity with microelectrodes has been the workhorse tool. We are still far from the goal of dense recordings from highly complex circuits, even though microelectrode recording methods have been scaled up in recent years. For example, large-scale neurophysiological approaches have allowed recordings from thousands of neurons in the vertebrate retina, but even so only the retinal ganglion cells have been recorded at scale, not the many non-spiking bipolar and amacrine cells that process information prior to optic nerve output. More recently, optical sensors (e.g. chemical, genetic) for recording activity have been greatly improved and have proved to be a tremendous asset for monitoring activity in large numbers of densely packed neurons. Optical tools capture a central vision of the BRAIN Initiative, in that they may ultimately facilitate the integration of many multiple approaches into a single experiment—activity monitoring, activity manipulation, circuit reconstruction and characterization of a single cell's morphology and molecular constituents (or at least a subset of the above). Optical methods also have the greatest potential for measuring chemical and biochemical processes in the brain, an important complement to measurements of electrical activity.

Both electrical and optical methods will continue to be essential in studying neural circuitry and we urge a continued focus on improving these techniques. New and improved electrode arrays should increase the number and density of recorded neurons, provide access to more brain areas, increase reliability and improve biocompatibility through better materials and electrode design. Great benefit could come from short-term efforts to improve optical sensors to enhance the speed, tissue volume, tissue depth and the number of brain regions that can be monitored in living animals. Ultimately, new recording technologies will provide the ability to map at unprecedented resolution and scale the electrical and chemical activity of populations of neurons in the awake brain during cognition, emotion and behaviour. These new data will provide the basis for a conceptual understanding of neural coding: how information relevant to the brain state, sensory stimuli or other variables are encoded in neural population activity. Following the changes in neural activity over time—circuit dynamics—will provide key information for establishing the computational function of a neural circuit, and allow us to develop and test (when combined with causal manipulations) hypotheses about the necessity and sufficiency of particular neural activity patterns for specific behaviours and cognitive processes.

In the intermediate or long-term, revolutionary new recording technologies may emerge, and we encourage their exploration and development. Future development of next-generation recording technologies will increasingly require the participation of scientists from physics, chemistry, molecular biology, electrical and neuroengineering, materials science and computer science. Development of a new generation of large-scale recording tools will permit more incisive investigation of numerous problems in neuroscience that have been approached in only limited ways to date — How is sensory information transformed into higher-order perception?— How is short-term working memory encoded, maintained, and read out?— What are the circuit mechanisms underlying decision-making?— What fundamental logic and neural mechanisms mediate motor control?— How do multiple brain areas communicate and work together as behaviour and task demands change?— How can we reliably detect internal brain states that are not time-locked to externally observable events? What are the unique functions of these states?— How do neuromodulatory signals remodel circuit dynamics and brain states?— How are internal cognitive models of the world encoded, updated, and accessed to make predictions and guide future actions?


#4. Demonstrating causality: link brain activity to behaviour by developing and applying precise interventional tools that change neural circuit dynamics

Observing natural patterns of neural activity during behaviour generates hypotheses about their functional significance, but causal tests of such hypotheses require direct manipulation of the underlying activity patterns. Precise circuit-level perturbation techniques are needed to (i) determine the causal significance of neural activity patterns in cognition, emotion, perception and other processes; (ii) probe the internal structure and dynamics of nervous systems; and (iii) serve as a basis for new therapeutic interventions.

A major recent advance in circuit manipulation has been the development of optogenetic tools based on light-activated channels and ion pumps. The combination of rapid activation, reliable effects and genetic delivery of the light-sensitive channels to specific cell types and brain regions has proved to be a general method for testing and generating hypotheses of brain function across systems, brain regions and (non-human) species. There are broader possibilities for manipulating neuronal activity in vivo. Chemogenetic tools (such as Receptors Activated Solely by a Synthetic Ligand (RASSLs), Designer Receptors Exclusively Activated by Designer Drugs (DREADDs) and chemical–genetic switches for kinases and channels) are already a useful complement to optogenetics and thermally regulated tools for long-term manipulation, and this is another area that will benefit from continued improvement.

New and improved perturbation tools could rapidly amplify research efforts around the world. Optogenetics, for example, is limited by light scattering, typically requiring fibre optics for most deep brain structures. Potential improvements include narrower (light wavelength) action spectra, increased light-sensitivity and tools with new kinds of ion conduction properties or other electrical or biochemical modulatory capabilities. Optogenetic approaches also need to develop further to enable not just cell-type resolution, but single-cell resolution, in systems as complex as behaving animals. Similarly, new chemogenetic tools with an expanded repertoire of effectors and more time-resolved kinetic properties would significantly advance our capabilities for targeted circuit perturbation, and could open the door to additional approaches for understanding and treating brain disease.

Invention of completely novel perturbation approaches is badly needed, especially for non- (or minimally) invasive use in the human nervous system. Novel tools might be based on magnetic stimulation, gases, infrared excitation, ultrasound, synthetic biology or organic or physical chemistry to allow access to neurons deep within the brain. Again, future efforts should increasingly emphasize integration of major technical approaches—cell type access, connectomics, recording and perturbation—into seamless investigation of fundamental questions about neural circuit function.

Finally, the analysis of behaviour must improve in its spatial and temporal precision to match the precision of activity measurements and manipulations. Innovations in psychophysics, machine learning and virtual reality should be encouraged to create a rich understanding of the brain's output in behaviour.

Novel perturbation tools developed over the past decade have had a remarkable impact on experimental neuroscience. New and improved tools will continue to re-make the field, offering neuroscientists the opportunity to address fundamental questions from novel points of view — How are measureable aspects of perception and behaviour modulated by alteration of activity patterns in underlying neural populations?— What alterations of these activity patterns give rise to maladaptive or pathological behaviour?— Are precise corrections of these activity patterns at the cellular level necessary to restore typical behaviour, or are more simple shifts in regional or projection dynamics sufficient?— What is the causal role of spike rate, timing and synchrony relationships among neurons, projections and brain regions, in circuit processing and behaviour?— Are there consistent neural activity ‘motifs' or patterns that perform core computations in different brain regions that perform different tasks?— Can therapeutic intervention be productively guided in a patient-specific way by considering brain structure or activity alongside a patient's symptoms, and then adapting an activity intervention to that patient's unique clinical situation?


#5. Identifying fundamental principles: produce conceptual foundations for understanding the biological basis of mental processes through development of new theoretical and data analysis tools

The overarching goal of theory, modelling and statistics in neuroscience is to create an understanding of how the brain works—how information is encoded and processed by the dynamic activity of specific neural circuits, and how neural coding and processing lead to perception, emotion, cognition and behaviour. Powerful new experimental technologies developed in response to the BRAIN Initiative will produce datasets of unprecedented size and sophistication, but rigorous statistical analysis and theoretical insight will be essential for understanding what these data mean. Coherent lessons must be drawn not only from the analysis of single experiments, but also by integrating insights across experiments, scales and systems. Theoretical studies will allow us to check the rigour and robustness of new conceptualizations and to identify distinctive predictions of competing ideas to help direct further experiments. Neuroscience will mature to the extent that we discover basic principles of neural coding and computation that connect and predict the results of multi-modal experimental manipulations of brain and behaviour.

To extract meaning from large datasets efficiently, new techniques for analysing large, complex datasets need to be developed, including methods for finding high-order structure in recording, anatomical and behavioural datasets; methods for building models that can identify potential underlying mechanisms; and methods for rigorous hypothesis testing and inference by fitting models to data. These new analytic and modelling techniques are likely to prove beneficial in every stage of research under the BRAIN Initiative, from experimental design to final analysis and interpretation, so that expensive, multidimensional datasets can optimally address the questions being asked. Ultimately, sophisticated statistical and computational techniques need to be made available to all neuroscientists at all levels, faculty, postdoctoral and graduate student, to generate increased quantitative rigour throughout the field.

A particularly daunting challenge for the BRAIN Initiative is to integrate data across multiple scales of space and time. Datasets from different laboratories will cover spatial scales ranging from micrometres to metres, and time scales ranging from milliseconds to minutes, hours or even the lifetime of an organism. New analytic and computational methods, as well as new theoretical frameworks, are fundamental in understanding how organism-level cognition and behaviour emerge from the interplay of structural connectivity and signalling events at the molecular, cellular and circuit levels. By synthesizing results from numerous experiments that explore neural circuits at different levels, theoretical studies should uncover common themes and general principles. These principles will elucidate how neural circuits work, that is, how populations of neurons collectively support the brain's many functions.

Among the key questions to be addressed by a unified theoretical and experimental approach under the BRAIN Initiative are — What are the neural codes used by brains for sensory information processing, information transmission and motor control?— How do interacting neurons in distributed circuits integrate and transform inputs on multiple time scales?— How are neural dynamics changed by learning? What are the modulatory and plasticity mechanisms responsible for different forms of learning?— What neuronal, synaptic, biochemical and circuit mechanisms support working memory and long-term memory? How are memories retrieved?— How do neural circuits ‘read out’ the dynamics of multiple neural populations to guide behaviour and cognition?


#6. Advancing human neuroscience: develop innovative technologies to understand the human brain and treat its disorders; create and support integrated human brain research networks

Each goal of the BRAIN Initiative has an explicit component addressing human brain research and, accordingly, sections of our report addressed technologies to study human cell types, connectivity, large-scale activity, functional perturbation and models of brain function. Beyond these topics, however, there are scientific, experimental and ethical issues that are specific to human neuroscience, whether fundamental, translational or clinical.

Studies of human brain activity present extraordinary opportunities for both clinical advances and scientific inquiry. For example, clinically approved investigational technologies, including devices that are surgically implanted into the brain, provide a unique opportunity to investigate neural function by recording and/or stimulating at the resolution of cells and circuits. Implanted devices are being used in clinical practice to monitor brain function, to diagnose and treat mood and movement disorders, and to restore sensory and motor functions lost following injury or disease. When coupled with non-invasive measurements of functional activity—via MRI, electroencephalography, magnetoencephalography etc., there are real opportunities to bridge scales from (limited) cellular to whole brain functional imaging methods. However, much of this exceptionally valuable human data is not captured, curated or made available for research. The important possibility of carrying out research on human brain function while advancing the clinical capabilities of emerging neurotechnologies creates special issues for human research, including — Clinical support networks. A means to ensure support of fundamental human brain research in clinical settings and within clinical trials.— Training. Understanding of the special requirements for human research. Training a new generation of neuroscientists who are rigorous researchers, compassionate clinicians, creative engineers and adept administrators of complex scientific teams.— Data capture and sharing. A means to capture human data in standardized formats and to curate and share these data within the framework of protecting private information.— Effective human neurotechnology. A means to advance the development of safe, but innovative technology suitable for research in human brains.— Ethics. Strong ethical frameworks, review and oversight of human research.Integrated research teams of clinicians, scientists, device engineers, patient-care specialists, regulatory specialists and ethics specialists are needed to capitalize fully on the unique research opportunities offered by studies in which informed, consenting human subjects participate. Such teams may be assembled within a single university or medical centre, or may comprise integrated consortia across multiple universities and medical centres, which could facilitate sharing of standardized data and training in this research. Industry input and collaboration are also highly valued; this sector often possesses specialized expertise in overcoming hurdles to effective translation.

We believe that newer iterations of technology development should focus on maximizing scientific research value while advancing clinical diagnostics or therapeutic applications. The most dramatic improvement that could be made for implanted devices would be to combine multiple measurements and manipulation capabilities in a single device (e.g. combined recording and stimulation capabilities). Next-generation devices should be inspired by recent advances in electrical, optical, acoustic, genetic and other modalities.

Some of the unique questions that could be addressed by human neuroscience research include — How does neural activity in specific circuits relate to the conscious experience of humans as they perform a cognitive or behavioural task?— What neural mechanisms underlie the remarkable human ability to represent information symbolically (as in language) and then use that information in novel situations outside the context in which it was originally learned?— What patterns of neural activity in which brain structures correspond to human emotional states? Can we treat emotional disorders by applying neuromodulation techniques to these structures and circuits?— Can we decode mental motor plans with sufficient speed and accuracy to control supple, effective prosthetic devices for paralysed patients?


#7. From BRAIN Initiative to the brain: integrate new technological and conceptual approaches produced in goals #1–6 to discover how dynamic patterns of neural activity are transformed into cognition, emotion, perception and action in health and disease

The overarching vision of the BRAIN Initiative is best captured by this priority research area—combining multiple approaches into a single, integrated science of cells, circuits, brain and behaviour. In some cases, particularly, in the early phases of the BRAIN Initiative, a given technology will be applied in isolation to provide important new knowledge. However, many of the most exciting and powerful applications will come from combining the new technologies as parts of an integrated whole, a goal we have pointed to in several preceding sections. For example, immense value is added if recordings are conducted from identified cell types whose anatomical connections are established in the same study. Such an experiment is currently an exceptional tour de force; with new technology, it could become routine. In another example, neuronal populations recorded during complex behaviour might be immediately retested with circuit manipulation techniques to determine their causal role in generating the behaviour. Hand-in-hand with these new combinations of experimental methods will come integrated work from theory, modelling and statistics that provide rigour to observations, new methods of visualization and understanding of the data and, most importantly, new conceptual frameworks for interpretation of the data. When verified, these hypotheses and theories will provide the mechanistic understanding of neural circuit function that is the principal goal of the BRAIN Initiative.

Integration of neuroscience technologies in the BRAIN Initiative should emphasize a systems engineering approach, in which one optimizes the collective performance of the final system, rather than optimizing individual components. For example, a systems engineering approach to developing fluorescent indicators of neural activity should focus not only on the properties of the indicator molecule, but also on parameters such as wavelength compatibility with other optical sensors, optogenetic probes, detectors or illumination sources, or robustness to fixation processes used in post mortem analyses. This would be important when combining targeted recording with post hoc connectomic analysis. Similarly, designers of new lasers, lenses or detectors for deep tissue imaging should consider the capabilities of important molecular sensors and probes.


Core principles of the BRAIN Initiative

Over the course of our deliberations, specific themes emerged regarding core principles for the BRAIN Initiative. We believe that these principles are integral to more rapid, effective advances in understanding the brain, ultimately leading to treating neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders. Some of these principles have been articulated already by other international and private brain research initiatives. Although formulated in a specifically American context, we suggest that these general principles might also be suitable for guiding other brain research efforts. (1) Pursue human studies and non-human models in parallel. The goal is to understand the human brain, but many methods and ideas are developed first in animal models, both vertebrate and invertebrate. Experiments should take advantage of the unique strengths of diverse species and experimental systems.(2) Cross boundaries in interdisciplinary collaborations. No single researcher or discovery will solve the brain's mysteries. The most exciting approaches will bridge fields, linking experiment to theory, biology to engineering, tool development to experimental application, human neuroscience to non-human models in innovative ways.(3) Integrate spatial and temporal scales. A unified view of the brain will cross spatial and temporal levels, recognizing that the nervous system consists of interacting molecules, cells and circuits across the entire body, and important functions can occur in milliseconds or minutes, or take a lifetime.(4) Establish platforms for preserving and sharing data. Public, integrated repositories for datasets and data analysis tools, with an emphasis on ready accessibility and effective central maintenance, will have immense value.(5) Validate and disseminate technology. New methods should be critically tested through iterative interaction between tool-makers and experimentalists. After validation, mechanisms must be developed to make new tools available to all.(6) Consider ethical implications of neuroscience research. BRAIN Initiative research may raise important issues about neural enhancement, data privacy and appropriate use of brain data in law, education and business. These important issues must be considered in a serious and sustained manner. BRAIN Initiative research should adhere to the highest ethical standards for research with human subjects and with non-human animals under applicable federal and local laws.(7) Create mechanisms to ensure accountability to the government sponsor (NIH in our case), the taxpayer and the basic, translational and clinical neuroscience communities. The BRAIN Initiative is extremely broad in interdisciplinary scope and will involve multiple partners. Oversight mechanisms should be established to ensure that BRAIN funds are invested wisely for the ultimate benefit of the public and the scientific community.


Concluding remarks

We are at a unique moment in the history of neuroscience—a moment when technological innovation has created possibilities for discoveries that could cumulatively lead to a revolution in our understanding of the brain. For some of our goals, novel technologies are already in place and simply need to be exploited at scale and in a highly coordinated fashion. In other cases, however, entirely new technologies need to be envisioned and created, especially for non-invasive, high-resolution recording and modulation of human brain circuits. We believe that these goals are achievable with sufficient investment of human and financial resources and scientific infrastructure, all of which are critical to the success of the BRAIN Initiative. An investment that builds up over 5–7 years and is sustained through time will encourage talented scientists to form new collaborations to solve important, difficult problems because they will perceive a long-term commitment of the NIH and other US government agencies.

The US commitment will be markedly enhanced by the rise in complementary efforts around the globe, such as the European Union's Human Brain Project, Japan's Brain/MINDS (Brain Mapping by Integrated Neurotechnologies for Disease Studies) project, and CanadaBrain—to name just a few. Planning is also underway for a national brain project in China. It will be important for the research community to continue to engage in a regular dialog about the scientific opportunities and challenges associated with these large-scale efforts. Regular communication will be key for researchers to learn from each other's success and failures, and identify potentially synergistic research approaches when appropriate.

Like the Apollo program, undertaking a grand challenge of this sort will require the development and integration of an array of new technologies, drawing on scientists and engineers from a multitude of disciplines. The neuroscience ‘moonshot’ differs, however, in that we cannot foresee exactly where these new technologies and experiments will take us. Charting a course to the moon was far simpler than unlocking the mysteries of our own minds! Future technological innovation will certainly propel neuroscience research in entirely new, unexpected directions, as it has so often in the past. Consider, for instance, the evolution of the field of cerebral cartography, the focus of this special issue. The first era of systematic brain mapping, begun by Fritsch and Hitzig in the 1870s, culminated in Wilder Penfield's systematic electrical stimulation studies in conscious human patients undergoing surgery for epilepsy. These early experiments demonstrated beyond all doubt the localization of function within the cerebral cortex, including the primary sensory and motor areas, specialized language areas, hemispheric laterality and neural systems involved in memory. More penetrating studies awaited the invention of the intracortical microelectrode and anatomical tracer techniques based on anterograde and retrograde axoplasmic transport. With the advent of these tools, neuroscientists were able to explore the exquisitely selective response properties of single neurons, identify the cortical column as a primary unit of cerebral information processing and discover a host of new cortical areas and the anatomical circuits that connect them. The development of techniques for recording from awake, behaving animals and for non-invasive imaging of the human brain and animal brains led to the rise of cognitive neuroscience in the last quarter of the twentieth century, bringing previously mysterious cognitive process such as attention, working memory, spatial navigation, decision-making and motor planning under direct empirical examination. The fusion of molecular and cell biological techniques with in vitro slice recordings enabled elucidation of many basic mechanisms of synaptic plasticity.

As exhilarating at these discoveries have been, the best is certainly yet to come. The pace of technological change in neuroscience has accelerated dramatically in the past decade, giving researchers powerful new tools to access and manipulate specific types of cells, analyse coding and circuit dynamics across extended neural populations, and causally link specific patterns of neural activity to cognition and behaviour. The sophisticated new datasets and circuit manipulations emerging from neuroscience laboratories around the world—nearly unimaginable a decade ago—are providing rich fodder for theorists and modellers seeking to identify the biophysical and circuit-level principles underlying nervous system function. The BRAIN Initiative will accelerate this cycle of technical innovation and scientific discovery by fostering integration of the new experimental approaches with each other and with theory and modelling, creating a path towards solving the mysteries of the brain's circuits and their activity across time and space.

Understanding the brain is a worthy goal in and of itself. But, in the longer term, new treatments for devastating brain diseases are likely to emerge from a deeper understanding of the brain. For example, treatment of Parkinson's disease has been greatly enhanced by circuit-level understanding of the brain's motor systems. Our front-line treatment for Parkinson's is the dopamine precursor drug, l-DOPA, but its efficacy decreases over time while severe side effects increase. In response, teams of neurophysiologists, engineers and physicians fused an understanding of the brain's motor circuits with technological advances to create deep brain stimulation, which can restore motor circuit function in many Parkinson's patients for up to several years. Current research into brain circuits for mood and emotion has the potential to advance psychiatry in similar ways.

Powered by novel technological capabilities, neuroscience has gathered remarkable momentum over the past decade. We believe that great leaps forward can be made in just a few years or decades given an infusion of new interdisciplinary talent, coordination of effort, and investment of resources at the national level. Like other great leaps in the history of science—the development of atomic and nuclear physics, the elucidation of the genetic code—this one will change human society forever. Through deepened knowledge of how our brains actually work, we will understand ourselves differently, treat disease more incisively, educate our children more effectively, practice law and governance with greater insight and develop more understanding of others whose brains have been moulded in different circumstances. To achieve this vision, we must train and support a new generation of cross-disciplinary brain scientists and provide the resources needed to unleash their creative energies for the benefit of all.


Consciousness: here, there and everywhere?

Giulio Tononi, Christof Koch — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4387509, CC BY 4.0.

The science of consciousness has made great strides by focusing on the behavioural and neuronal correlates of experience. However, while such correlates are important for progress to occur, they are not enough if we are to understand even basic facts, for example, why the cerebral cortex gives rise to consciousness but the cerebellum does not, though it has even more neurons and appears to be just as complicated. Moreover, correlates are of little help in many instances where we would like to know if consciousness is present: patients with a few remaining islands of functioning cortex, preterm infants, non-mammalian species and machines that are rapidly outperforming people at driving, recognizing faces and objects, and answering difficult questions. To address these issues, we need not only more data but also a theory of consciousness—one that says what experience is and what type of physical systems can have it. Integrated information theory (IIT) does so by starting from experience itself via five phenomenological axioms: intrinsic existence, composition, information, integration and exclusion. From these it derives five postulates about the properties required of physical mechanisms to support consciousness. The theory provides a principled account of both the quantity and the quality of an individual experience (a quale), and a calculus to evaluate whether or not a particular physical system is conscious and of what. Moreover, IIT can explain a range of clinical and laboratory findings, makes a number of testable predictions and extrapolates to a number of problematic conditions. The theory holds that consciousness is a fundamental property possessed by physical systems having specific causal properties. It predicts that consciousness is graded, is common among biological organisms and can occur in some very simple systems. Conversely, it predicts that feed-forward networks, even complex ones, are not conscious, nor are aggregates such as groups of individuals or heaps of sand. Also, in sharp contrast to widespread functionalist beliefs, IIT implies that digital computers, even if their behaviour were to be functionally equivalent to ours, and even if they were to run faithful simulations of the human brain, would experience next to nothing.


Consciousness: here, there and everywhere?

I know I am conscious: I am seeing, hearing, feeling something here, inside my own head. But is consciousness—subjective experience—also there, not only in other people's heads, but also in the head of animals? And perhaps everywhere, pervading the cosmos, as in old panpsychist traditions and in the Beatles' song? While these kinds of questions may seem scientifically inappropriate, we argue below that they can be approached in a principled and testable manner. Moreover, obtaining an answer is urgent, not only because of difficult clinical cases and in our interactions with other species but also because of the advent of machines that are getting closer to passing the Turing test—computers programmed to perform many tasks as well as us, and often far better than some brain-damaged patients.


Here

That I am conscious, here and now, is the one fact I am absolutely certain of—all the rest is conjecture. This is, of course, the gist of the most famous deduction in Western thought, Descartes' je pense, donc je suis. Everything else—what I think I know about my body, about other people, dogs, trees, mountains and stars, is inferential. It is a reasonable inference, corroborated first by the beliefs of my fellow humans and then by the intersubjective methods of science. Yet consciousness itself—the central fact of existence—still demands a rational explanation.

The past two centuries of clinical and laboratory studies have revealed an intimate relationship between the conscious mind and the brain, but the exact nature of this relationship remains elusive. Why is the brain associated with consciousness but not the liver or the heart, as previous cultures believed? Why certain parts of the brain and not others? Why is consciousness lost in some stages of sleep? Why does red feel like red and not like the sound of a violin? Is consciousness just an epiphenomenon, or does it have a function? Can computers be conscious? Could a system behave like us and yet be devoid of consciousness—a zombie? Such questions seem to resist the empirical, reductionist approach that has been so successful for other aspects of the natural world. Nevertheless, thanks to experimental and theoretical progress in the past decades, we are in a better position to understand which systems under which conditions can be conscious. That is, the study of consciousness is becoming a science. In doing so, it is leaving behind the defeatist dictum of the physiologist Emil du Bois-Reymond, ignoramus et ignorabimus (we don't know and never will), espousing instead the upbeat maxim of the mathematician David Hilbert, Wir müssen wissen—wir werden wissen (we must know and we will know).


There

We usually grant consciousness to others—of the same kind we experience in the privacy of our own mind—if they can tell us what they feel, or if they look and behave more or less like us. However, we become less and less confident in attributing consciousness to those who cannot talk about their experiences, such as infants or severely brain injured patients. Many assume that animals closely related to homo sapiens—apes and other primates—are conscious, though presumably less than we are, based on the similarity of their behaviour and their brain. But should we attribute experience to all mammals, to all vertebrates, to invertebrates such as cephalopods and bees or even to all multi-cellular animals? What about cultured organoids that mimic the cellular organization of the developing human brain? And finally, what about the sophisticated machines that run software designed to substitute for conscious humans in many complicated tasks?


Behavioural correlates of consciousness and reportability

Traditionally, we assess consciousness by observing behaviour (a). If someone is awake and acts meaningfully, we have little doubt he is conscious. If he speaks, and especially if he can answer questions about what he is conscious of, we are fully confident. In the laboratory, the ability to report one's experiences has become the gold standard for judging the presence of consciousness. Reportability is often reduced to a binary forced choice, in which the subject pushes one of two buttons for ‘seen’ versus ‘not seen’, or ‘angry face’ versus ‘happy face’. One can also ask subjects how confident they are in their judgements (confidence rating), ask them to further describe their experiences (perceptual awareness scale) or get them to make an economic judgement following each response (post-decision wagering). These kinds of meta-cognitive and confidence reports can also be obtained from trained monkeys and other animals, with so many similarities to our own reports that there is little doubt as to the presence of consciousness.

But behaviour can be misleading: a person may walk and speak in her sleep, yet it is quite dubious whether she is experiencing anything. Or a person can be asleep, immobile, silent and unresponsive, yet she may be dreaming—vividly conscious of an imaginary environment. In such cases, reportability can be used as retrospective evidence of consciousness, by waking up the sleeper to obtain a ‘dream report’. However, reportability, too, can be problematic. Since we obviously experience things in dreams whether or not we are woken up to report them, we should accept the possibility that in certain situations consciousness can be present even if it is not reported. Moreover, insisting on reportability elevates language to a king-maker role, which makes inferring consciousness in non-verbal infants, preterm babies, fetuses or animals problematic. Clearly, if we want to understand what is really going on, we must also investigate the brain mechanisms that underlie consciousness.


Neural correlates of consciousness

The neural correlates of consciousness (NCC) have been defined as the minimal neural mechanisms that are jointly sufficient for any one conscious percept, thought or memory, under constant background conditions (b). The latter are the distal or proximal enabling factors that must be present for any conscious experience to occur—the heart must beat and supply the brain with oxygenated blood, various nuclei in the midbrain reticular formation and brainstem must be active, cholinergic release needs to occur within the cortico-thalamic complex and so on.

Every experience will have an associated NCC: one for seeing a red patch, another one for hearing a high C. Inducing the NCC by manipulating the relevant neuronal populations via magnetic stimulation, optogenetics or other means will give rise to the associated conscious percept. Interfering with the NCC by disabling the underlying neural circuits will eliminate the percept.

The NCC are typically assessed by determining which aspects of neural function change depending on whether a subject is conscious or not, as established using behavioural reports. This can be done by considering a global change in the level of consciousness, as when awareness is lost during deep sleep or general anaesthesia. Or it can be done by considering changes in a particular content of consciousness, as when a subject's awareness of a particular stimulus is experimentally manipulated (‘seen’ versus ‘not seen’). In optimally controlled experiments, the stimulus and the behavioural report (such as a button press) are kept constant while the subject sometimes sees the percept and sometimes does not. Once a particular NCC has been sufficiently validated, it can be used to extrapolate to situations in which reports are not available. Both functional brain imaging in magnetic scanners and as high-density electroencephalography (EEG) recordings from outside the skull have been put to use to track down the footprints of consciousness in the brain of healthy adult observers. Popular candidates include strong activation of high level fronto-parietal cortices (b), high-frequency electrical activity in the gamma range (35–80 Hz), and the occurrence of an EEG event known as the P300 wave. However, there is still no consensus on whether any of these signs can be treated as reliable ‘signatures’ of consciousness. In particular, there can be consciousness without frontal cortex involvement, gamma activity without consciousness, such as during anaesthesia, and consciousness without a frontal P300, for example, during dreaming sleep. Moreover, it is likely that many of the signatures proposed as possible NCC may actually be correlates of neural activity that is needed leading up to a conscious percept, or for giving a report following a conscious percept, rather than for having an experience. A major challenge is to keep constant cognitive functions such as selective attention, memory, decision making and task monitoring, in order to isolate the ‘naked’ substrate of consciousness at the neuronal level. Finally, NCC obtained in healthy adults may or may not apply to brain-damaged patients, to infants, to animals very different from us, not to mention machines.


Patients and infants

Patients with widespread cortical or thalamic damage pose a poignant challenge. Emergency room personnel quickly evaluate the severity of a head injury behaviourally by assigning a number to a patient's auditory, visual, verbal and motor functions as well as communication and arousal level. Various NCC, such as the presence of a P300 wave in response to a non-standard stimulus, are increasingly being used to complement the behavioural assessment and occasionally modify the diagnosis. In some cases, NCC can be decisive. Thus, if a patient who lies mute and immobile can nevertheless respond to commands by appropriately activating certain brain areas, it is fair to conclude that she is conscious. Yet most of the proposed ‘signatures’ of consciousness are inadequate. For example, the P300 wave is absent in many minimally conscious patients and even in some brain-damaged patients who can communicate. And what should one make of patients in whom, amidst widespread destruction and inactivity, one or a few isolated cortical areas may show signs of metabolic activation and electrophysiological ‘markers’ of consciousness? Is an island of functioning brain tissue sufficient for generating a limited kind of awareness, maybe just awareness of sound or of pain? In other words, ‘what is it like’ to be a brain island, if it feels like anything at all? And how big must the island be to qualify?

By the same token, what is it like to be a newborn baby with an immature brain and restricted connectivity among cortical structures? Again, considering NCC can be helpful: for example, a wave resembling the P300 wave has been reported in six to 16 months old infants, although weaker, more variable and delayed compared with adults. But does this mean that newborn and preterm babies or even fetuses experience nothing because they do not show a P300?


Animals

The problem becomes even more acute when turning to other species. The study of consciousness in nature has been hindered for centuries by a strong belief in human exceptionalism. Yet the range and complexity of animal behaviour has laid rest to this belief, at least among biologists. This is particularly true for mammals. In psychophysical tasks involving simple button presses, trained macaque monkeys act very similarly to human volunteers, including signalling when they do not see anything. Visual recognition of self, meta-cognition (knowing one's mind), theory of mind, empathy and long-range planning have all been demonstrated in primates, rodents and other orders.

It is also difficult to find anything exceptional about the human brain. Its constitutive genes, synapses, neurons and other cells are similar to those found in many other species. Even its size is not so special, as elephants, dolphins and whales have even bigger brains. Only an expert neuroanatomist, armed with a microscope, can tell a grain-sized piece of neocortex of a mouse from that of a monkey or a human. Biologists emphasize this structural and behavioural continuity by distinguishing between non-human and human animals. Given this continuity, it seems unjustified to claim that only one species has consciousness while everybody else is devoid of experience, is a zombie. It is far more likely that all mammals have at least some conscious experiences, can hear the sounds and see the sights of life.

As we consider species that are progressively further removed from Homo sapiens in evolutionary and neuronal terms, the case for consciousness becomes more difficult to make. Two observations, one relating to complexity of behaviour and another one to complexity of the underlying nervous system, are critical. First, ravens, crows, magpies, parrots and other birds, tuna, coelacanths and other fish, octopuses and other cephalopods, bees and other members of the vast class of insects are all capable of sophisticated, learnt, non-stereotyped behaviours that we associate with consciousness if carried out by people. Darwin himself set out ‘to learn how far the worms acted consciously’ and concluded that there was no absolute threshold between ‘lower’ and ‘higher’ animals, including humans, which would assign higher mental powers to one but not to the other. Second, the nervous systems of these species display a vast and ill-understood complexity. The bee contains about 800 000 nerve cells whose morphological and electrical heterogeneity rivals that of any neocortical neuron. These cells are assembled in highly nonlinear feedback circuits whose density is up to ten times higher than that of neocortex. Thus, neural signatures of consciousness that have some validity in humans and other mammals may not apply at all to invertebrates.

On the other hand, the lessons learnt from studying the behavioural (BCC) and neuronal correlates of consciousness in people must make us cautious about inferring its presence in creatures very different from us, no matter how sophisticated their behaviour and how complicated their brain. Humans can perform complex behaviours—recognizing whether a scene is congruous or incongruous, controlling the size, orientation and strength of how one's finger should grip an object, doing simple arithmetic, detecting the meaning of words or rapid keyboard typing—in a seemingly non-conscious manner. When a bee navigates a maze, does it do so like when we consciously deliberate whether to turn right or left, or rather like when we type on a keyboard? Similarly, consider that an extraordinarily complicated neuronal structure in our brain, the cerebellum, home to 69 of the 86 billion nerve cells that make up the human brain, apparently has little to do with consciousness. Patients who lose part or nearly all of their cerebellum owing to stroke or other trauma show ataxia, slurred speech and unsteady gait but do not complain of a loss or diminution of consciousness. Is the bee's brain central complex more like the cerebellum or more like the cerebral cortex with respect to experience? Thus, the extent to which non-mammalian species share with us the gift of subjective experience remains hard to fathom.


Machines

Difficulties in attributing sentience become even more apparent when considering digital computers. These have a radically different architecture and provenance from biological organisms shaped by natural selection. Owing to the relentless decrease in transistor size over the past 50 years and the concomitant exponential increase in computational power and memory capacity, present-day computers executing appropriate algorithms outperform us in many tasks that were thought to be the sole prerogative of the human mind. Prominent examples include IBM's Deep Blue that beat the reigning chess world master in 1997; another IBM computer, Watson, that can answer questions posed in spoken English and won the quiz show Jeopardy in 2011; smart phones that answer questions by speech; Google's driverless cars that have logged more than half a million miles on open roads; and machine vision algorithms for face detection in security and commercial applications. People playing chess, supplying meaningful answers to questions, driving a car or picking out a face are assumed to be conscious. But should we say the same for these digital creatures?


Integrated information theory

Clearly, as we move away from people, BCC and NCC become progressively less helpful to establish the presence of consciousness. Even in the normal human brain, we need to understand why and how certain structures are associated with experience (the cerebral cortex or, possibly, the claustrum) while others are not (the cerebellum), and why they do so under certain conditions (wake, dreams) and not others (deep sleep, seizures). Some philosophers have claimed that the problem of explaining how matter can give rise to consciousness may forever elude us, dubbing it the Hard problem. Indeed, as long as one starts from the brain and asks how it could possibly give rise to experience—in effect trying to ‘distill’ mind out of matter, the problem may be not only hard, but almost impossible to solve. But things may be less hard if one takes the opposite approach: start from consciousness itself, by identifying its essential properties, and then ask what kinds of physical mechanisms could possibly account for them. This is the approach taken by integrated information theory (IIT), an evolving formal and quantitative framework that provides a principled account for what it takes for consciousness to arise, offers a parsimonious explanation for the empirical evidence, makes testable predictions and permits inferences and extrapolations.


Axioms: essential phenomenological properties of consciousness

Taking consciousness as primary, IIT first identifies axioms of experience (left), then derives a set of corresponding postulates (right) about its physical substrate. The axioms of IIT are assumptions about our own experience that are the starting point for the theory. Ideally, axioms are essential (apply to all experiences), complete (include all the essential properties shared by every experience), consistent (lack contradictions) and independent (not derivable from each other). Whether the current set of five axioms are truly valid, complete and independent remains open. The five axioms are intrinsic existence, composition, information, integration and exclusion.


Intrinsic existence

Consciousness exists: my experience just is. Indeed, that my experience here and now exists—it is real or actual—is the only fact I am immediately and absolutely sure of, as Descartes realized four centuries ago. Moreover, my experience exists from its own intrinsic perspective, independent of external observers.


Composition

Consciousness is structured: each experience is composed of many phenomenological distinctions, elementary or higher order, which also exist. Within the same experience, for example, I may distinguish a book, a blue colour, a blue book and so on.


Information

Consciousness is specific: each experience is the particular way it is—it is composed of a specific set of specific phenomenal distinctions—thereby differing from other possible experiences (differentiation). Thus, an experience of pure darkness and silence is what it is because, among other things, it is not filled with light and sound, colours and shapes, there are no books, no blue books and so on. And being that way, it necessarily differs from a large number of alternative experiences I could have. Just consider all the frames of all possible movies: the associated visual percepts are but a small subset of all possible experiences.


Integration

Consciousness is unified: each experience is irreducible to non-interdependent subsets of phenomenal distinctions. Thus, I experience a whole visual scene, not the left side of the visual field independent of the right side (and vice versa). For example, the experience of seeing written in the middle of a blank page the word ‘HONEYMOON’ is irreducible to an experience of seeing ‘HONEY’ on the left plus the experience of seeing ‘MOON’ on the right. Similarly, seeing a blue book is irreducible to seeing a grey book plus the disembodied colour blue.


Exclusion

Consciousness is definite, in content and spatio-temporal grain: each experience has the set of phenomenal distinctions it has, neither less (a subset) nor more (a superset), and it flows at the speed it flows, neither faster nor slower. Thus, the experience I am having is of seeing a body on a bed in a bedroom, a bookcase with books, one of which is a blue book, but I am not having an experience with less content—say, one lacking the phenomenal distinction blue/not blue, or coloured/not coloured; nor am I having an experience with more content—say, one endowed with the additional phenomenal distinction high/low blood pressure. Similarly, my experience flows at a particular speed—each experience encompassing a hundred milliseconds or so—but I am not having experience that encompasses just a few milliseconds or instead minutes or hours.


Postulates: properties that physical mechanisms must have to support consciousness

To parallel these axioms that capture the essential properties of every experience, IIT proposes a set of postulates concerning the requirements that must be satisfied by any physical system to account for experience (right). For simplicity, physical systems are considered as elements in a state, such as neurons or logic gates that are either ON or OFF. All that is required is that such elements have two or more internal states, inputs that can influence these states in a certain way and outputs that in turn depend on these states.


Intrinsic existence

A system of mechanisms in a state must exist intrinsically. Specifically, in order to exist, it must have cause–effect power, as there is no point in assuming that something exists if nothing can make a difference to it, or if it cannot make a difference to anything. Moreover, to exist from its own intrinsic perspective, independent of external observers, it must have cause–effect power upon itself, independent of extrinsic factors (intrinsic existence). Cause–effect power can be established by considering a cause–effect space with an axis for every possible state of the system in the past (causes) and in the future (effects). Within this space, it is enough to show that an ‘intervention’ that sets the system in some initial state, keeping the state of the elements outside the system fixed (background conditions), can lead with probability different from chance to its present state (cause); conversely, setting the system to its present state leads with probability different from chance to some other state (effect).


Composition

The system must be structured: subsets of the elementary mechanisms of the system, composed in various combinations, also have cause–effect power within the system. Thus, if a system ABC comprises elements A, B and C (composition), any subset of elements, including A, B, C; AB, AC, BC; as well as the entire system, ABC, can compose a mechanism having cause–effect power. Composition allows for elementary (first-order) mechanisms to form distinct higher order mechanisms, and for multiple mechanisms to form a structure.


Information

The system must specify a cause–effect structure that is the particular way it is: a specific set of specific cause–effect repertoires—thereby differing from other possible ones (differentiation). A cause–effect repertoire characterizes in full the cause–effect power of a mechanism within a system by making explicit all its cause–effect properties. It can be determined by perturbing the system in all possible ways to assess how a mechanism in its present state makes a difference to the probability of the past and future states of the system. Together, the cause–effect repertoires specified by each composition of elements within a system specify a cause–effect structure. Consider for example, within the system ABC (information), the mechanism implemented by element C, an XOR gate with two inputs (A and B) and two outputs (the OR gate A and the AND gate B). If C is OFF, its cause repertoire specifies that, at the previous time step, A and B must have been either in the state OFF,OFF or in the state ON,ON, rather than in the other two possible states (OFF,ON; ON,OFF); and its effect repertoire specifies that the next time step B will have to be OFF, rather than ON. Its cause–effect repertoire is specific: it would be different if the state of C were different (ON), or if C were a different mechanism (say, an AND gate). Similar considerations apply to every other mechanism of the system, implemented by different compositions of elements. Thus, the cause–effect repertoire specifies the full cause–effect power of a mechanism in a particular state, and the cause–effect structure specifies the full cause–effect power of a system of mechanisms. Note that the notion of information in IIT differs substantially from that in communication theory or in common language, but it is faithful to its etymology: information refers to how a system of mechanisms in a state, through its cause–effect power, specifies a form (‘informs’ a conceptual structure) in the space of possibilities.


Integration

The cause–effect structure specified by the system must be unified: it must be intrinsically irreducible to that specified by non-interdependent sub-systems obtained by unidirectional partitions. Partitions are taken unidirectionally to ensure that cause–effect power is intrinsically irreducible—from the system's intrinsic perspective—which implies that every part of the system must be able to both affect and be affected by the rest of the system. Intrinsic irreducibility can be measured as integrated information (‘big phi’ or Φ, a non-negative number), which quantifies to what extent the cause–effect structure specified by a system's mechanisms changes if the system is partitioned (cut or reduced) along its minimum partition (the one that makes the least difference). For example, the system in is integrated, because partitioning it through its weakest link destroys several cause–effect repertoires and changes others (compare the cause–effect structure under ‘information’ and under ‘integration’ in). By contrast, if a system of mechanisms can be divided into two sub-systems and the partition makes no difference to the associated cause–effect structure, then the whole is reducible to those parts. Being intrinsically irreducible is another precondition for existence having to do with causation: there is no point in assuming that the whole exists in and of itself, if it has no cause–effect power above and beyond its parts. This postulate also applies to individual mechanisms: a subset of elements can contribute a specific aspect of experience only if its cause–effect repertoire within the system is irreducible by the minimum partition of the mechanism (‘small phi’ or φ).


Exclusion

The cause–effect structure specified by the system must be definite: it is specified over a single set of elements—neither less nor more—the one over which it is maximally irreducible (Φmax) from its intrinsic perspective, thus laying maximal claim to existence. For example (exclusion), within ABCDE, many candidate systems could specify cause–effect structures, including AB, AC, BC, ABC, ABCD, ABCDE and so on. Among these, the system that specifies the cause–effect structure that is maximally irreducible intrinsically is the set of elements ABC, rather than any of its subsets or supersets. The exclusion postulate provides a sufficient reason why the contents of the experience should be what they are—neither less nor more. With respect to causation, this has the consequence that the ‘winning’ cause–effect structure excludes alternative cause–effect structures specified over overlapping elements: if a mechanism in a state (say A OFF) specifies a particular cause–effect repertoire within one system (ABC), it should not additionally specify an overlapping cause–effect repertoire as part of other, overlapping systems (say AB or ABCD), otherwise one would be counting multiple times the difference that mechanism makes. The exclusion postulate can be said to enforce Occam's razor (entities should not be multiplied beyond necessity): it is more parsimonious to postulate the existence of a single cause–effect structure over a system of elements—the one that is maximally irreducible—than a multitude of overlapping cause–effect structures whose existence would make no further difference. The exclusion postulate also applies to individual mechanisms: a subset of elements in a state specifies the cause–effect repertoire within the system that is maximally irreducible (φmax), called a core concept, or concept for short. Again, it cannot additionally specify a cause–effect repertoire overlapping over the same elements, because otherwise the difference a mechanism makes would be counted multiple times. A maximally irreducible cause–effect structure composed of concepts is called a conceptual structure. The system of mechanisms that specifies a conceptual structure is called a complex. It is useful to think of a conceptual structure as existing as a form in cause–effect space, whose axes are given by all possible past and future states of the complex. In this space, every concept is a point (star), whose size is given by its irreducibility φmax, and a conceptual structure is a ‘constellation’ of points, that is, a form. Finally, this postulate also applies to spatio-temporal grain. For example, a mechanism cannot have effects at a fine temporal grain, and additional effects at a coarser grain, otherwise causal exclusion would be violated. On the other hand, if the effects at a coarser grain are more irreducible than those at a finer grain, then the coarser grain of causation excludes the finer one.


The central identity: experience as a conceptual structure

Altogether, the elements of a complex in a state, composed into higher order mechanisms that specify concepts, form a conceptual structure that is maximally irreducible intrinsically, also known as a quale. The constellation of all concepts specifies the overall form or shape of the quale.

On this basis, the central identity of IIT can be formulated quite simply: an experience is identical to a conceptual structure that is maximally irreducible intrinsically. More precisely, a conceptual structure completely specifies both the quantity and the quality of experience: how much the system exists—the quantity or level of consciousness—is measured by its Φmax value—the intrinsic irreducibility of the conceptual structure; which way it exists—the quality or content of consciousness—is specified by the shape of the conceptual structure. If a system has Φmax = 0, meaning that its cause–effect power is completely reducible to that of its parts, it cannot lay claim to existing. If Φmax > 0, the system cannot be reduced to its parts, so it exists in and of itself. More generally, the larger Φmax, the more a system can lay claim to existing in a fuller sense than systems with lower Φmax. According to IIT, the quantity and quality of an experience are an intrinsic, fundamental property of a complex of mechanisms in a state—the property of informing or shaping the space of possibilities (past and future states) in a particular way, just as it is considered to be intrinsic to a mass to bend space–time around it.

At any given time, then, consciousness is supported by a set of neuronal elements forming a complex of high Φmax that specifies a conceptual structure that is maximally irreducible intrinsically. The particular set of neurons that form the major complex, the one of highest Φmax in the brain, may change to some extent from moment to moment, as well as their state—which neurons are firing and which are not. For example, let us assume that while I watch a scene of a movie containing the actress Jennifer Aniston (JA), the major complex in my brain is made up of neurons within certain parts of the cerebral cortex. Every neuron within the complex necessarily shapes the probability of possible past states (causes) and future states (effects) of the complex, depending on how it is connected to the other neurons and on its state (say firing strongly for 100 ms). Thus, a neuron firing strongly in a certain visual area may specify as more likely those past states of the complex that are compatible with the invariant concept ‘J.A.'s face’, as well as certain appropriate future states. Another neuron firing strongly in another visual area may specify that there likely was a horizontal edge in a certain position of the visual field, and so on. Yet other neurons that are part of the complex but are silent may specify that certain past (and future) states are unlikely to have occurred (or to occur), such as those having to do with the invariant concepts ‘book’, ‘square’ and so on. Moreover, combinations of neurons may specify higher order concepts, such as ‘J.A. with a red hat sitting on the couch on the left’. Note that all the concepts are specified by elements of the complex, specify cause–effect repertoires over elements of the complex, and acquire meaning intrinsically, in relation to the other concepts in the quale, and not by referring to external inputs (J.A. is just as meaningful when daydreaming about her, or in a dream).

In principle, then, the postulates of IIT offer a way to analyse any system of mechanisms in a particular state and determine whether it constitutes a complex, over which spatial and temporal grain, and which quale it specifies. Furthermore, while in practice it is not possible to determine the quale and Φmax precisely for a realistic system, it is already possible to employ IIT for prediction, explanation and extrapolation.


Predictions

A straightforward experimental prediction of IIT is that the loss and recovery of consciousness should be associated with the breakdown and recovery of the brain's capacity for information integration. This prediction has been confirmed using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) in combination with high-density EEG in conditions characterized by loss of consciousness. These include deep sleep, general anaesthesia obtained with several different agents and brain-damaged patients (vegetative, minimally conscious, emerging from minimal consciousness, locked-in). If a subject is conscious when the cerebral cortex is probed with a pulse of current induced by the TMS coil from outside the skull, the cortex responds with a complex pattern of reverberating activations and deactivations that is both widespread (integrated) and differentiated in time and space (information rich). By contrast, when consciousness fades, the response of the cortex becomes local (loss of integration) or global but stereotypical (loss of information). The perturbational complexity index (PCI), a scalar measure of the compressibility of the EEG response to TMS inspired by IIT, decreases distinctly in all the different conditions of loss of consciousness and, critical for a clinically useful device, is high instead in each conscious healthy subject or neurological patient tested so far.

A theory is the more powerful the more it makes correct predictions that violate prior expectations. One counterintuitive prediction of IIT is that a system such as the cerebral cortex may generate experience even if the majority of its pyramidal neurons are nearly silent, a state that is perhaps approximated through certain meditative practices that aim at reaching ‘naked’ awareness without content. This corollary of IIT contrasts with the common assumption that neurons only contribute to consciousness if they are active in such a way that they ‘signal’ or ‘broadcast’ the information they represent and ‘ignite’ fronto-parietal networks. That silent neurons can contribute to consciousness is because, in IIT, information is not in the message that is broadcast by an element, but in the form of the conceptual structure that is specified by a complex. Inactive elements of a complex specify a cause–effect repertoire (the probability of possible past and future states) just as much as active ones (think of the dog that did not bark in the famous Sherlock Holmes story). Conversely, if the same neurons were not merely inactive, but pharmacologically or optogenetically inactivated, they would cease to contribute to consciousness: even though their actual state is the same, they would not specify a cause–effect repertoire, since they do not affect the probability of possible past and future states of the complex.

Another counterintuitive prediction of IIT is that if the efficacy of the 200 million callosal fibres through which the two cerebral hemispheres communicate with each other were reduced progressively, there would be a moment at which, for a minimal change in the traffic of neural impulses across the callosum, there would be an all-or-none change in consciousness: experience would go from being a single one to suddenly splitting into two separate experiencing minds (one linguistically dominant), as we know to be the case with split-brain patients. This would be the point at which Φmax for the whole brain would fall below the value of Φmax for the left and for the right hemisphere taken by themselves.

More generally, IIT predicts that, whatever the neural correlate of consciousness (NCC) turns out to be—whether it is global or local within the cortex, anterior or posterior, medial or lateral, whether it includes primary areas or not, the thalamus or not, whether it encompasses neurons in supragranular, infragranular layers of cortex or not—it should be a local maximum of Φ, and thus of a maximum of intrinsic, irreducible cause–effect power. IIT also predicts that the NCC is not necessarily fixed, but may expand, shrink and even move within a given brain depending on various conditions. In fact, there may even be multiple NCCs in a single brain, as shown by split-brain patients, in which case there should be multiple local maxima of integrated information. Finally, IIT makes precise predictions about the physical elements that constitute the NCC and the time intervals and levels of activity at which they operate: they should have a spatial scale that achieves the highest value of Φ, as opposed to finer or coarser grains (say, either individual neurons or local groups of neurons rather than neuronal compartments or brain areas); they should operate most effectively (highest value of Φ) at the time scale of consciousness, as opposed to finer or coarser scales (say, hundred milliseconds rather than a millisecond or ten seconds); and the activity states that make the most difference to the NCC should be the ones that support phenomenological distinctions (say, bursting, high mean firing, low mean firing). In short, the general rule is that the NCC must always correspond to a maximum of intrinsic, ireducible cause–effect power.


Explanations

IIT offers a coherent, principled account of the NCC—which it identifies with the major complex in a particular state—and of many disparate empirical observations. For example, why is consciousness generated by the cerebral cortex (or at least some parts of it), but the cerebellum does not contribute to it, despite the latter having even more neurons;? Why does consciousness fade early in sleep, although the brain remains active? Why is it lost during generalized seizures, when neural activity is intense and synchronous? Why is there no direct contribution to consciousness from neural activity within sensory pathways (the retina) and motor pathways (the motoneurons in the spinal cord), or within neural circuits looping out of the cortex into subcortical structures and back, despite their manifest ability to influence the content of experience?

These and other well-known facts find a parsimonious explanation based on the postulates of IIT. Thus, a prominent feature of the cerebral cortex, which is responsible for the content of consciousness, is that it is composed of elements that are functionally specialized and at the same time can interact rapidly and effectively. This is the kind of organization that yields a comparatively high value of Φmax. Instead, the cerebellum is composed of small modules that process inputs and produce outputs largely independent of each other. Simulations also show that input and output pathways, while capable of affecting the major complex and being affected by it, can remain excluded from it, because they are not part of a local maximum of integrated information. The same applies to loops that may exit the major complex and reenter it. Other simulations show that Φmax is low when the effective connectivity among a set of elements is weak or is organized in homogeneous manner. Indeed, as was mentioned above, when consciousness fades during deep slow wave sleep or in certain states of general anaesthesia, the interactions among different cortical regions become weaker or highly stereotypical, as they do during generalized epileptic seizures.


Extrapolations

Finally, the more the postulates of IIT are validated in situations in which we are reasonably confident about whether and how consciousness changes, the more we can use the theory to extrapolate and make inferences about situations where we are less confident—brain-damaged patients, newborn babies, alien animals, complicated machines and other far-fetched scenarios, as we shall consider next.


Everywhere?

In the ‘Canticle of the Creatures’, Saint Francis addressed animals, flowers and even stones as if endowed with soul, and praised them as mother earth, brother sun, sister moon, the stars, the air, water and fire. And he was not alone. Some of the brightest minds in the West embraced some form of the ancient philosophical doctrine of panpsychism, starting with the Presocratics and Plato. The Renaissance philosophers Patrizi, Bruno, Telesio and Campanella took the position that matter and soul are one substance. Later, Spinoza, Leibniz, Schopenhauer and, closer to modern times, James, Whitehead, Russell, and Teilhard de Chardin espoused panpsychist notions. Strawson is a well-known contemporary defender of panpsychism. Eastern traditions, such as Buddhism, have always emphasized the continuity of consciousness across life.

Materialism, or its modern offspring, physicalism, has profited immensely from Galileo's pragmatic stance of removing subjectivity (mind) from nature in order to describe and understand it objectively—from the extrinsic perspective of a manipulator/observer. But it has done so at the cost of ignoring the central aspect of reality from the intrinsic perspective—experience itself. Unlike idealism, which does away with the physical world, or dualism, which accepts both in an uneasy marriage, panpsychism is elegantly unitary: there is only one substance, all the way up from the smallest entities to human consciousness and maybe to the World Soul (anima mundi). But panpsychism's beauty has been singularly barren. Besides claiming that matter and mind are one thing, it has little constructive to say and offers no positive laws explaining how the mind is organized and works.

IIT was not developed with panpsychism in mind (sic). However, in line with the central intuitions of panpsychism, IIT treats consciousness as an intrinsic, fundamental property of reality. IIT also implies that consciousness is graded, that it is likely widespread among animals, and that it can be found in small amounts even in certain simple systems. Unlike panpsychism, however, IIT clearly implies that not everything is conscious. Moreover, IIT offers a solution to several of the conceptual obstacles that panpsychists never properly resolved, like the problem of aggregates (or combination problem) and can account for its quality. It also explains why consciousness can be adaptive, suggesting a reason for its evolution.


Consciousness is a fundamental property

The axioms and postulates of IIT say that consciousness is a fundamental, observer-independent property that can be accounted for by the intrinsic cause–effect power of certain mechanisms in a state—how they give form to the space of possibilities in their past and their future. An analogy is mass, which can be defined by how it curves space–time around it—except that in the case of experience the entities having the property are not elementary particles but complexes of elements, and experience comes not in two but in a trillion varieties. In this general sense, at least, IIT is not at odds with panpsychism.


Consciousness comes in various qualities

Unfortunately, panpsychism is mute when it comes to explaining the way any one conscious experience feels—why the perception of red feels different from that of blue and why colours are experienced as different from tones. Instead, at least in principle, IIT says exactly what determines the quality of an experience—what makes it the particular way it is: an experience is a maximally irreducible conceptual structure or quale—a shape in a fantastically high-dimensional cause–effect space specified by a complex of neurons in a particular state. This is the constellation of concepts through which the neurons of the major complex, in various combinations, give form to the space of its possible past and future states. Different experiences—every different scene in a movie or in a dream—correspond to different shapes, with some shapes being measurably closer (red and blue) and some more distant within the space (a black screen and a city scene). Indeed, there is much scope for future research to begin mapping psychophysics, for example, the circular nature of colour space, onto the geometry of shapes in cause–effect space—except that a shape in cause–effect space, unlike the shape of an object in 3D space, is the shape within, the shape of experience itself. It is the voice in the head, the light inside the skull.


Consciousness is adaptive

IIT takes no position on the function of experience as such—similar to physics not having anything to say about the function of mass or charge. However, by identifying consciousness with integrated information, IIT can account for why it evolved, another aspect about which panpsychism has nothing to say. In general, a brain having a high capacity for information integration will better match an environment with a complex causal structure varying across multiple time scales, than a network made of many modules that are informationally encapsulated. Indeed, artificial life simulations (‘animats’) of simple Braitenberg-like vehicles that have to traverse mazes and whose brains evolve by natural selection over 60 000 generations show a monotonic relationship between (simulated) integrated information and adaptation. That is, the more adapted individual animats are to their environment, the higher the integrated information of the major complex in their brain. Similar animats, evolved to catch falling blocks in a Tetris-like scenario, demonstrate that increased adaptation leads to increased number of concepts in the major complex and an associated increase in integrated information that depends on the complexity of the animats’ environment. Thus, evolution by natural selection gives rise to organisms with high Φmax because, given constraints on the number of elements and connections, they can pack more functions per element than their less integrated competitors and thus are more adept at exploiting regularities in a rich environment.


Consciousness is graded

IIT does side with the panpsychist intuition that consciousness may be present across the animal kingdom, and even beyond, but in varying degrees. Everything else being equal, integrated information, and with it the richness of experience, is likely to increase as the number of neurons and the abundance of their interconnections grow, although sheer number of neurons is not a guarantee, as shown by the cerebellum. It is also likely that consciousness is graded across the lifetime of any one organism. In us it becomes richer as we grow from a baby to an adult whose brain has fully matured and becomes more functionally specialized. It can also wax and wane when we are highly alert or drowsy, intoxicated by drugs or alcohol, or become demented in old age. This is illustrated schematically in a, where a set of ‘cortical’ areas is integrated into a major complex of ‘high’ Φmax when the inter-areal connections are strong, undergoes a reduction in Φmax when connection strength is reduced by neuromodulatory changes (simulated as an increase in noise), and finally breaks down into small complexes of low Φmax.

A corollary of IIT that violates common intuitions is that even circuits as simple as a ‘photodiode’ made up of a sensor and a memory element can have a modicum of experience (see also a, right panel). It is nearly impossible to imagine what it would ‘feel like’ to be such a circuit, for which the only phenomenal distinction would be between ‘this rather than not this’ (unlike a photodiode, when we are conscious of ‘light’ or of ‘dark,’ our experience is what it is because it includes scores of negative concepts, such as no colours, no shapes, no thoughts and so on, that are all available to us). But consider that normal matter at −272.15°C, one degree above absolute zero, still contains some heat. However, in practice its temperature is as cold as it gets. Similarly, there may well be a practical threshold for Φmax below which people do not report feeling much of anything, but this does not mean that consciousness has reached its absolute minimum, zero. Indeed, when we fall into a deep, dreamless sleep and don't report any experience upon being awoken, some small complex of neurons within our sleeping brain will likely have a Φmax value greater than zero, yet that may not amount to much compared to that of our rich, everyday experience.


Multiple consciousnesses

IIT also allows for the possibility of two or more complexes coexisting within a single system. Depending on the exact connectivity, these are likely to have quite different values of Φmax. Indeed, in the brains of both vertebrates and invertebrates, there may well exist, at least under some conditions, a major complex and one or more minor complexes. In humans, the complex that supports our day-to-day stream of conscious experience should have by far the highest value of integrated information—it should be the major complex. In split-brain patients the speaking, major complex is unaware of the presence of another consciousness, one that typically lacks speech, but which can be revealed by clever experimental paradigms. It is conceivable that at least some cases of ‘high-level’ performance found in normal subjects), while unconscious from the perspective of the major complex, may be due to the presence of minor complexes (of course, some of these behaviours may be mediated by purely feed-forward circuits). This counterintuitive scenario of ‘many conscious minds within a single brain’ could be assessed, at least in principle, by measurements of integrated information at the neuronal level. Major and minor complexes may also occur in patients with Marchiafava–Bignami disease and other disconnection syndromes, in patients with identity and conversion disorders, and in other neurological and psychiatric conditions.


Aggregates are not conscious

‘Take a sentence of a dozen words, and take twelve men and tell to each one word. Then stand the men in a row or jam them in a bunch, and let each think of his word as intently as he will; nowhere will there be a consciousness of the whole sentence’. This is how William James illustrated the combination problem of panpsychism. Or take John Searle: ‘Consciousness cannot spread over the universe like a thin veneer of jam; there has to be a point where my consciousness ends and yours begins’. Indeed, if consciousness is everywhere, why should it not animate the United States of America? IIT deals squarely with this problem by stating that only maxima of integrated information exist. Consider two people talking: within each brain, there will be a major complex—a set of neurons that form a maximally irreducible cause–effect structure with definite borders and a high value of Φmax. Now let the two speak together. They will now form a system that is also irreducible (Φ > zero) due to their interactions. However, it is not maximally irreducible, since its value of integrated information will be much less than that of each of the two major complexes it contains. According to IIT, there should indeed be two separate experiences, but no superordinate conscious entity that is the union of the two. In other words, there is nothing-it-is-like-to-be two people, let alone the 300 plus million citizens making up the USA. Again, this point can be exemplified schematically by the system of a, right panel. While the five small complexes do interact, forming a larger integrated system, the larger system is not a complex: by the exclusion postulate, only the five smaller complexes exist, since they are local maxima of integrated information (Φmax = 0.19), while the larger system is not a complex (Φ = 0.03). Worse, a dumb thing with hardly any intrinsically distinguishable states, say a grain of sand for the sake of the argument, has no experience whatsoever. And heaping a large number of such zero-Φ systems on top of each other would not increase their Φ to a non-zero value: to be a sand dune does not feel like anything either—aggregates have no consciousness.


Complicated systems can be unconscious

A second class of zero-Φ systems are purely feed-forward computational networks in which one layer feeds the next one without any recurrent connections. In a feed-forward network, the input layer is always determined entirely by external inputs and the output layer does not affect the rest of the system, hence neither layer can be part of a complex, and the same is true recursively for the next layers downstream and upstream. According to IIT, then, a feed-forward network does not exist intrinsically—for itself—but is a zombie—carrying out tasks unconsciously. Yet from the extrinsic perspective of a user, feed-forward networks, like those used in deep learning, perform plenty of useful computational functions, such as finding faces or cats in images, labelling images, reading zip codes and detecting credit card fraud.

This has a rather startling consequence. Consider that any neural network with feedback circuits can be mapped onto a purely feed-forward network in such a manner that the latter approximates its input–output relationships (for computations bounded by a maximal time step). That is, for the same inputs, the two networks will yield the same output (in general, the equivalent feed-forward network will have many more nodes and connection than the feedback network). Therefore, a purely feed-forward system able to replicate the input–output behaviour of the human brain (under the limited time-step constraint) would be behaviourally indistinguishable from us, and certainly capable of passing the Turing test, yet it would have zero Φ and would thus be a ‘perfect’ zombie. A simple example of two functionally equivalent systems, one with recurrent connections and non-zero Φ, and one purely feed-forward with zero Φ, is shown in b.

In people and organisms that evolved through natural selection, input–output behaviour provides a good first guess about the presence of consciousness. However, as demonstrated by the example in b, this may not always be the case for radically different computational architectures. In the general case, and certainly with machines, it becomes essential to consider the internal circuitry—not just what the machine does, but how it does it. This also means that there cannot be an ultimate Turing test for consciousness (although, there may be some practical CAPTCHA-like tests). According to many functionalist notions, if a machine reproduces our input–output behaviour in every circumstance, it would have to be granted consciousness just as much as us. IIT could not disagree more—no Turing test (e.g. Samantha in the Hollywood movie She) can be a sufficient criterion for consciousness, human or otherwise.


Simulations of conscious neural systems can be unconscious

Finally, what about a computer whose software simulates in detail not just our behaviour, but even the biophysics of neurons, synapses and so on, of the relevant portion of the human brain? Could such a digital simulacrum ever be conscious? Functionalism again would say yes, even more forcefully. For in this case all the relevant functional roles within our brain, not just our input–output behaviour, would have been replicated faithfully. Why should we not grant to this simulacrum the same consciousness we grant to a fellow human? According to IIT, however, this would not be justified, for the simple reason that the brain is real, but a simulation of a brain is virtual. For IIT, consciousness is a fundamental property of certain physical systems, one that requires having real cause–effect power, specifically the power of shaping the space of possible past and future states in a way that is maximally irreducible intrinsically. In the same way, mass is an intrinsic property of systems of particles, a property that has real causal power, specifically that of bending space–time. Therefore, just like a computer simulation of a giant star will not bend space–time around the machine, a simulation of our conscious brain will not have consciousness. Of course, the physical computer that is running the simulation is just as real as the brain. However, according to the principles of IIT, one should analyse its real physical components—identify elements, say transistors, define their cause–effect repertoires, find concepts, complexes and determine the spatio-temporal scale at which Φ reaches a maximum. In that case, we suspect that the computer would likely not form a large complex of high Φmax, but break down into many mini-complexes of low Φmax. This is due to the small fan-in and fan-out of digital circuitry (c), which is likely to yield maximum cause–effect power at the fast temporal scale of the computer clock.


Conclusion

In summary, there are some aspects of IIT that definitely do not fit with panpsychism, and others that vindicate some of its intuitions. In this respect, it is natural to consider how one should regard some of the inferences derived from IIT for which it is hard even to imagine a direct test at the present time. Our position is that, as is often the case in science, a theory is first tested and validated in situations that are close to ideal, and then extrapolated to more remote cases. Ideally, whether consciousness varies with integrated information, and other predictions of IIT, would first be validated here—on my own consciousness: for example, does Φmax collapse when I undergo general anaesthesia or a seizure, or when I fall into dreamless sleep, and return to high values when I dream? Does my experience change if one temporarily inactivates a region of my brain that is part of the major complex, but not one that is outside it? Does it change if one succeeds in connecting a neuromorphic microcircuit that becomes part of my major complex and not otherwise? Then one can extrapolate to there, at first in situations involving other healthy humans, then in slightly more difficult cases, say monkeys with a brain similar to ours who are trained to give reports similar to ours. Finally, insofar as the theory has been validated and has shown good predictive and explanatory power, one can try and extrapolate to everywhere, unresponsive patients with just a small ‘island’ of functioning brain tissue, newborn babies, animals very different from us, photodiodes, machines, and computer simulations. After all, often in science the most we can do is to draw our best inferences about unknown instances based on a theory that works well in many known instances. And that is much better than to make arbitrary claims or to draw no inference whatsoever.


Cerebral hierarchies: predictive processing, precision and the pulvinar

Ryota Kanai, Yutaka Komura, Stewart Shipp, Karl Friston — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4387510, CC BY 4.0.

This paper considers neuronal architectures from a computational perspective and asks what aspects of neuroanatomy and neurophysiology can be disclosed by the nature of neuronal computations? In particular, we extend current formulations of the brain as an organ of inference—based upon hierarchical predictive coding—and consider how these inferences are orchestrated. In other words, what would the brain require to dynamically coordinate and contextualize its message passing to optimize its computational goals? The answer that emerges rests on the delicate (modulatory) gain control of neuronal populations that select and coordinate (prediction error) signals that ascend cortical hierarchies. This is important because it speaks to a hierarchical anatomy of extrinsic (between region) connections that form two distinct classes, namely a class of driving (first-order) connections that are concerned with encoding the content of neuronal representations and a class of modulatory (second-order) connections that establish context—in the form of the salience or precision ascribed to content. We explore the implications of this distinction from a formal perspective (using simulations of feature–ground segregation) and consider the neurobiological substrates of the ensuing precision-engineered dynamics, with a special focus on the pulvinar and attention.


Introduction

There are many fascinating aspects of cerebral cartography that have been disclosed over the past centuries and—presumably—many more that have yet to reveal themselves. In this paper, we focus on one particular aspect, namely the imperatives for the coordination of message passing in the brain—and what those imperatives mandate in terms of cortical (and subcortical) anatomy. We base our treatment on the assumption that cerebral cartography is an anatomy of inference. In other words, the brain is a statistical organ predicting worldly states that generate its sensory inputs. In particular, we focus on predictive coding as a (biologically plausible) implementation of hierarchical inference in the brain and see how far this takes us in understanding the orchestration and contextualization of neuronal dynamics.

In what follows, we briefly review predictive coding with a special focus on how the brain encodes irreducible uncertainty inherent in the sensory evidence it samples. It transpires that—under predictive coding—this uncertainty or relative confidence in sensory (and extrasensory) information can be succinctly encoded by the gain of certain neuronal populations that pass information from one hierarchal cortical level to the next. This immediately brings us into the realm of cortical gain control and neuromodulation—that may be closely tied to synchronous gain and the (oscillatory) dynamics associated with binding, attention and dynamic coordination. We then consider the computational anatomy implied by encoding the confidence or precision of ascending neuronal signals that is illustrated with a simple problem, namely figure–ground segregation in the visual hierarchy. We then turn to the neurobiology of cortical gain control, using the pulvinar as a prime example of a subcortical structure that has all the equipment necessary for contextualizing hierarchical inference in cortical hierarchies.


The Bayesian brain

Recent advances in theoretical neuroscience have inspired a paradigm shift in cognitive neuroscience. This shift is away from the brain as a passive filter of sensations towards a view of the brain as a statistical organ that generates hypotheses or fantasies which are tested against sensory evidence. In this formulation, the brain is, literally, a fantastic organ (fantastic: from Greek phantastikos, the ability to create mental images, from phantazesthai). This perspective can be traced back to Helmholtz and the notion of unconscious inference. This notion has been generalized to cover deep or hierarchical Bayesian inference—about the causes of our sensations—and how these inferences induce beliefs, movement and behaviour.


Predictive coding and the Bayesian brain

Modern formulations of Helmholtz's notion are now among the most popular explanations for neuronal message passing and are usually considered under the Bayesian brain hypothesis as predictive coding. There is now considerable (circumstantial) anatomical and physiological evidence for predictive coding in the brain. See Bastos et al. for a review of canonical microcircuits and hierarchical predictive coding in perception and Adams et al. and Shipp et al. for an equivalent treatment of the motor system. In these schemes, neuronal representations in higher levels of cortical hierarchies generate predictions of representations in lower levels. These top-down predictions are compared with representations at the lower level to form a prediction error (associated with the activity of superficial pyramidal cells). The ensuing mismatch signal is passed back up the hierarchy, to update higher representations (associated with the activity of deep pyramidal cells). This recursive exchange of signals suppresses prediction error at each and every level to provide a hierarchical explanation for sensory inputs that enter at the lowest (sensory) level. In computational terms, neuronal activity encodes beliefs or probability distributions over states in the world that cause sensations (e.g. my visual sensations are caused by a face). The simplest encoding corresponds to representing the belief with the expected value of a (hidden) cause or expectation. These causes are referred to as hidden because they have to be inferred from their sensory consequences.

In summary, predictive coding represents a biologically plausible scheme for updating beliefs (or expectations) about the world using sensory samples. In this setting, neuroanatomy and neurophysiology can be regarded as a biological embodiment of how sensory signals are generated; for example, a smiling face generates luminance surfaces that generate textures and edges and so on, down to retinal input. This form of hierarchical inference explains a remarkable number of anatomical and physiological facts as documented elsewhere. In brief, it explains the hierarchical nature of cortical cartography; the prevalence of backward connections and many of the functional and structural asymmetries in the extrinsic connections that link hierarchical levels. These asymmetries include the laminar specificity of forward and backward connections, the prevalence of nonlinear or modulatory backward connections (that embody interactions and nonlinearities inherent in the generation of sensory signals) and their spectral characteristics—with fast (e.g. gamma) activity predominating in forward connections (prediction errors) and slower (e.g. beta) frequencies emerging as this evidence is accumulated in units that provide descending predictions.

At a more macroscopic level, the implicit anatomy of inference also provides a simple explanation for functional segregation; in the sense that hierarchically deeper representations or expectations (e.g. what and where) are statistically segregated and are combined in a nonlinear way to contextualize lower-level causes of sensory information (e.g. colour and form). Indeed, one could argue that the very existence of slender axonal connections in the brain speaks to the sparse causal dependencies or laws that endow our sensory world with statistical regularities (contrast the anatomy of the brain with the anatomy of the liver). Although hierarchical predictive coding appears to have broad explanatory power, there is something missing from this picture. In short, there appears to be no role for corticothalamic interactions or (recursive) coupling with other subcortical structures. So, what is lacking in the above description of predictive coding?


Precision engineering and the encoding of context

One can regard ascending prediction errors as broadcasting ‘newsworthy’ information that has yet to be explained by descending predictions. However, the brain also has to select the channels it listens to—by adjusting the volume or gain of prediction errors that compete to update expectations in higher levels. Computationally, this gain corresponds to the precision or confidence associated with ascending prediction errors; very much in the same way that we assess the statistical significance of an effect in relation to its standard error. However, to optimally select the prediction errors—that should be afforded greater influence—the brain has to estimate or encode their precision. Having done this, prediction errors can then be weighted by their precision, so that only precise information is accumulated and assimilated in high or deep hierarchical levels.

This broadcasting of precision-weighted prediction errors may rest on neuromodulatory gain control mechanisms at a synaptic level. This gain control corresponds to a (Bayes-optimal) encoding of precision in terms of the excitability of neuronal populations reporting prediction errors. This may explain why superficial pyramidal cells have so many synaptic gain control mechanisms such as N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors and classical neuromodulatory receptors like D1 dopamine receptors. Furthermore, it places excitation–inhibition balance in a prime position to mediate precision-engineered message passing within and among hierarchical levels. As noted above, the encoding of salience or precision can also be understood in terms of synchronous gain and fast (oscillatory) dynamics associated with binding, attention and dynamic coordination.

The dynamic and context-sensitive control of precision has been associated with attentional gain control in sensory processing and has been discussed in terms of affordance and action selection. Crucially, the delicate balance of precision over different hierarchical levels has a profound effect on inference—and may also offer a formal understanding of false inference in psychopathology. To illustrate the potential importance of precision—and implicit synaptic gain control—we will look at a particular problem from the point of view of predictive coding and see why neuromodulatory mechanisms are an integral part of its solution.


Predictive coding and figure–ground segregation

This section considers the figure–ground segregation problem where, crucially, a figure is defined texturally—in terms of its second-order statistics; in other words, a visual object is manifest in terms of its texture or spectral power in the spatial domain. This segregation problem precludes recourse to first-order attributes, such as differences in luminance or colour. In other words, the quantities causing visual impressions are only defined in terms of their precision (or inverse variance). This presents an interesting problem for predictive coding (and the brain) that we use to illustrate the importance of gain control in finessing the inference problem.

In statistics, this (inverse) problem is usually solved using some form of variance component estimation; for example, using covariance constraints in the electromagnetic source reconstruction problem. Here, we solve the same problem with predictive coding. In this setting, hidden causes in the generative model control the precision or variance of subordinate causes generating data. Expectations of these hierarchical causes are optimized with respect to variational free energy—using predictive coding. Here, variational free energy is a proxy for Bayesian model evidence and can be regarded as the sum of the (squared and precision-weighted) prediction error. The simulation used to illustrate this solution is trivially simple but sufficient to make our key point, namely that top-down predictions have very different effects on prediction error responses—depending upon whether they encode the first- or second-order statistical properties of a stimulus.

We simulated a contiguous object, whose texture was determined by the variance of random fluctuations in luminance, where this variance was modulated by (Gaussian) spatial basis functions of retinotopic space. The resulting signal was mixed with uniform Gaussian observation noise to produce sensory data. These data were then subjected to Bayesian inversion using (generalized) predictive coding to recover the object or figure. The implicit figure–ground segregation basically involves estimating the hidden causes modulating the spatial basis functions controlling textural features—in this case, the local variance of stimulus intensity over sensory channels.

Technically, predictive coding optimizes expectations of the hidden causes of data that, in this case, include the amplitude of radial basis functions controlling the precision (inverse variance) of retinotopic signals (see below). In brief, we see that the resulting figure–ground segregation rests on selectively attending to sensory input from the figure, relative to the background. However, this form of attention is distinct from simply boosting sensory precision (the precision of sensory prediction errors) as in simulations of the Posner paradigm or biased competition. Here, expectations of hidden causes are optimized in a way that renders them less precise and therefore more sensitive to ascending sensory (prediction error) input. This illustrates the importance of the relative precision of sensory and extrasensory prediction errors in modulating the influence of ascending sensory information.


Simulation details

Three Gaussian basis functions of a one-dimensional retinotopic space (with a separation and standard deviation of eight channels) were modulated with three hidden causes v(2) = [8, 8, 0] to generate the log-precision of a visual signal over 128 visual channels. The resulting log precision vector was used to modulate Gaussian fluctuations to generate textured signals by applying a Gaussian convolution matrix (with a standard deviation of two channels); finally, uniform Gaussian noise with a precision of 16 was added to the signals to generate sensory data

This way of generating data rests upon a generative model of the following form, which is a special case of the generative models described in the appendix: it is a special case, because there are no dynamics or hidden states

This generative model specifies the neuronal dynamics for posterior expectations about the hidden causes that constitute predictive coding (see appendix for details and for the particular equations of the current model), where:

These equations provide a relatively simple update scheme, in which changes in posterior expectations are driven by a mixture of precision-weighted prediction errors—where prediction errors are defined by the equations of the generative model. Crucially, prediction errors are affected by descending predictions in one of two ways: expectations can either generate predictions of first-order effects, through the functions. Alternatively, they can generate predictions of precision, through the functions. These effects are formally distinct: the first-order predictions (of lower expectations) have a negative (driving) effect on the prediction errors, whereas the second-order predictions (of their precision) have a positive (modulatory) effect. We can see this separation clearly in the current example, because the second-level hidden causes only predict second-order statistics (log precision), whereas the first-level hidden predict first-order statistics. This means equation can be separated into first- and second-order updates

The key thing to take from these equations is the difference between first- and second-order message passing. The first-order expectations are driven by linear mixtures of first- and second-order prediction errors that play the role of the likelihood and (empirical) prior influences. Crucially, the second-order prediction errors (empirical priors) have more influence when they are more precise. Similarly, the first-order predictions enter the first-order prediction errors in a linear (subtractive) fashion. In contrast, the second-order expectations are driven by nonlinear (sum of squared) prediction errors and modulate the second-order prediction errors in a nonlinear fashion. It is this modulation we associate with precision-engineered message passing and the (attentional) contextualization of predictive coding. (See for a schematic of this message passing for the simple model considered here.)

shows the results of a typical simulation. The left columns show the results of predictive coding and the right columns show the true values generating sensory input. These inputs were inverted using the generative model that was used to produce them—but with unknown hidden causes at the first and second levels. The posterior expectations of these hidden causes are shown in the lower left panels—along with their 90% posterior confidence intervals (in grey). The upper left panel shows the predicted sensory input in blue, and the sensory prediction error in red.

shows the results of the same simulation but using a two-dimensional visual input (and a grid of nine Gaussian radial basis functions). Here, the signal was an L-shaped feature (with anisotropic smoothness) in the lower left quadrant that has, effectively, attracted attention. This attentional ‘spotlight’ is nicely illustrated in terms of the expected variance (inverse precision) as shown in the middle panel. Although very simple, this example highlights the close relationship between attentional selection and figure–ground segregation based upon second-order statistics. Clearly, we could have used a much more elaborate generative model; for example, we could have considered anisotropic Gabor patches when mapping first level hidden causes to sensory (retinotopic) input (cf. classical receptive fields). One could also imagine having separate precision components for vertical and horizontal patches that themselves were constrained by higher hierarchical levels. We will illustrate these ideas in future papers. Here, we focus on the basic computational anatomy implied by these schemes.


Precision, attention and the pulvinar

There are two primary types of relay neurons in the thalamus, namely core cells and matrix cells. Matrix cells are distributed widely over the nuclei of the dorsal thalamus and send thalamocortical axons that terminate principally in the superficial layers of the cortex. Furthermore, thalamocortical signalling is primarily excitatory, but is largely mediated by inhibitory mechanisms that implement synchronous gain. Thalamocortical oscillations also provide modulatory inputs to the thalamus via GABAergic neurons that synapse in the reticular nucleus of the thalamus. It seems natural therefore to consider (a subset of) the corticothalamic system as a candidate for precision control. In what follows, we review the evidence for such a role in the pulvinar—drawing on known neuroanatomy, neurophysiology and recent findings in cognitive neuroscience.

The pulvinar is the largest nucleus in the primate thalamus and has expanded in size during primate evolution—in parallel with other visual structures. The pulvinar has long been thought to play a role in mediating visual attention perhaps by registering the saliency of a visual scene. Damage to the pulvinar in humans can result in visual hemi-neglect, deficits in feature binding or focal attention. Neurons in the pulvinar exhibit features of selective attention; as they respond more strongly to behaviourally relevant stimuli than to unattended stimuli, as such, they contribute to top-down suppression of distractors. Human imaging studies report pulvinar activation that is consistent with the filtering of distractors, such that only information pertaining to the attended target can be decoded from patterns of activity.

Neuroanatomical observations of the pulvinar suggest that for every direct connection between two cortical regions, there is a parallel, indirect pathway that goes through the pulvinar. This is called the replication principle. For example, consider the visual maps of ventral pulvinar that receive retinotopically registered connections from the areas of the ventral visual pathway (V1, V2, V4, TEO and TE). These form a (diffuse) occipitotemporal gradient from V1 at one pole of the pulvinar map to area TE at the other. The relative overlap between the pulvinar fields of any given pair of areas roughly reflects their mutual level of cortical connectivity: for example, area V4 shares more pulvinar territory, and has stronger cortical connections with its neighbouring area TEO, than it does with the more distant area TE. This neuroanatomical architecture of the cortico-pulvino-cortical pathway is therefore suited for concurrent precision estimation and to modulate the gain of reciprocal message passing between cortical hierarchical levels. In particular, the replication principle is entirely consistent with the control of the relative precision of prediction errors at different levels in the cortical hierarchy.

Based on these architectural properties—and the requirements of predictive coding—it seems reasonable to hypothesize that the functional role of the pulvinar is to optimize the gain of cortical prediction errors according to their expected precision. To fulfil this role, the pulvinar needs to encode expected precision and mediate gain modulation. Recent neurophysiological studies in behaving monkeys indicate that the pulvinar, indeed, performs these computational operations.


Empirical evidence for precision engineering in the pulvinar

In terms of encoding precision, it has been recently reported that approximately 30% of neurons in the pulvinar are sensitive to the reliability of task-relevant sensory signals, representing the ‘confidence’ in perceptual decisions. During a perceptual decision task, this subset of neurons does not selectively respond to the content of perception, but exhibits a higher firing rate when the monkeys behaved as though they were certain about their perceptual decision. When the monkeys were given a choice to opt-out, for a smaller reward, a lower firing rate of these neurons predicted the escape response of the monkeys—even when the signal-to-noise ratio in the stimulus was identical. The firing rate was lower for more difficult trials, and the deactivation of these neurons by GABA agonist (muscimol) injection enhanced escape responses—as though the monkeys lost confidence in their perceptual decision even though their objective task performance was unimpaired. These findings support the notion that neurons in the pulvinar encode expected precision or confidence in information used for perceptual decisions.

The pulvinar's contribution to gain control has been demonstrated in a compelling study of spike-field coherence. By concurrently recording pulvinar spikes and local field potentials from V4 and TEO, the authors showed that the spike-field coherence between the pulvinar neurons and alpha oscillation in V4 and TEO was enhanced when attention was directed to the receptive field of the pulvinar neuron. Crucially, conditional Granger causality analysis across the three regions showed that the pulvinar neurons facilitated the transmission of information between V4 and TE by synchronizing the alpha oscillation in those cortical regions. This provides empirical evidence that the pulvinar serves as a gain control system for corticocortical interaction—via controlling neuronal synchronization. This synchronous gain control offers a neurobiological mechanism to adjust effective synaptic gain transiently across cortical regions. Furthermore, it is closely related to notions of communication through coherence (see below) and may reflect an important mechanism for precision engineering in attention.

These studies provide neurophysiological evidence that the pulvinar neurons encode expected precision, and modulate the gain of corticocortical communication. The notion of precision engineering in the pulvinar offers a coherent (computational) perspective on how seemingly disparate aspects of attention (gain modulation) and confidence (uncertainty estimation) are orchestrated. Although the concepts of salience, confidence and attention may appear distinct, their intimate relationship can be interpreted as an integral part of perceptual inference—reflecting the different faces of precision.


Gain control mechanisms in the cortico-pulvino-cortical connectivity

There are multiple thalamocortical mechanisms that can modulate the gain of prediction error in superficial layers of the cortex. Here, we consider three possible mechanisms through which the pulvinar contributes to gain control: (i) induction of phase synchrony across presynaptic neurons within a cortical region, perhaps achieved by (ii) modulation of low-frequency (alpha) oscillation across cortical regions and (iii) modulation of prediction error units in the superficial layers via diffuse projections.

The first mechanism reflects the fact that synchronized presynaptic spikes generally make the postsynaptic impact stronger. Thus, controlling the degree of synchrony at presynaptic neurons can serve as a gain control mechanism. This can be achieved by synchronous modulation of subthreshold membrane potentials at the gamma frequency. While gamma oscillations can be generated by intracortical mechanisms, the thalamus plays a role in modulating gamma oscillations in sensory cortex. For example, it has been shown that stimulation of the posterior intralaminar nucleus modulates synchronous gamma oscillations in the auditory cortex. Extending this notion to the visual cortex, one may speculate that the pulvinar could modulate subthreshold gamma oscillation in prediction error neurons in the cortex, thereby controlling the synchrony of spike timings of prediction error neurons.

The second mechanism is phase synchronization of distant cortical areas by the pulvinar, invoking the principle of ‘communication through coherence’—that selective communication can be achieved through coherence between firing rate oscillation in the sending region and oscillatory gain modulation in the receiving region. Corticothalamic connections play a prominent role in synchronizing oscillations, and the thalamus modulates phase relationships between cortical regions, thereby modulating the effective synaptic strengths. For example, Akam & Kullmann demonstrate flexible signal routing in neural circuits, by exploiting sparsely synchronized network oscillations and temporal filtering by feed-forward inhibition.

The core cells in the pulvinar form a loop through layers 3 and 6 of extrastriate cortex. This circuit could serve as an alpha generator for extrastriate cortex, through a mechanism analogous to the geniculocortical loop through layers 4 and 6 of V1, and modulate the effectiveness of the output from one area to another distant cortical region. As discussed earlier, empirical evidence indicates that spikes from the pulvinar generate alpha rhythms in the target cortical areas, and induce corticocortical synchrony in the alpha frequency that facilitates communication between the synchronized cortical regions. Furthermore, there is evidence in this study and others for alpha–gamma cross-frequency coupling, thus forging a link between the two mechanisms considered so far.

The third mechanism considers gain control by projections from the pulvinar to the superficial layers 1–3 of a visual area (e.g. V1). This diffuse projection, originating from the matrix cells of the pulvinar, can modulate the activity of prediction error neurons in the target area—a functional analogy with the superficial component of backward cortical connections that we have previously attributed with a role in precision control. Gain control via this pathway has been empirically demonstrated. Inactivation of the lateral pulvinar suppressed responses of superficial V1 neurons to visual input, whereas excitation of the pulvinar neurons increased the responsiveness of neurons in the superficial layers with overlapping receptive fields. Given the organization of cortico-pulvino-cortical connections (noted above), we predict that the pulvinar neurons sending feedback to superficial layers of any given cortical area receive information about expected precision via the descending input from areas at both higher and lower levels in the cortical hierarchy. This may differ from the corticocortical transmission of precision that we have so far linked exclusively to backward connections.

These candidate mechanisms suggest that the pulvinar has multiple ways to control the gain in corticocortical communications. These neuronal implementations of gain control mechanisms are by no means comprehensive, and are not mutually exclusive. While all of the mechanisms discussed here have some empirical support, which mechanism plays a dominant role in the context of the predictive coding framework remains to be determined. Nevertheless, these examples collectively point to the pulvinar's role in gain control in corticocortical communication.


Precision estimation in the corticothalamic network

The anatomy and laminar specificity of pulvinar projections to the cortex fits comfortably with the computational architecture implied by predictive coding. We have outlined different roles for the core and matrix output neurons (in alpha generation for the core cells, projecting to the middle layers and in precision regulation for the matrix cells projecting superficially). The dual afferent projections to the pulvinar from the cortex derive from layers 5 and 6, thought to act as drivers and modulators, respectively. It is these connections that should convey the (squared) prediction error to enable the pulvinar to estimate precision. However, if we consider the geniculocortical loop with striate cortex as a model for alpha generation it is the layer 6 outputs to thalamus that serve this role, pointing to layer 5, perhaps, as the source of squared prediction error. Note that striate cortex output to pulvinar is not duplex, but arises exclusively from layer 5. All current analyses of canonical microcircuits place prediction error units in superficial layers. Thus, we suppose that the principal cells reporting the squared prediction error (i.e. second-order forward connections) to the pulvinar are a secondary stream originating through the strong intrinsic connections from the superficial layers to layer 5. The particular arrangement that we arrive at—cortical drivers driving thalamic matrix cells, and cortical modulators modulating thalamic core cells—matches the anatomy reported for connections between frontal cortex and the ventral anterior thalamic nucleus, but the specificity of contacts existing within pulvinar is unknown.

The message passing implied by predictive coding would require these layer 5 principal cells to respond, in a U-shaped fashion, to both high and low levels of prediction error firing in superficial layers; in other words, be both excited and disinhibited by (first-order) prediction errors. The notion of a (second-order) forward-type corticopulvinar stream fits comfortably with the notion that input from layer 5 is largely feed-forward and the hypothesis that layer 5 corticothalamic axons represent the afferent limb of a corticothalamocortical pathway.


Conclusion

In this paper, we have considered how inferences about first-order content and second-order context are orchestrated in hierarchical predictive coding, highlighting the importance of modulatory effects by second-order representations—such as precision and saliency—in optimizing inference. We have considered the neurobiological substrates of precision engineering in the brain, with a special focus on the pulvinar and attention. In this proposal, inference about the (first-order) content of perception was ascribed to corticocortical message passing, whereas parallel corticothalamocortical connections contextualize (second-order) corticocortical processing via precision-weighted gain control of ascending prediction errors. This proposal offers a formal understanding of attentional functions and the encoding of expected precision by the pulvinar.

More generally, the notion of hierarchical inference in the brain provides a potentially important link between structure and function: if the brain transcribes causal structure from the world, then this (hierarchical) structure should be embodied in cortical architectures. Predictive coding provides a particular process theory for this transcription and calls for an understanding of microscopic (laminar-specific) message passing in canonical microcircuits—that is consistent with macroscopic cartography defined by extrinsic connections. The particular contribution of this paper is to highlight the context-sensitive and dynamic aspects of functional anatomy—distinguishing between the neuronal processing of (first-order) content and (second-order) context. The implications for the future of cerebral cartography are manifest at a number of levels, namely a fuller understanding of the asymmetries between forward and backward connections—and the distinction between streams responsible for perceptual synthesis per se and those (presumably more diffuse) streams that contextualize perceptual processing, enabling the selection and coordination of precise information. The formal constraints offered by schemes like predictive coding highlight the need to characterize cortical interactions at the level of cortical layers and the orchestration of cerebral processing through centrifugal exchanges with subcortical structures.


The brain timewise: how timing shapes and supports brain function

Riitta Hari, Lauri Parkkonen — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4387511, CC BY 4.0.

We discuss the importance of timing in brain function: how temporal dynamics of the world has left its traces in the brain during evolution and how we can monitor the dynamics of the human brain with non-invasive measurements. Accurate timing is important for the interplay of neurons, neuronal circuitries, brain areas and human individuals. In the human brain, multiple temporal integration windows are hierarchically organized, with temporal scales ranging from microseconds to tens and hundreds of milliseconds for perceptual, motor and cognitive functions, and up to minutes, hours and even months for hormonal and mood changes. Accurate timing is impaired in several brain diseases. From the current repertoire of non-invasive brain imaging methods, only magnetoencephalography (MEG) and scalp electroencephalography (EEG) provide millisecond time-resolution; our focus in this paper is on MEG. Since the introduction of high-density whole-scalp MEG/EEG coverage in the 1990s, the instrumentation has not changed drastically; yet, novel data analyses are advancing the field rapidly by shifting the focus from the mere pinpointing of activity hotspots to seeking stimulus- or task-specific information and to characterizing functional networks. During the next decades, we can expect increased spatial resolution and accuracy of the time-resolved brain imaging and better understanding of brain function, especially its temporal constraints, with the development of novel instrumentation and finer-grained, physiologically inspired generative models of local and network activity. Merging both spatial and temporal information with increasing accuracy and carrying out recordings in naturalistic conditions, including social interaction, will bring much new information about human brain function.

Keywords: brain imaging, hierarchical order, magnetoencephalography, networks, prediction, time


Introduction

Accurate timing is essential for human brain function. Still, current human brain imaging is dominated by methods focusing on the spatial distributions of brain activity by means of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and positron emission tomography (PET). Although these methods are intrinsically sluggish, they have been extremely informative in unravelling brain areas involved in different types of processing. Recent development is moving the focus from single brain areas to dynamic networks whose nodes and connection strengths can change over time.

Less attention has been paid to temporally accurate recording methods, such as magnetoencephalography (MEG) and electroencephalography (EEG), which we discuss in this paper. We first describe temporal integration windows that govern human brain function and their changes in brain disorders. We continue by pondering what kind of traces the temporal dynamics of the environment has left during evolution of the mammal brain. We then discuss the kind of timing information that we can obtain with the current brain imaging tools, and we end by speculating future developments in this field, especially related to our own work on time-resolved MEG imaging of two-person recordings in the study of the brain basis of social interaction and of other human cortical functions.


Multiple time scales in brain function


Perception, action and cognition

The relevant time scales of human perception, action and cognition vary considerably. The analysis of directional hearing cues requires resolving temporal differences of just 50 ms, corresponding to 20 kHz, which is a factor of 1000 higher than the frequency of the typical brain rhythms occurring at 10–20 Hz (cycle durations 50–100 ms). The strength of these rhythms is modulated by external stimuli or tasks at rates slower than approximately 2 Hz (approx. 500 ms). The now very popular resting-state fluctuations of brain activity are slower than approximately 0.2 Hz (approx. 5 s). Acute emotions, such as anger and happiness, can arise within seconds, but for mood changes the proper time scales are in the range of minutes. Thus, the time scales of interest vary from microseconds to subseconds, seconds, minutes and even years, resulting in a multitude of ultradian, circadian and annual rhythms; besides behaviour, many of these rhythms can be seen at the level of brain signals.

Millisecond timing is needed for movements and perception, for example during dancing to the rhythm of music. However, sensory processing in some conditions tolerates inaccuracies up to hundreds of milliseconds. For example, multisensory asynchrony is permitted up to 100–250 ms (approx. 4–10 Hz), meaning that stimuli arriving at intervals less than about 250 ms are perceptually fused to the same object or event. Different tasks have different temporal windows but also different requirements of accuracy and error tolerance.

The brains are able to make temporally accurate predictions of the consequences of the subject's own actions; millisecond-range temporal precision is realized via the efference copies (via corollary discharges) that inform the sensory cortices about the motor plans. For example, activity in human somatosensory cortex differs when the subject touches herself compared with an identical stimulus delivered by someone else, and this difference is observable already about 30 ms after the touch. Similarly, learned regularities in sensory input can give rise to temporal predictions with subsecond accuracy, as is reflected in, for example evoked responses in the auditory cortex to omitted sounds, occurring within 200 ms from the time of the expected sound occurrence, or as changes of brain rhythms to support prediction of timing of external events.


Hierarchy of time scales

Naturalistic visual and auditory stimulation have been applied during fMRI scanning to reveal a hierarchy of time scales from a few seconds to tens of seconds, expressed as topographically organized maps where the time windows are longer the longer is the area's distance from the early projection cortex. MEG studies, based on the recovery rates of evoked responses—with their sequences of different deflections each reacting differentially to changes in stimulus repetition rate—have pointed to a hierarchical order of much shorter time intervals and demonstrated that one brain area can be, at the same time, involved in processes spanning different time scales.

The brain apparently operates in parallel on several timescales which are often nested and hierarchically organized. The functional hierarchy may emerge as the result of self-organization in a system containing multiple time scales, as can be deduced from a network model controlling the physical body and the movements of a humanoid robot. Quite striking evidence of nested time windows exists for cortical mechanisms underlying speech perception, with different integration windows for consonants (20–50 ms), syllables (200–300 ms) and sentences.

Several bodily rhythms are coupled to each other. For example, the breathing rhythm has been suggested to serve, during evolution, as a common clock for integration of multiple orofacial senses, such as sniffing-related smell and vibrissae-movement-related touch. Respiration as a fundamental function could also be one of the evolutionary bases for the rhythmicity of speech. The rhythmical structure is highly similar in human speech and monkey auditory calls, and in both species the acoustic envelopes and the mouth movements resemble each other at frequencies lower than about 10 Hz, that is in the frequency range where abolition of the temporal fluctuations of sounds and the temporal modulations of their frequency patterns most seriously disrupts speech understanding.

Generally, cross-frequency coupling of brain oscillations is considered an important coordinating and integrating mechanism of brain activity. It is a mechanism for the global slow oscillations (usually their phase) to modulate the local fast oscillations (usually their amplitude). The commonly used analysis tools have, however, been recently criticized, because of the easy appearance of spurious cross-frequency coupling.

The neurophysiological mechanism supporting such coupling could be that the synaptic oscillatory signal modulates the length constant of neurons of the target area, which in turn affects local spatio-temporal integration of that area's other synaptic inputs in a nonlinear manner—in other words changing the electrotonic size of the pyramidal neuron—and thereby makes the neuron's output vary in phase of the driving rhythm.


Timing in brain disorders

Characteristic of many brain disorders is slowing of the background EEG/MEG rhythms as well as delays in sensory processing as indicated by prolonged latencies of evoked responses. For over 80 years, abnormalities of EEG rhythms and the appearance of abnormal EEG signals have been used as diagnostic tools of various brain disorders, although the findings are often quite unspecific.

Clumsy and slow movements are often related, besides lesions of the corticospinal pathways, to disorders of the cerebellum and basal ganglia; for example, bradykinesia (slowed-down movements) in Parkinson's disease is associated with changes in dopamine-dependent rhythms covering a wide frequency range.

Timing deficits have been much discussed and debated in dyslexia because the subjects are often slow in reacting to stimuli presented in rapid succession. One frequently presented hypothesis is weakness of the magnocellular pathways that normally transmits impulses to the cortex about 10 ms earlier than the other fibres, or the sensory slowing could be secondary to sluggish attention shifting. Whatever their origin may be, these timing disorders contribute to but apparently do not exhaustively explain dyslexia.


Temporal constraints for brain architecture


How temporal dynamics was impregnated into our brains

An interesting question is how the different temporal scales have emerged in the human brain during evolution and ontogeny. Evolutionary pressure has arisen from the necessity of the organism, for its survival and reproduction, to perceive and act in the dynamical environment. Additional temporal constraints have arisen from the need to communicate.

Nature is full of concurrently active time scales to which organisms have to adapt and be able to react. Importantly, these basic environmental constraints are quite similar in all mammals living on land. The most evident consequences are the annual and circadian rhythms in various bodily functions, but in a similar way the dynamical environment with all its time scales is the apparent driving force for the hierarchical organization of both temporal and spatial scales in brain activity.

When facing the same force, larger masses move or oscillate slower than smaller ones, as dictated by Newton's second law. Think, for example, how differently the wind moves the trunk and the small branches of a tree. Thus, a general inverse relationship exists between the speed of passive responses (and active movements) and the size of real-world objects (and organisms). Physical quantities reflecting such random motion typically manifest a 1/f spectrum (corresponding to ‘pink noise’) where the power and frequency of the signal are inversely related. This kind of a relationship, generally called a powerlaw, is omnipresent in the physical world and also common in biological systems. It is thus to be expected that the long evolutionary exposure to the dynamical environment would have led the small spatial scales and short temporal windows to coexist in the same brain regions, similarly to how they coexist in the physical environment. The above analyses of temporal and spatio-temporal windows support this prediction.


Preservation of brain rhythms across species

The importance of timing for brain function becomes evident from the surprising preservation of the frequencies of brain rhythms across mammals, in whom the brain volume varies by a factor of 17 000 as recently reviewed. Such regularities are evident across species although, at least in humans, the detailed frequencies and the reactivity of brain rhythms have a clear genetic component as well. This similarity of brain rhythm frequencies is in strong contrast to for example breathing rhythm and heart rate, which scale inversely with animal size.

According to Buzsaki et al., the reasons for the brain-rhythm similarity could be related to intrinsic biophysical properties of neurons and microcircuits involved in the generation of the rhythms. These processes impose the temporal limits for synchrony that as such are closely related to the timing between pre- and postsynaptic firing (and thereby synaptic plasticity) as well as to second-messenger processes that make the plastic changes permanent.

Another interesting constraint, also mentioned by Buzsaki et al., is the mechanics of the effector systems, especially the contraction mechanisms of skeletal muscles where the properties of myosin and actin filaments, and especially their interaction (contraction) speed, have remained largely similar across mammals. Consequently, both the input and output systems of all animals equipped with these physiological ‘devices’ need to keep approximately similar timing.

In other words, the temporo-spatial properties and regularities of the environment have, during evolution, shaped both the sensory and motor systems, and less directly also the executive functions that are temporally constrained by sensing and acting.


How to wire a brain

It is beneficial for an animal to react to danger or a threat as rapidly as possible, thus relying on fast transmission channels. The conduction velocity of an axonal fibre depends on the fibre diameter: in a myelinated axon the velocity increases linearly as a function of the diameter, whereas in an unmyelinated fibre it increases only as the square root of the diameter. Although thin unmyelinated fibres are metabolically expensive (because of the increased capacitance of the membrane compared with myelinated fibres) they still are very common in the brain. One may thus wonder—given the importance of accurate timing and speed for survival—why the brain spends energy on such thin, slowly conducting fibres.

Estimating from the fibre diameter distribution of the human corpus callosum, time lags between the hemispheres vary from 3 to 300 ms. Very strikingly, in all mammals the shortest transmission times between the hemispheres—independently of the brain size—remain about the same, shorter than 5 ms, because a fraction of the thickest fibres scales with brain size.

It is evident that one cannot keep accurate timing in large mammal brains just by increasing the diameter of all axons, as such a design would lead to a catastrophic increase of the brain size, making delivery impossible. The required high-speed information transfer is thus realized by a significant increase in the diameter of only a small fraction of axons in the corpus callosum, which is enough to keep the delays short without spending too much of the expensive brain volume. Evolution has, however, preserved the slow but dense thin fibres, thereby guaranteeing good connectivity at a compromised speed.

An interesting parallel is seen in the current development of interconnections on semiconductor chips where space is also at a premium: a large number of thin (slow) connections form a dense local wiring on the chip, whereas thick (fast) wires are used for global communication on the chip. Similarly to in the brain, the connections in semiconductor integrated circuits can be either fast or dense but not both at the same time without leading to problems of packaging and space. Thus, similar compromises have taken place both in chip design and in the evolution of the mammal brain.

Many studies and theoretical treatises consider the brain as a small-world network, where long-range connections are sparse and contacts between distant areas come as a surprise. The presence of small-world network structure has been recently challenged at local scales, because retrograde tracing has demonstrated several clusters of connections that have not previously been seen with other methods, thereby suggesting that the cortical connectivity matrix can be very dense at local scales. At the level of the whole brain, however, the connectivity is predicted by an exponential distance model where connections are lognormally distributed, with short connections weighted strongly but long connections available to connect distant areas. This view of rare long-distance connections fits nicely with the above discussion about the fibre-thickness distributions.

We have previously suggested that the dispersion of the interhemispheric timing because of the wide distribution of conduction velocities in the connecting fibres is useful also in keeping the system flexible, as it prevents excessive ‘neurons that fire together, wire together’ phenomenon that would otherwise freeze and dedifferentiate the system. Cortical dedifferentiation has been demonstrated in monkeys exposed to repetitive monotonous hand movements so that the resulting clumsiness resembled occupational repetitive-strain syndrome.


Time-resolved brain imaging


Basics of magnetoencephalography and electroencephalography

Monitoring neuronal activity at the speed it occurs requires measuring the electric activity within neurons. While several invasive techniques exist to perform these measurements both in vitro and in vivo, MEG and EEG are currently the only non-invasive ways to record electric activity of neuronal populations. The bulk of MEG and EEG signals are generated by postsynaptic currents in the apical dendrites of cortical pyramidal neurons; in EEG, we record the potential distribution caused by these currents on the scalp, whereas in MEG we collect the information by measuring the tiny magnetic fields produced by the currents (for reviews).

MEG is currently performed almost exclusively with superconducting SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device) sensors that have the exquisite sensitivity to pick up the weak, extracranial neuromagnetic fields. Yet, for a measurable signal, synchronized activation of tens of thousands of nearby neurons is needed, both because the signals are tiny and because currents into opposite directions within the cortex result in considerable cancellation (a,b). Response averaging is often necessary to uncover the signal of interest amidst noise due to instrumentation, biological artefacts and background brain activity.

MEG and EEG excel in picking up transient evoked responses as well as rhythmic brain activity (c). However, with MEG and EEG, it is typically difficult to record slowly changing brain signals that are associated, for example, with slowly rising sounds or with cognitive tasks that are not driven by temporally accurate external stimuli. This problem can be alleviated to some extent by using continuous dynamic stimuli crafted to elicit evoked responses at a distinct frequency. Such a ‘frequency tagging’ approach allows to probe so slowly changing brain states that they as such could not provide temporally accurate triggers for analysis of brain signals that are time-locked to certain events, for example, the perceptual states associated with ambiguous visual stimuli.

Both MEG and particularly EEG sensor signals are a mixture of several neural sources, and to disentangle their timing source modelling is needed. Thus, even if accurate localization of the activity is not the main target, high spatial resolution is beneficial as it allows spatial separation between signals arising from different sources. MEG performs considerably better than EEG in this respect, which has implications for studies of functional connectivity between brain regions. Yet, the limited spatial resolution may give rise to spurious functional connectivity unless the estimation excludes in-phase correlations. Similarly, a priori selection of regions-of-interest, as opposed to performing full-brain or whole-cortex analysis, can give misleading results as the activity of the sources not accounted for in the model may leak in to the estimated time series of the selected areas.

MEG, similarly to fMRI, is employed increasingly to explore connectivity, causality and network structure. However, the whole brain imaging community still has problems with proper functional connectivity measures since the widely applied measures tell about correlations, not about causal relationships. Data-driven analyses are beneficial in classifying responses or ‘decoding’ mental contents from the responses. For example, single-trial MEG responses seem to contain information about low-level visual features (here spatial frequencies of gratings) already at the time of the earliest cortical evoked responses, at about 50 ms.


Limitations of the current magnetoencephalography/electroencephalography approaches

Even with electrophysiological methods we are biased to responses attributable to the fastest fibres, whereas the signalling in the slower ones is very difficult to detect because of the larger temporal dispersion. A robust example is the compound action potential of a peripheral nerve that is dominated by the signals from the fastest (thickest) myelinated fibres and only after averaging some contributions can be seen from the slower conducting myelinated fibres, and signals from unmyelinated fibres typically remain invisible. Thus, there is more happening than our recordings can tell.

Even single-unit recordings directly from the monkey cortex may not clarify the activation order of different brain areas: despite a general progression from anatomically lower to higher visual cortices in monkeys, the firing is temporally overlapping, and it is thus difficult to specify temporal boundaries for a hierarchy of brain areas. Normal causality measures or even partial coherence measures typically fail if the communication between the brain areas overlaps heavily in time. A further problem is that most brain areas have reciprocal connections, which still hampers the directionality analyses. However, it might be possible to separate incoming and outgoing signalling, at least to some extent, because the feedback and feed-forward connections, landing to different depths in the cortex, employ different frequencies. In macroscopic brain imaging experiments, especially those carried out with fMRI, a common approach to look at the connectivities of different brain regions is dynamical causal modelling which can tell about the directions of information flow, given a predetermined connectivity pattern, but naturally not about the cortical layers that are involved.

Despite their good agreement in studying sensory projection cortices, MEG/EEG and fMRI often imply different spatial patterns for brain activation even in similar cognitive tasks and in the same subjects. It has been suggested that one should first find the activated areas (blobs) with fMRI and then use MEG or EEG to determine the temporal relationships between these areas. However, this approach would work only if the physiological sources of both MEG/EEG and fMRI were identical. Discrepancies between the methods are to be expected to some extent as fMRI reflects neural activity only indirectly, via the BOLD (blood oxygenation-level dependent) signal arising from neurovascular coupling, whereas MEG/EEG pick up signals directly related to the neuronal activity (for time courses, see c). Another apparent difference between the methods, not yet discussed in the literature as far as we know, is that MEG/EEG weights strongly the fastest-conducting pathways, whereas fMRI probably receives its main contribution from neuronal ensembles that are connected via slow and thin fibres, thereby apparently reflecting functionally different brain activations. This difference further emphasizes the complementary nature of these methods.


Future methods for non-invasive time-resolved brain imaging

How could we improve non-invasive time-resolved imaging of the human brain? First of all, the measurements should be performed as close to the neural generators as possible. However, with an intact skull, the distance from the outside of the head to the closest sources in the cortex is at least 1.5 cm, which sets an upper bound for the spatial frequencies (how fast the signals change in space) and thereby for the resolution any MEG or EEG sensor array can provide. In the present-day SQUID-based magnetometers, the sensors are as far as 4–5 cm from the most superficial sources. Since MEG picks up signals mostly from sources in fissural cortex, the sensor-to-source distance can approach even 7 cm. In children, when measured with the current adult-head-optimized devices, these numbers are even larger if both hemispheres are to be measured simultaneously. However, a few MEG systems designed for infant heads are already available. Moreover, by recording just one hemisphere at a time with an adult MEG device on which the baby's head rests, the distances to sources are efficiently minimized.

The large distances are mostly due to the very low temperatures required by the SQUID sensors; the necessary thermal insulation for a vessel containing liquid helium (4 K = –269°C) typically occupies at least 2 cm and makes it impossible to fabricate arrays adaptable to the head size and shape. Thus, disposing of the cryogenics would allow sensors closer to the cortex. To move in this direction, one could employ SQUIDs made of high-critical-temperature superconducting materials, which enable operation at liquid nitrogen (T = 77 K = –196°C) temperatures and possibly allow for an adaptable sensor helmet. However, the sensitivity of the current high-Tc SQUIDs is an order of magnitude worse than that of their liquid-helium-cooled low-Tc cousins (typically 3 fT/√Hz in the white-noise region) used in today's MEG systems. This limitation has prevented the widespread use of high-Tc SQUIDs for MEG even though it has already been shown that MEG signals can be recorded with high-Tc SQUIDS.

Optically pumped magnetometers (OPMs), also known as atomic magnetometers, are another viable alternative to low-Tc SQUIDs. In particular, the spin-exchange relaxation-free OPMs provide sensitivities comparable to those of the best low-Tc SQUIDs and they have indeed been demonstrated to be capable of recording MEG. Since OPMs do not require cooling, but only moderate heating (and the heat can be easily insulated), they can be placed right on the scalp, much like EEG electrodes on an EEG cap. However, the dynamic range and frequency response of OPMs are not yet optimal for MEG.

Both of these technologies would allow magnetic-field measurements within millimetres from the scalp, which would increase the spatial resolution of MEG provided that the noise level of the sensors remains sufficiently low. Yet, the thickness of the intervening skull imposes a hard limit on spatial resolution, and it is therefore unrealistic to assume that MEG could ever delineate simultaneously active cortical regions within a few millimetres, unless very specific and accurate neurophysiological models are available. To fully exploit the more proximal measurements and thus the potential for capturing higher spatial frequencies, the number of channels should be increased compared with today's MEG systems with about 300 channels. However, the remaining about 15-mm distance to the nearest sources reduces the benefit of having sensors packed more densely than about every 15 mm.

There is still room to improve the noise level of the magnetic sensors, including low-Tc SQUIDs, but would that help? At low frequencies (below, say, 50 Hz), the background brain activity typically exceeds the instrumentation noise by an order of magnitude and therefore improvements in sensitivity do not readily translate into improvements in spatial resolution. However, within the high gamma band (more than 60 Hz) and above, the situation is quite different as no prominent brain rhythms exist at those high frequencies. In spectral density, spontaneous brain activity seems to be on par with instrumentation noise at around 100 Hz and then falls below it at higher frequencies. Therefore, further reduction of sensor noise shall improve the visibility of high-frequency responses, particularly of the high gamma band. The fundamental limit is set by the noise due to the thermal motion of charged particles in the body, which is estimated to be about 0.2 fT/√Hz.

Sources in deep brain structures are generally poorly visible in MEG. In special cases that allow excessive trial averaging, responses from for example the auditory brainstem can be recorded and their sources identified. Placing the sensors on the scalp as described above does not substantially improve the detectability of these deep sources, although it remarkably improves the detection of the superficial sources, since the signal attenuation happens largely as cancellation by the fields due to the volume currents (J. Iivanainen, M. Stenroos & L. Parkkonen 2014, unpublished data). On the other hand, lowering the noise level of the sensors would be beneficial provided that cortical activity at similar frequencies does not mask the signals from deep sources.

Action potentials, as opposed to postsynaptic currents, are very poorly visible in MEG and EEG due to their quadrupolar sources and low probability for synchronous appearance during the short duration of the potential. However, action potentials at axon bends and extracellular conductivity boundaries show a dipolar component whose signal could be measured at a distance (and has been done so in peripheral nerves). Yet, the problem of lacking temporal synchronization remains, and concerted action potentials have been non-invasively detected only in a few cases (at frequencies around 600 Hz), but if future developments in instrumentation greatly increase the sensitivity at high frequencies (200–2000 Hz), rather small groups of axons with near-simultaneous action potentials could be detected non-invasively. This possibility would substantially expand our window to investigate timing in the brain, allowing for example the evaluation of the functional significance of millisecond-range temporal differences.

While the previous discussion pertains mostly to instrumentation, modelling of the signal sources probably plays an increasingly important role in the future. So far, current dipoles with no amplitude priors have been used almost exclusively as the model for each source, but more detailed, biophysically and physiologically inspired generative models could be more informative of the underlying neural processes. These multilevel models could facilitate the much-needed bridging of spatial scales as they could integrate detailed descriptions of single neurons, models of population activity and non-invasive macroscopic measurements.

Inverse modelling algorithms could benefit from full Bayesian approaches that not only integrate information from multiple imaging methods but also allow the estimation of source locations, source time series and even functional networks at a single step to alleviate problems with limited spatial resolution. Should the improvements in instrumentation provide much higher signal-to-noise ratios than available today, the inverse models could also estimate the extent of the active brain areas.

In the future, MEG and EEG may not be the only non-invasive ways of measuring electric signalling of neurons. It has been suggested that, for example, neural currents could generate an MRI contrast by dephasing the spins due to the local neuromagnetic fields. While such direct neuronal current imaging is a very tempting approach as it does not suffer from an ill-posed inverse problem as MEG and EEG do, the effects are so weak (currently perhaps two orders of magnitude below what can be measured) that their detection will remain extremely challenging. In addition, a long acquisition time will probably be needed for detecting these subtle changes, which renders the temporal resolution poor even though one is recording a reflection of the fast neuronal events.

Future brain research may also take advantage of recording devices implantable on the cortex to extract signals for controlling, for example, a prosthetic limb (for a review). These invasive brain–machine interfaces may develop rapidly and bring useful by-products to basic neuroscience as well. Moreover, recent advantages in spintronics have enabled miniaturized yet highly sensitive magnetic field detectors that operate at body temperature and can record neural activity right on the cortex. Similar sensors can also be integrated on needle-like probes (d < 100 µm) that can be inserted into the cortex. The likely benefit of magnetic measurement versus electric recording of local neural activity is increased spatial selectivity, i.e. the ability to attribute the signals to specific neurons, as well as the higher sensitivity to intracellular than extracellular currents of intact neurons.

The contribution of action potentials to these micro- and meso-scale measurements of the future will probably be much larger than it is to MEG and EEG. Therefore, these invasive techniques will provide not only a spatially sharper but also physiologically complementary picture of brain activity with respect to MEG/EEG. An important advantage will be the possibility to look at the timing of single spikes at sub-millisecond resolution.


Brains in interaction

One can criticize the current brain imaging, with all its great advances, as representing ‘spectator science’ with the assumption that humans (and their brains) are only reactive, so that the ongoing state-changes triggered by the interacting partner, or the physical environment, are not taken into account. Instead, the subject is exposed to a range of crafted stimuli from checkerboard patterns to movies. In reality, however, people are actively participating in the events, not only observing them.

Although social interaction is among the most complex functions that humans (and their brains) perform, it appears surprisingly easy. For example, during conversation, turns are usually taken effortlessly, smoothly and in a temporally accurate manner so that, over different languages and cultures, the gaps between the turns are typically only a few hundred milliseconds, or even less. Such brief intervals cannot reflect just reactions to the end of the previous speaker's utterance; instead the conversation participants have to be synched so that they can unconsciously predict when the other speaker is going to finish their turn at talking.

We have proposed ‘two-person neuroscience’ (2PN) as an approach to study the physiological basis of social interaction. One of the main experimental goals of 2PN could be to differentiate interactive versus reactive states of human social interaction by measuring brain signals from dyads instead of single actors. How big the gain will be from the investments to these rather complicated simultaneous measurements of two persons remains to be seen in the future. Anyhow, 2PN set-ups seem necessary for studies of real social interaction whenever people mutually regulate their dynamic coupling, co-adapting their behaviours. Whether we should take the 2PN approach instead of the easier and more controlled 1PN approach (a spectator view) depends essentially on the timing of the behaviour of interest; phenomena where information is exchanged between the participants at time intervals shorter than 100 ms would need time-resolved brain imaging methods, such as MEG or EEG.

Motivation for two-person ‘hyperscanning’ also derives from the fact that the human brain and mind are shaped from cradle to grave by the interaction with other people. It is even thought that sociality has drastically driven the evolution of the human brain. Importantly, sociality is a group property emerging in relation to other people. From the experimental point of view, it is evident that without measuring two persons at the same time the natural social interaction is difficult or impossible to tackle because the interaction sequences cannot be repeated so that the subjects' brain activity could be measured sequentially.

For 2PN purposes, we have recently built a set-up for simultaneous MEG-to-MEG recordings between two sites. The first measurements were carried out between laboratories 5 km apart in Finland, and more recently experiments have been run between our laboratory in Finland and another similarly equipped laboratory in Belgium. The main advantage of MEG over EEG in this kind of 2PN recordings is that the sources of the signals (e.g. of modulation of brain rhythms) can be more accurately identified.

Still, the analysis of 2PN data is extremely challenging. Several approaches are possible. One can compute hyperconnectivity, a measure of functional connectivity between the two brains (instead of estimating connectivity between areas of the same brain). Especially interesting would be to track the time-varying modulations of the connectivity. Intersubject correlations (earlier studied with both fMRI and MEG between subjects who were successively viewing the same movie, e.g.) can in the 2PN setting also inform about contextual features typical to that situation only. When data are available from both brains, we can look for correlations between the two sets of brain signals, without explicit reference to the external events.

Combining behavioural and body-state parameters to the analysis (e.g. data from motion-capture or accelerometer sensors, or various measures of the autonomous nervous system function including for example heart rate and its variability) will inform how the brain and body act in synchrony, both within one person and between the two subjects involved in social interaction.


Timewise insights into brain function

It is now increasingly realized that in addition to the connectome, the structural architecture of the brain, information about neuronal timing is quintessential for understanding the human brain function as well as the behaviour as an emergent property of the brain as a whole. Neurodynamics has even been stated to be the focus of ‘postconnectome science’, meaning that it is not enough to treat the nodes of neural networks solely as places of some activity; instead, information is needed about the local dynamics of the nodes as such, as well as their relative timings.

To draw attention to the importance of timing in brain function, Kopell and co-workers recently introduced the dynome as the collection of both experimental and modelling data dealing with the dynamical structure in the brain and its relation to cognition. Similarly, Calhoun et al. introduced the chronnectome, where functional connectivity may be temporarily changing.

Improved recording accuracy also brings up new questions. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) of the USA is, according to media information, considering single-neuron recording from ‘behaving soldiers’ in the field. What would such information tell? How many neurons should we measure to learn something about the percepts or aims of the person? How would we find these cells? How informative would single neurons be as correlates to behaviour?

And what if we had transparent human brains, similar to the mouse brain treated with the CLARITY technique? How much would it help if we were able to measure and follow each action potential and each synaptic activation? Would it be acceptable to integrate the functions of all neurons, interneurons and glial cells in small volumes of brain tissue, such as cortical columns? How should we simplify the models to make them computationally tractable yet physiologically meaningful? Are all synapses and neurons essential, or are they important only occasionally in certain contexts? In other words, would it really be necessary to simulate each single neuron, or should one immediately proceed to a much larger grain level and then rely on the self-organization of the extensive training and plasticity of the units and their connections?

Apparently the problem is not the laborious collection of data, but making sense of them. For that purpose, we definitely should improve the theoretical framework and have models that could be used to make temporo-spatial predictions of new data (even though we are still missing any real ‘brain theory’, perhaps except for the idea that the brain develops and works like a Bayesian inference system) and to make a link from elements to circuits and behaviour.

If we build models with all details—even surviving the abundance of big data—the models will be as difficult to understand as the original biological systems. Thus, we need to simplify down to a level of an analysis unit that is proper for each complexity level. One guideline might be to change from one level to the next whenever (and only when) some emergent properties arise in the system. Emergence itself is a dynamical process, which does not exist in static systems.

An example of a well-known connectome is the structural architecture of the Caenorhabditis elegans nervous system, comprising 302 neurons. This structure has been known for a quarter of century and is extensively studied to find out how neural circuitry arises from the interconnected neurons. In such a well-understood system, it might also be possible to find out how much the properties of the neurons can be simplified without losing the emergent properties of the whole circuitry. Ongoing megaprojects in the USA focus on development of new technology that would allow the study, in small mammals, of mesoscopic circuitries that we currently know very little about. Of course, the questions related to the details of the elements and the emergent properties of the networks can be also studied with simulations provided that the temporo-spatial details of the system are fully known.

When pondering about the proper analysis unit, it is good to remember that quite complex behaviour is possible with very simple architecture. For example, ‘Breitenberg vehicles’, simple robots with only uncomplicated control circuits (such as, when a light sensor detects a wall, turn away from the wall, etc.), result in behaviour that for an outside observer seems intelligent. At a little more advanced level, many children, and even adults, are fascinated by movements of robotic vacuum cleaners that they consider intentional.


Predicting versus creating the future

Predicting the future is not a rewarding task. However, the future is not totally unwritten but rather shaped by the progress until the present moment and by the plans that people have for the future. Single researchers and serendipitous discoveries can quickly change the main direction of science. With the large crowd of scientists some main directions of discoveries can be guessed and even directed by, for example, funding policies and inspiring role-model scientists. The predictability of research directions also increases as more and more research is made in larger units that require considerable investments. In trying to win the necessary funding, many scientists start to behave as opportunists; bees fly where the nectar is, which again increases the power of the funding agencies in directing the science.

The best means to predict the near future is to extrapolate from the past; for example, by predicting tomorrow's weather from that of today as the weather conditions of two successive days are highly correlated. But predictions of future innovations are stated to often overestimate short-term developments and to underestimate long-term changes.

It is expected that in the years to come, old ideas and research questions will reappear and be tested with more rigorous and accurate methods. For example, the relationship between behaviour and brain function can be assessed more accurately with the improved instrumentation and better integration of multilevel temporo-spatial information and modelling covering multiple temporal and spatial scales. Big data are already now changing the way we do research, and data-driven machine learning approaches are likely to continue to advance our understanding of human brain function.

We would like to see the development of a solid theoretical framework for human brain function and more understanding of brain dynamics in naturalistic situations, as well as measurements of multiple persons at the same time. When we move from the laboratory environment to naturalistic conditions, the picture of brain function may change as dramatically as happened when it first became possible to make neurophysiological recordings from awake animals and humans in contrast to the previous experiments limited to anaesthetized animals.

The focus of current brain imaging has been much on healthy (student) populations, but should be equally broadened to all age groups. Time-resolved brain imaging may be especially suitable for the study of brain development from neonates to adolescents, when the transmission delays change drastically as a function of increased myelination and changes in neuronal transmission. Moreover, it would be beneficial to study more extensively subjects with special abilities, and not only patients with damaged brains.

Finally, brain function does not explain everything about human behaviour and mind. One has to consider the body, environment and culture as well.


Funding statement

This work was supported by European Research Council (Advanced Grant Brain2Brain #232946) and the Academy of Finland (grant nos. 218072 and 263800) and by the European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013) under grant agreements no. 604102 (Human Brain Project) and no. 600730 (Magnetrodes).


Conflict of interests

The authors declare no competing financial interests.


The restless brain: how intrinsic activity organizes brain function

Marcus E Raichle — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4387513, CC BY 4.0.

Traditionally studies of brain function have focused on task-evoked responses. By their very nature such experiments tacitly encourage a reflexive view of brain function. While such an approach has been remarkably productive at all levels of neuroscience, it ignores the alternative possibility that brain functions are mainly intrinsic and ongoing, involving information processing for interpreting, responding to and predicting environmental demands. I suggest that the latter view best captures the essence of brain function, a position that accords well with the allocation of the brain's energy resources, its limited access to sensory information and a dynamic, intrinsic functional organization. The nature of this intrinsic activity, which exhibits a surprising level of organization with dimensions of both space and time, is revealed in the ongoing activity of the brain and its metabolism. As we look to the future, understanding the nature of this intrinsic activity will require integrating knowledge from cognitive and systems neuroscience with cellular and molecular neuroscience where ion channels, receptors, components of signal transduction and metabolic pathways are all in a constant state of flux. The reward for doing so will be a much better understanding of human behaviour in health and disease.

Keywords: aerobic glycolysis, functional connectivity, local field potentials, neoteny, resting state, slow cortical potentials


Introduction

Since the introduction of electroencephalography (EEG) in humans by Hans Berger in 1929 (for an English translation of this important work), it has been clear that ongoing spontaneous electrical activity is a prominent feature of the brain of every species in which it has been studied including humans. In referring to the spontaneous activity in the human EEG, Berger rhetorically asked [pp. 562–563] ‘Is it possible to demonstrate the influence of intellectual work upon the human electroencephalogram, insofar as it has been reported here?’ He concluded that: ‘Of course, one should not at first entertain too high hopes with regard to this, because mental work, as I explained elsewhere, adds only a small increment to the cortical work which is going on continuously and not only in the waking state’. Consistent with Berger's prediction it has subsequently been shown that extensive averaging of the EEG is necessary to attenuate if not eliminate this seemingly random, ongoing activity in order to see event-related potentials (ERPs).

Despite the implication of Berger's early work showing that substantial activity is always present and should be accounted for, the motivating focus of neuroscience research has been on event-related activity (i.e. the brain is reflexive, primarily driven by the momentary demands of the environment). From a practical point of view, this is not surprising because experiments designed to measure brain responses to controlled stimuli and carefully designed tasks can be rigorously controlled and the results of such experiments measured with great precision, whereas evaluating the behavioural relevance of intrinsic activity (i.e. ongoing neural and metabolic activity which may or may not be directly associated with subjects' performance) can be an elusive enterprise. Unfortunately, the success of studying evoked activity has caused us to lose sight of the possibility that our experiments reveal only a small fraction of the actual functional activity performed by our brain.

In this essay, I review the evidence that persuades me of the importance of intrinsic activity and then briefly survey the material presently available regarding its properties and functions. The story is incomplete but rich with opportunities for future research that will be most productive if conducted in a climate of mutual respect for different levels of analysis.


Adjudicating the merits of intrinsic activity


Cost

One of the most persuasive arguments for the importance of intrinsic activity emerges from a consideration of its relative cost in terms of brain energy consumption. In the average adult human, the brain represents about 2% of the total body weight yet it accounts for 20% of all the energy consumed, 10 times that predicted by its weight alone.

Relative to this very high rate of ongoing energy consumption in the resting state, the additional energy consumption associated with changes in brain activity is remarkably small, often less than 5% of the baseline level of activity. From these data, it is clear that the brain's enormous energy consumption (something I have dubbed the brain's dark energy) is little affected by task performance, an observation first made more than 50 years ago by Louis Sokoloff, Seymour Kety and their colleagues but rarely cited (see also for an interesting evolutionary perspective).

What is the nature of this ongoing intrinsic activity that commands such a large amount of the brain's energy resources? Assessments of brain energy budget using a variety of approaches (for review) would suggest that 60–80% of overall brain energy consumption is devoted to spike-generated glutamate cycling and, hence, neural signalling processes involving principal cells. The basis for this estimate, however, should be viewed with caution for several reasons. First, it is important to realize that most of the ongoing electrical activity of the neocortex is, in fact, subthreshold depolarizations rather than action potential firing. Second, early estimates of the cost of spikes fell far short of explaining the cost of brain function. Also, current estimates leave for future consideration the demands placed on the brain's energy budget by the activity of inhibitory interneurons, astrocytes and other supporting cells.

Furthermore, it is important to emphasize that biosynthesis may be a significant contributor to the cost of brain function. Eve Marder has described the situation nicely [p. 563]: ‘Humans and other long-lived animals … have neurons that live and function for decades. By contrast, ion channel proteins, synaptic receptors and the components of signal transduction pathways are constantly turning over in the membrane and being replaced, with half-lives of minutes, hours, days or weeks. Therefore, each neuron is constantly rebuilding itself from its constituent proteins, using all of the molecular and biochemical machinery of the cell. This allows for plastic changes in development and learning but also poses the problem of how stable neuronal function is maintained … ’ As Locasale & Cantley [21] have pointed out, basal cellular maintenance of the type Eve Marder describes is very costly, something probably underestimated. This is a subject to which I will return later in this essay (see Intrinsic activity and metabolism).


Sensory information

Complementary insight on the importance of intrinsic activity comes from a consideration of sensory information. It may surprise some to learn that visual information is significantly compressed as it passes from the eye to the visual cortex. Thus, of the information available from the environment, only about 1010 bits s−1 are deposited in the retina. Because of a limited number of axons in the optic nerves (approx. 1 million axons in each) only 106 bits s−1 leave the retina and only 104 make it to layer IV of V1. These data clearly leave the impression that visual cortex receives a very compressed representation of the world, a subject of more than passing interest to those interested in the processing of visual information. Parenthetically, it should be noted that estimates of the bandwidth of conscious awareness itself (i.e. what we ‘see’) are in the range of 100 bits s−1 or less.

Reinforcing this impression of the brain's ‘isolation’ is the fact that the number of synapses in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus and in layer IV of primary visual cortex devoted to incoming visual information is less than 10% of the total number of synapses in both locations. Various proposals have been made concerning the interpretation of these anatomical data but the fact remains that the brain must interpret, respond to and even predict environmental demands from seemingly impoverished data. An explanation for its success in doing so must lie in significant measure with intrinsic brain processes that link representations residing broadly within brain systems to incoming sensory information.

Vernon Mountcastle, one of the preeminent neurophysiologists of the twentieth century, summed up the situation nicely: ‘Each of us believes himself to live directly within the world that surrounds him, to sense its objects and events precisely, and to live in real and current time. I assert that these are perceptual illusions. Sensation is an abstraction, not a replication, of the real world’.


The organization of intrinsic activity

Important insights into the organization of intrinsic activity have come from two perspectives: a top–down approach using brain imaging with PET and fMRI as well as genetics in normal humans and electrocorticography in selected patients; and a bottom–up approach using laboratory animals and more invasive, high-resolution (spatial and temporal) studies employing neurophysiological as well as optical imaging techniques. Together a picture of the dynamic organization of intrinsic activity emerges that is remarkably complementary across these levels of analysis.


Top–down view: activity decreases from a resting state

By the early 1980s, PET began to receive serious attention as a potential functional neuroimaging device in human subjects. The study of human cognition with neuroimaging was aided greatly by the involvement of cognitive psychologists in the 1980s whose experimental strategies for dissecting human behaviours fitted well with the emerging capabilities of functional brain imaging. This strategy, involving the careful selection of task and control states, was a major contribution of cognitive psychology to the emerging field of cognitive neuroscience. This approach, in various forms, has dominated the cognitive neuroscience agenda ever since with remarkably productive results.

One of the guiding principles of cognitive psychology was that a control state must explicitly contain all of the elements of the associated task state other than the one element of interest (e.g. seeing a word versus reading the same word). Using a control state of rest would clearly seem to violate that principle. Despite our commitment to the strategies of cognitive psychology in our experiments we routinely obtained resting state scans in all of our experiments, which was a carry-over habit from experiments involving simple sensory stimuli where the control state was simply the absence of the stimulus (i.e. a resting state2). At some point in our work, and I do not recall the motivation, I began to look at the resting state scans minus the task scans. What immediately caught my attention was the fact that regardless of the task under investigation, activity decreases were clearly present and almost always included the posterior cingulate and the adjacent precuneus (a). Initially puzzled by the meaning of this observation, I began collecting examples from our work and placed them in a folder which I labelled MMPA for mystery medial parietal area.

The first formal characterization of task-induced activity decreases from a resting state was a meta-analysis of nine PET studies involving 134 subjects by my colleague Gordon Shulman. This study generated an iconic image of a network of cortical areas that decreased their activity during the performance of a variety of attention-demanding, largely non-self-referential tasks (a). The unique identity of this network was confirmed a short time later by others with similar observations which are now an everyday occurrence in laboratories worldwide as investigators seek to understand its role in brain function. This network has been dubbed the brain's default mode network (DMN) by Greicius et al. after our formal description of its unique features. Subsequent work by us and others (summarized in) has established the DMN as an important functional component of the intrinsic activity of the human brain as well as in non-human primates and rodents.

It should be noted that other more task-specific deactivations had been noted by us and others, consistent with our more general idea that a default mode of brain function is broadly based across all brain systems (a hypothesis that was to receive substantial support from functional studies of the brain's resting state2).

The discovery of the DMN made apparent the need for additional ways to study the large-scale intrinsic, functional organization of the brain. A major step forward was the discovery that this large-scale network organization, including but not limited to the DMN, could be revealed by the study of patterns of spatial coherence in the spontaneous fluctuations (i.e. noise) of the fMRI blood-oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal.


Top–down view: spontaneous fluctuation in the fMRI signal

A prominent feature of fMRI is the noise in the raw, resting state BOLD signal (b). For many years, this prompted researchers to average their data to increase signal and reduce noise. As first shown by Biswal et al. in the human somatomotor system, this ‘noise’ exhibits strong patterns of coherence within well-known brain systems.

The significance of this observation was brought forcefully to our attention when Greicius et al. looked at the patterns of coherence in the DMN elicited by placing a region of interest in either the posterior cingulate cortex (yellow arrow, a) or the ventral medial prefrontal cortex (orange arrow, a). The resulting time-activity curves (b) reflected a pattern of coherence within the entire DMN (c). Similar patterns of resting state coherence have now been documented in most cortical systems in the human brain (d) as well as their subcortical connections.

A number of additional observations made about these surprising patterns of spatial coherence are of interest. First, they appear to transcend levels of consciousness, being present under anaesthesia in humans, monkeys, rats and mice and also during sleep in humans. These observations make it unlikely that the patterns of coherence and the intrinsic activity they represent are primarily the result of unconstrained, conscious cognition (i.e. mind-wandering or day dreaming).

Second, while resting state patterns of coherence in fMRI do respect patterns of anatomical connectivity in both the monkey and human brain, it is clear that they are not constrained by these anatomical connections. Thus, the absence of monosynaptic connections between brain areas (e.g. right and left primary visual cortex) does not preclude the existence of functional connectivity as expressed in the maps of resting state coherence.

Third, relationships thus far uncovered among the resting state networks (d) reveal a distinct hierarchy that places the DMN in a central role within the organization of the brain's intrinsic functional network structure. Furthermore, these relationships are not static. For example, the DMN and the dorsal attention network (DAN; d) are anti-correlated in the resting state, a relationship noted during the performance of novel, attention-demanding, non-self-referential tasks in which the DMN decreases its activity while the DAN is increased. Interestingly, this resting state relationship has received confirmation in direct electrophysiological measurements in laboratory animals. Furthermore, the resting state relationship between the DMN and medial temporal structures varies diurnally, absent in the morning but present in the evening, probably reflecting changes in brain organization related to the accrual of new knowledge while awake.

Finally, spontaneous fluctuations in the BOLD signal contribute significantly to both variability in evoked signals and variability in the associated behaviour, observations that were anticipated by others pursuing the neurophysiology more directly (also see below).


Bottom–up view: organization at the cellular level

Occurring in parallel but rarely interacting at a conceptual level with the ‘top–down view’ of intrinsic activity has been in vivo and slice work primarily on the sensory cortices in laboratory animals, employing conventional electrode recordings as well as voltage-sensitive dye and calcium imaging. Several interesting themes emerge from this very important work.

In a series of papers on the cat visual cortex using a combination of electrode recording and voltage-sensitive dyes from the Weizmann Institute beginning in 1995, it was shown that the magnitude of ongoing intrinsic activity was the same as evoked activity, and that the two interacted strongly with the intrinsic activity contributing significantly to the variability in evoked activity, confirming an observation first made by George Bishop in 1933. And, even in the absence of stimuli, cortical representations of visual attributes emerged from the ongoing spontaneous activity (a). These authors also concluded that a significant fraction of the intrinsic activity represented subthreshold activity within dendrites, a recurrent theme in later publications. Elegant replications and extensions of this work have been contributed by others.

In summary, combining a bottom–up and a top–down view of intrinsic activity reveals common themes at the cellular level and full brain systems level. At a very local level, at least in sensory cortices, intrinsic activity is organized into the cortical representations of anticipated sensory attributes. At the full brain level, in the absence of any overt activity, intrinsic activity is organized into systems well known for their participation in the full range of overt behaviours. This organization is clearly hierarchical from the local to the systems level and consistent with the hypothesis that the brain maintains a state of preparedness in anticipation of the demands placed upon it while awake. But considering the fact that intrinsic, spontaneous activity persists during sleep we should be mindful of its potential role in development and plasticity.


The neurophysiology of intrinsic activity

There has been an active effort to ascertain the electrical correlates of the fMRI BOLD signal for some time (for summaries of this work from different perspectives). The conclusion to be drawn from this work as I see it is that the fMRI BOLD signal is best correlated with local field potentials (LFPs), that is, the complex, subthreshold signals arising from the integrated electrical activity in pre- and postsynaptic terminals of the brain. The research shows further that the spontaneous fluctuations in the BOLD signal are best correlated with LFP activity in the range of slow cortical potentials (SCPs; approx. 0.01–5 Hz).

SCPs provide a window on how the brain matches its predictions to changing environmental contingencies. Schroeder & Lakatos view this as one mode of attending in which the phase of the SCPs is shifted to match the predictable patterns of incoming information, a process dubbed phase resetting. As a result, responses are enhanced and performance is improved. This mode, and it may well be the dominant mode, occurs in a seemingly effortless manner fitting, in a sense, the idea of a default mode of brain function involving the ongoing coordinated activity of all of its systems. It provides a means of connecting the concept of an intrinsic mode of brain function designed to organize information for interpreting, responding to and even predicting environmental events to register with the naturally occurring but ever changing regularities unfolding in the environment.


Relating systems to cells

At the cellular level, spontaneous activity is often discussed in terms of variations in neuronal excitability mediated by spontaneous variations in membrane voltage known as up and down states (UDS). The question is whether a similar mechanism underlies the spontaneous fluctuations in the fMRI BOLD signal that gives us resting state maps of functional connectivity.

On the basis of this information, we originally thought it reasonable to ask whether spontaneous fluctuations in the fMRI BOLD signal were, in fact, related to UDS (see Supplementary Note 3 in). We concluded at the time that it was unlikely to be the case for two reasons. First, the frequency content of the BOLD signal demonstrates a power spectrum that exhibits power law scaling (for a review), whereas UDS have a narrow frequency range that centres around 0.8 Hz. And, second, UDS and their associated LFPs travel across the cortex with latencies of a second or less (b), whereas fMRI BOLD resting state networks appear spatially stationary. Recent advances in our analysis of spontaneous fluctuations in the fMRI BOLD signal, however, suggest a rethinking of that view.

We find that the resting state fMRI BOLD signal contains even more interesting features of the organization of the brain's intrinsic activity than initially thought. The traditional way to examine the correlation structure of intrinsic activity using the fMRI BOLD signal is to average across time. This simple manoeuvre has been surprisingly powerful in identifying patterns of activity that are spatially structured (d), linked to the representation of function and clinically relevant. Importantly, the computational strategies employed in this work make the critical assumption that the activity within networks is exactly synchronous. However, evidence from a variety of sources (for a recent review) suggests that intrinsic activity is spatio-temporally structured. We recently explored the latency structure of the spontaneous fluctuations of the fMRI BOLD in detail and found that intrinsic activity propagates orthogonal to conventional resting state networks on a timescale of approximately 1 s, precisely in the range of UP and DOWN states (b)). These findings open up a whole new avenue of investigation involving the temporal as well as spatial structure of intrinsic activity and provide a means of linking activity at the systems level (i.e. the temporal features of the spontaneous fMRI BOLD signal) to that at a cellular level (i.e. changes in excitability or UDS).


Intrinsic activity and metabolism

Pursuing an understanding of the brain's intrinsic activities needs not stop with the neurophysiology. Understanding the underlying cell biology is also relevant in understanding not only brain imaging signals but also what these signals are actually telling us about brain function (for those interested in an expanded view of this argument). Functional brain imaging studies actually provide some clues as to how this inquiry might proceed.

I begin from the perspective of the fMRI BOLD signal, whose cell biology helps introduce a somewhat more sophisticated view of the role of the metabolism of intrinsic activity, one that goes beyond a consideration of metabolism solely in terms of energy generation. One of the surprising observations made with PET was that blood flow increases much more than oxygen consumption during task-induced increases in brain activity. The practical significance of this observation paved the way for fMRI. However, overlooked by many in discussions of BOLD signal biology have been the task-induced increases in aerobic glycolysis (i.e. glucose metabolized by the brain in excess of that needed for oxidative phosphorylation despite the presence of adequate oxygen) that accompany changes in blood flow. These unexpected task-induced increases in aerobic glycolysis actually reflect an increase rather than a de novo appearance of aerobic glycolysis.

Indeed, aerobic glycolysis is present in the normal adult human brain at rest, accounting for 12–15% of the glucose metabolized. Hence it constitutes an important component of intrinsic activity metabolism. Furthermore, aerobic glycolysis is not distributed uniformly (a). Rather, it exhibits elevated levels in the DMN and adjacent areas of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and low levels in the cerebellum and the medial temporal lobes.

Taking advantage of the non-uniform distribution of aerobic glycolysis, we compared the regional variance in the resting state fMRI BOLD signal (b) with the regional levels of aerobic glycolysis in the human brain (a) and found them to be highly correlated. Thus, aerobic glycolysis at ‘rest’ is related to dynamic imaging signals that have allowed us to delineate the spatial and temporal components of the brain's functional organization (for a further illustration and discussion, see fig. 6 in). It is important to understand what this might mean with regard to the cellular mechanisms involved.

Through a series of important experiments beginning in the early 1990s, it was established that one source of aerobic glycolysis is the energy demands of the membrane pump Na,K-ATPase in astrocytes. Glutamate is removed from the synapse by uptake into astrocytes in a sodium-dependent process. Sodium must then be removed from the astrocyte by Na,K-ATPase. The energy needed for this process comes from aerobic glycolysis which produces a net 2 ATP per molecule of glucose consumed. One might argue that it is inefficient to fuel such a critical pump by aerobic glycolysis given such a low yield of ATP for each molecule of glucose used. However, the advantage aerobic glycolysis has over oxidative phosphorylation is that the ATP is produced much faster (at least two times faster). Thus, where speed and flexibility is important, such as at an excitatory synapse, one might posit that aerobic glycolysis is the way to go. Regardless of the reason, it is the case that Na,K-ATPase is commonly fueled by aerobic glycolysis in all membrane systems in which it is found with lactate as a by-product.

As Pellerin and Magistretti have shown, monocarboxylate transporters favour the movement of lactate out of the astrocyte and into the neuron in both the cell body and the postsynaptic density. They further posited that lactate would move from the astrocyte to the neuron to supplement the energy needs of the neuron (b), an idea that generated much controversy. Unfortunately, these discussions have tended to ignore the elegant details of that relationship. I briefly highlight some of the most interesting features of this symbiotic relationship between neurons and astrocytes.

When lactate enters a neuron its conversion to pyruvate and entry into oxidative phosphorylation captures only part of the story. It is not a simple choice by the neuron to select between glucose and lactate for its energy production but, rather, the challenge for the neuron is to maintain energy production while at the same time increasing the availability of glucose for biosynthesis and neuroprotection. Overlooked by most neuroscientists is one of the important functions performed by glycolysis which is to provide substrate for biosynthesis.

Biosynthesis via glycolysis proceeds largely via the pentose phosphate pathway (b), where glucose-derived carbon is used for the synthesis of nucleotides, lipids and proteins. This is important not only for actively proliferating cancer cells, where the role of aerobic glycolysis has been explored in great detail, but for the basal turnover and remodelling of neuronal connections in the service of memory and learning. This expanded view of aerobic glycolysis in a symbiotic relationship between neuron and astrocyte has been dubbed the reverse Warburg effect (b) in reference to the original work of Otto Warburg on the role of aerobic glycolysis in cell proliferation. This same relationship is seen in axons where the supporting cell is the oligodendrocyte.

There is an additional fascinating twist to the reverse Warburg effect which involves the redox state of the neuron. When lactate enters the neuron and is converted to pyruvate it shifts the NAD+/NADH equilibrium to a more reduced state which turns off glycolysis at a critical step between biosynthesis pathways and energy generation (i.e. the conversation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate to 1,3 bisphosphoglycerate mediated by GAPDH; b). This has been dubbed a redox switch, designed to facilitate glycolysis-mediated biosynthesis in the neuron without sacrificing its mandatory energy requirements which are conveniently supplied by lactate from an adjacent astrocyte. With a potential role for aerobic glycolysis in cellular biosynthesis in the human brain, it is important to ask what evidence we have for this hypothesis.

To pursue the hypothesis put forth above that elevated aerobic glycolysis is associated with biosynthesis, we explored its regional variability in relation to gene expression and found that aerobic glycolysis correlates with the persistence of gene expression typical of infancy (transcriptional neotony). In brain regions with the highest aerobic glycolysis levels (a), we found increased gene expression related to synapse formation and growth. By contrast, regions high in oxidative glucose metabolism express genes related to mitochondria and synaptic transmission. Our results suggest that brain aerobic glycolysis in the resting state supports developmental processes, particularly those required for synapse formation and replacement. Such processes are ongoing in the adult human brain particularly in areas such as the brain's DMN.

Consistent with the hypothesis that aerobic glycolysis is important for biosynthesis is the trajectory of human brain metabolism during the first two decades of life (for a review of this literature). By age 2, the glucose metabolism of the infant brain has reached adult levels and by the end of the first decade of life it is, remarkably, twice that of the adult (see fig. 2 in). Thirty per cent of glucose use in an average 10 year old is aerobic glycolysis. Levels of glucose metabolism, aerobic glycolysis and oxygen consumption decline to adult levels early in the second decade of life. This time course parallels remarkably that of synaptic proliferation and pruning. Finally, adult levels of synapses appear to be maintained through a dynamic balance between synaptic proliferation and synaptic elimination. Aerobic glycolysis is needed in this situation where constituents are being constantly remodelled in the service of learning and memory.

It should be noted that the hippocampus, long associated with learning and memory, actually has a low level of aerobic glycolysis (a). Further work will obviously be needed to understand the implications of this with regard to the role of the hippocampus and other medial temporal lobe structures in learning and memory. Bringing in insights from metabolism and cell biochemistry will probably be very informative.

It is worth coming back to the spontaneous fluctuations of the fMRI BOLD signal which have provided such important new insights into the organization of the intrinsic activity of the brain as well as the more recent findings of a latency structure within this signal that has the temporal properties of UDS a critical component of the cellular elements of intrinsic activity reviewed earlier. A recent paper by Poskanzer & Yuste convincingly shows that astrocytes regulate neuronal UP states through a purinergically mediated mechanism. This coupled with the recent report that glutamate-stimulated glycogenolysis in astrocytes cause astrocytes to release ATP (a mediator of neuronal excitability via the KATP channel) provides an increasingly rich picture of the deep relationship between network-level metabolism involving multiple cell types and the brain's intrinsic activity.

Finally, there is a long history in biochemistry of metabolic rhythms remarkably similar in character to the spontaneous fluctuations in the fMRI BOLD signal (for a comprehensive review of this fascinating work), where glycolysis plays a central role. In a long overlooked work, it was noted that cellular redox states, a direct manifestation of metabolic activity, fluctuate synchronously in homologous regions of the hemispheres in a manner not unlike that shown in b. More recent work has implicated changes in cellular redox states as critical for neuronal electrical function. A noteworthy quote from the latter work is worth our consideration: ‘Energetic fluctuation in the central nervous system has been considered to be a consequence of neuronal activity. However, our study implies that changes in cellular metabolic state could be the cause, rather than the result, of neuronal activity’ [p. 842].

The way forward is clear; we must be open-minded when considering issues influencing brain function that can lead us to a better understanding of the brain's intrinsic activity.


Funding statement

The author currently receives extramural support from the National Institutes of Health, USA (P01-NS080675).


A massively asynchronous, parallel brain

Semir Zeki — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4387515, CC BY 4.0.

Whether the visual brain uses a parallel or a serial, hierarchical, strategy to process visual signals, the end result appears to be that different attributes of the visual scene are perceived asynchronously—with colour leading form (orientation) by 40 ms and direction of motion by about 80 ms. Whatever the neural root of this asynchrony, it creates a problem that has not been properly addressed, namely how visual attributes that are perceived asynchronously over brief time windows after stimulus onset are bound together in the longer term to give us a unified experience of the visual world, in which all attributes are apparently seen in perfect registration. In this review, I suggest that there is no central neural clock in the (visual) brain that synchronizes the activity of different processing systems. More likely, activity in each of the parallel processing-perceptual systems of the visual brain is reset independently, making of the brain a massively asynchronous organ, just like the new generation of more efficient computers promise to be. Given the asynchronous operations of the brain, it is likely that the results of activities in the different processing-perceptual systems are not bound by physiological interactions between cells in the specialized visual areas, but post-perceptually, outside the visual brain.


Introduction

In a synchronous chip, the clock's rhythm must be slow enough to accommodate the slowest action in the chip's circuits … Even though many other circuits on that chip may be able to complete their operations in less time, these circuits must wait until the clock ticks again before proceeding to the next logical step. In contrast, each part of an asynchronous system takes as much or as little time for each action as it needs. Complex operations can take more time than average, and simple ones can take less. Actions can start as soon as the prerequisite actions are done, without waiting for the next tick of the clock. Thus, the system's speed depends on the average action time rather than the slowest action time. Sutherland & Ebergen [p. 64]

Many would today subscribe to the view that the visual brain is organized to process visual signals in parallel, by which I mean that different attributes such as colour, motion and form are processed by separate systems. This is reflected anatomically in the parallel outputs from the primary visual cortex, area V1, to different, specialized, visual areas of the prestriate cortex. As I discuss below, parallelism may be an even more pervasive strategy in the visual brain than is commonly assumed.

There are probably sound computational reasons for this neural separation of functions as well as more mundane perceptual ones. The latter can be summarized as follows: that different attributes do not necessarily co-occur. A given colour can invest any form, and a form can be in any colour. If the specific form of a stimulus (or its direction of motion) always co-occurred with a specific colour, then the stimulus can be specified by any of these attributes. But, this is not the case. Moreover, there are different computational demands for processing different attributes, for example colour and motion. The former requires the brain to register the wavelength–energy composition of light coming from one surface and its surrounds simultaneously, whereas the latter requires it to register activity at least at two successive points in time.

Many would today also subscribe to the view that each one of these parallel systems consists of several hierarchical, apparently sequential, stages. Some would go beyond and subscribe to a more extreme form of hierarchies, or rather the lack of it and the lack of a necessity for it as well. They would claim that cells along the visual pathways that process signals related to colour also process signals related to form as well as motion, in other words that they are ‘multiplex’ cells. I do not agree with the latter view nor do I think that its proponents have made a near enough compelling case for it. But, this is not the place to go into a discussion of the relative merits of the different processing strategies proposed, because, whatever strategy one is inclined to prefer, each comes with a major problem, which is the same for all. The problem is that of perceptual asynchrony, namely that different attributes of the visual scene such as form, colour and motion are not perceived simultaneously. Instead, some attributes (such as colour) are perceived before others (such as motion), in the millisecond scale (see below).

Although largely restricted to a discussion of the visual brain, I believe that both the problem of perceptual asynchrony and what it reflects, namely that the operations of the brain are massively asynchronous with respect to each other, may be relevant to other sensory systems as well, and indeed, to higher cognitive processing systems in the brain. I suspect that there are lessons to be learned from this for developing future brain research strategies and possibly for computational neuroscience as well, although I am no expert in the latter field. I have not been exhaustive in citing the relevant literature, which is altogether enormous, but have selected instead papers with which I am familiar, many from our own work, and which not only provide good evidence in favour of both hierarchical and parallel processing systems, but also point to the problem associated with both. I also concentrate on the three visual attributes that I am most familiar with, namely colour, form and motion, but believe that these are sufficient to illustrate the general point that I am making, because they all point, ineluctably, to the brain as a massively asynchronous, parallel, organ. Hence, my emphasis in this review is more on the brain as an asynchronous organ, and the imperative to investigate it as such in future research.


The problem: asynchronous perception

A central problem in visual perception is that of perceptual asynchrony, demonstrated in psychophysical pairing experiments, in which subjects are asked to pair two states of two attributes (for a review, see Moutoussis). The experiment has variants, but essentially is as follows: subjects have to pair one of two rapidly alternating colours (say red and green) which appear in one half of a monitor screen with one of two rapidly changing directions of motion (say up and down) of a checkerboard pattern, or one of two rapidly changing orientations, which appear in the other half of the screen (d). The stimuli, one on each half of the screen, oscillate between their two states, the oscillations on either side having the same period T but being presented at various phase differences with respect to each other. The experiment can equally well be done with a single stimulus, say a checkerboard pattern that moves up and down and changes in colour, the changes in direction of motion and colour being at different phases. The results are illustrated as polar (response) curves. In these, the percentage of times that the answer was X for the property of the right half of the screen when Y is the property of the left half is plotted for each phase difference. If there is no difference in the time taken to perceive colour and motion, the response curves should be broadly similar and the vector of the curves vertical (a). On the other hand, if there is a difference in perception times for the two attributes, the response curve will deviate from the veridical one, in one direction or the other. In the colour–motion pairing experiment, for example, a clockwise deviation of the response curve indicates that motion is perceived first, and an anticlockwise deviation that colour is perceived first.

What these pairing experiments show is that these different attributes of a visual scene are not perceived simultaneously. Instead, colour is perceived before orientation (form) and orientation before motion, the perceptual asynchrony between colour and motion being as large—in neural terms—as 80 ms. The functional specialization of the visual brain thus appears to be projected in time. Moreover, because of this asynchrony, we misbind different attributes over very brief time windows, even though we bind them correctly over longer periods, something that has to be accounted for. In colour–motion pairing experiments, for example, subjects pair the direction of motion that was present on a screen at time t, with the colour that was present 80 ms earlier. In other words, they misbind visual attributes that occur simultaneously in time (on a screen), which suggests that there is no system in the brain that ‘waits' for all the processing systems to terminate their tasks before binding them. Hence, to perceive colour and motion at the same identical moment, one would have to present the colour some 80 ms before the direction of motion, in objective time.

Perceptual asynchrony may not be evident in every psychophysical task employing colour and motion. There is some disagreement as to whether there is any temporal asynchrony in temporal order judgements (TOJ) in which subjects have to decide, after the presentation, the order of appearance of perceptual events, with some finding no asynchrony, whereas others maintain that colour changes precede, perceptually, motion changes occurring at the same time. Even assuming that there is no perceptual asynchrony in TOJ experiments, one is inevitably led to the conclusion that, if the task is so critical, then the neural mechanisms underlying them are themselves asynchronous, because it implies that different tasks involving these two attributes take different times to completion.

Although perceptual asynchrony can only be demonstrated over very brief time windows lasting about 100 ms, it, nevertheless, offers us a window into the strategies that the brain uses to construct the visual image.


Asynchrony as a consequence of different times taken to process different attributes

One explanation given for asynchronous perception is based on the supposition that there are differences in the time taken to process different attributes. What I mean by processing time here is the time taken for activity at a given node (station) of the visual pathways to achieve a conscious correlate. The precise time taken, from onset of the stimulus to the moment of awareness of that stimulus and its characteristics, has not been measured. Perceptual asynchrony rather refers to the relative times taken to become aware of different visual attributes.

If the asynchronies are the result of differences in processing times (as defined above), then one should be able to manipulate the degree of asynchrony by varying the parameters of the attributes that are to be paired. Arnold & Clifford were the first to provide direct evidence for this, by showing that the degree of motion–colour asynchrony can be reduced or increased by changing the angular difference in the direction of motion that is to be paired with colour. More recently, this has been shown to be true even within a single attribute, that of visual motion. No asynchrony is detected in pairing experiments in which subjects are asked to pair up–down motion presented in one half of their field of view with left–right motion presented in the other half. However, when asked to pair up–down motion with up–right motion, a temporal advantage in favour of up–right motion emerges. This can be accounted for by the fact that there is much less cortical inhibition for up versus up–right motion than for up–down versus left–right motion. Motion in one direction suppresses or delays subsequent responses of cells in V5 to motion in the same or opposite direction. Hence, the suppressive effects of up–down motion would be similar to those of left–right motion, and the pairing should result in no asynchrony. By contrast, there is much less suppression or delay between non-opponent motion directions (up and up–right); hence, the suppressive effects are relatively greater for up–down motion than for up–right motion, with the consequence that up–right motion is perceived first. Equally, it is well known that, although V5 responds to isoluminant stimuli that are in motion, the response is much attenuated. Correspondingly, when the up–down motion of isoluminant dots is paired with the left–right motion of luminance dots (or vice versa), the advantage lies with the luminance dots, whereas no asynchrony is found when the same pairings are between luminous or between isoluminant stimuli. Hence, one can manipulate the asynchrony in a number of ways, which implies that it may indeed be the result of differences in processing times.

Perceptual asynchrony of a different temporal order can also be demonstrated when subjects are asked to pair similar (colour–colour; motion–motion) or different (colour–motion) attributes distributed across space (that is across the two hemi-fields, when the images would be projected to the two hemispheres separately). Now, motion–motion pairings take temporal precedence over colour–colour pairings which, in turn, take precedence over colour–motion pairings. This may seem surprising, given the precedence in perceiving colour over motion, but is explicable by a difference in the conduction velocities of the fibres that unite areas V4 and V5, specialized for colour and motion respectively, in one hemisphere with their counterparts in the other; the interhemispheric connections of V5 are mediated by larger myelinated fibres than those mediating the interhemispheric connections of V4. This therefore also suggests that asynchronies can be traced to differences in processing times (see below and).


Temporal hierarchies in visual processing

Perceptual asynchrony introduces a new and unexpected element into visual processing, namely that of temporal hierarchies, which is distinct from the hierarchies in serial processing systems and not to be confused with them. Perceptual temporal hierarchies may even be in reverse order from the one expected from serial hierarchical processing chains (see below). Perceptual asynchrony thus raises the question of how attributes that take different times to process and to perceive over brief time windows are bound together over longer periods to give us our apparently integrated perception of the visual world, where all the different attributes are seen in precise temporal and spatial registration (see for excellent general reviews).

Functional specialization in the visual brain was demonstrated over 40 years ago and immediately raised the question of how different attributes of the visual scene, processed in separate pathways, are bound together. Perceptual asynchrony was demonstrated 18 years ago; it showed that we do not perceive all the attributes of the visual world at the same precise moment. This, in turn, immediately suggested that binding might be a more complex temporal issue than previously supposed and even raised questions about the nature of visual consciousness. Yet, little attention has been given to perceptual asynchrony, which results from functional specialization, and its consequences. This is surprising. The binding problem was a central issue even before the demonstration of perceptual asynchrony and continues to be so; it even assumed a role in discussions of how conscious experiences are generated. It is also surprising, because the problems raised, it seems to me, are huge and of importance in understanding how the brain functions. And the problem is one that is shared by those who believe in an extreme hierarchy or no hierarchies as much as by those who believe in parallel, modular, processing systems.

In this review, I do not discuss synchronization and binding between the activity of cells in a given area, registering the same attribute (e.g. orientation of lines). This intra-attribute binding may serve as a ‘glue’ that enables the brain to ‘bind’ the responses of cells located in geographically separate positions within the same visual area but which otherwise respond to the same attribute, for example the same orientation of lines. This is a topic that has been extensively addressed (see for reviews), but is distinct from the one that I am addressing here, the question of inter-attribute binding. The temporal requirements for the two kinds of binding are probably significantly different. At any rate, the two types of binding should be distinguished, perhaps by referring specifically to inter- and intra-attribute binding.


Problems created by perceptual asynchrony

Perceptual asynchrony creates a problem for understanding how the visual brain operates, no matter what strategy one believes in.

For those who believe in ‘multiplex’ cells coding for colour, form and direction of motion or for just colour and form, the problem is to account for some waiting mechanism in multiplex cells that regulates their responses to two or more attributes in time, to ensure that the final signal from the cell is that of an integrated output which signals colour, form and motion simultaneously; alternatively, they have to account for why, given perceptual asynchrony, the responses of such cells are perceptually ineffectual. Just how perceptually ineffective such cells are, assuming them to have the multiplex role imputed to them, is suggested by experiments on inter-attribute binding which show that the accuracy of reporting two simultaneously presented attributes—colour and form—are independent, with accuracy for reporting the correct colour being higher than the one for reporting the correct form, presumably because colour is processed faster. This is so even when both attributes are focally attended to, a result that would not be expected if individual cells, wherever they may be located within the visual brain, code for both attributes.

Those subscribing to a hierarchical strategy within each of the parallel chains, with activity in a chain acquiring a conscious correlate only at the terminal node of the chain, assuming such a terminal node exists (see below), also face much the same problem. They have to account for some mechanism that waits until the final nodes in each of the parallel hierarchical chains terminate their processing and acquire a conscious correlate. That, over brief time windows, we misbind attributes that, veridically, occur at the same time implies that there is no waiting mechanism in the brain, no universal visual clock which sets the time for all the processings in the terminal nodes of parallel hierarchical chains to terminate and acquire a conscious correlate.

Those who believe in parallel strategies, with activity at each node of a parallel chain capable of acquiring a conscious correlate, face the identical problem, but now magnified several times, because any hypothetical neural clock would have to wait for all the nodes within the parallel chains, not just the end nodes, to terminate their processings. In such a system, some kind of mechanism must be capable of binding activity at each node of each of the parallel systems to each node of any of the other parallel systems, a task of some magnitude.


Hierarchical processing systems

There is little doubt of a hierarchical chain in anatomical connections, extending from the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) to the primary visual cortex (area V1) and from there to areas such as V2, V3, V4 and V5 of prestriate visual cortex (b). In addition, prestriate visual areas are connected to each other hierarchically, as in the examples of the connections from V1 to V2 to V4 in the colour system and the connections from V1 to V2 to V5 in the motion system, thus introducing a hierarchical element into each of the parallel processing systems (for reviews).

There is also impressive evidence in favour of a physiological hierarchy. The earliest came from the studies of Hubel and Wiesel, who showed a gradation in complexity of response between orientation-selective cells within V1 itself, and between orientation-selective cells in V1 and those in areas of the prestriate cortex. There is, as well, evidence of a functional hierarchy within the colour system, extending from V1 to V4, with the responses of cells in V4 approximating more closely to constant colours and to specific hues than those in V1 and V2. Among the most impressive evidence in favour of a functional hierarchy is the one provided by the motion system, which shows that the cells of V1 projecting to V5 respond to the direction of motion of the components of a visual stimulus, whereas those in V5 commonly respond to its true, global direction of motion. This no doubt reflects the fact that the connections from V1 to V5 are highly convergent, although this convergent input, which operates to enlarge receptive fields, is rather subtle, because critical computational elements that distinguish between local and global motion are undertaken within subregions of the large receptive fields.


Problems raised by the hierarchical system

Hierarchical systems consisting of several stations, or nodes, within a chain raise operational and perceptual problems, although there may be other ones besides. If the sole function of a node A within a hierarchical chain is to process signals for the next stage, B, within that same system, then what has been processed in A will be lost to perception, which would represent a considerable waste of neural resources and is improbable (a). More likely, what is processed at each node must be available to conscious perceptual experience, without further processing in subsequent nodes within the hierarchical chain (this is not to say that a node does not undertake other functions which may be important to the next node in the chain, for example that of error detection). In other words, activity at each node must, potentially, have a conscious correlate. But, if that is so, then the outputs from the nodes of a hierarchical system must themselves be parallel, because the output from node A could be independent of that from node B and vice versa (b). Parallel outputs imply a certain degree of autonomy of each node within a hierarchical chain, making each not totally dependent on either the previous node in the chain or the next one for activity in it to acquire a conscious correlate. This would constitute, therefore, one solution to the perceptual problem posed by an exclusively hierarchical system. There is indeed evidence to suggest that a parallel output system is used by the brain (see below). But, such a solution creates problems for the interbinding of visual attributes processed in separate areas of the visual brain, which I return to below.

One can give examples from all three visual systems discussed here, whether one is a proponent of the hierarchical or the parallel doctrine. In the form system, one can be aware of a complex form as well as of its constituent parts, including single oriented lines; if oriented lines are the preserve of early visual areas and complex forms of later areas, it follows that activity at each must become perceptually explicit. Although the colour system of the brain operates to confer a constant colour on objects and surfaces, in spite of wide-ranging fluctuations in the wavelength–energy composition of the light reflected from them, an individual can nevertheless be aware of sudden changes in wavelength composition (illumination) of the light. It is likely that the former is signalled through the activity of cells in V4, and the latter through the activity of cells in V1 and V2, as well as some in V4—all three areas constituting hierarchical nodes within the brain's colour system. For the motion system, patients blinded by lesions in V1 but with an intact V5 can become aware of fast visual motion, whereas a patient rendered akinetopsic (motion-blind) by a lesion in V5 but with an intact V1 can become aware of slow but not fast motion, again suggesting that activity at each of these two nodes can acquire a perceptual correlate, though a much impoverished one.


End nodes in the brain?

Based on anatomical evidence, I have argued in the past that there is no end station in the cerebral cortex. This argument derives from the fact that all areas of the cerebral cortex have anatomical inputs and outputs, and receive and send signals. Consequently, there is no terminal station in the cerebral cortex. While this remains true in terms of anatomy, it requires reformulating in perceptual terms. If activity at each node of a chain can become perceptually explicit without the need for further processing, then it is reasonable to argue that, perceptually, there are end nodes in the brain, activity at which can be perceptually explicit without further processing. But, because, these nodes are recipient of feedback connections, which may modulate their activity, it follows that even such a modicum of perceptual independence does not constitute an endpoint. The critical issue here, which I return to below, is that these feedback inputs must themselves be acting asynchronously, thus highlighting further the asynchronous operations of the brain.


Parallel processing systems

The evidence for parallel processing, in both anatomical and physiological terms, is impressive. It is evident in the parallel outputs from each cortical visual area, including area V1, to other visual areas (b). But parallel processing is almost certainly a more extensively used strategy than previously supposed. It is now becoming apparent that a relative independence for the nodes constituting a chain within a parallel visual system is conferred on them not only by parallel cortical inputs originating in V1 and other visual areas, but also by parallel inputs from subcortical visual stations (c). While the major emphasis in research on the visual brain has revolved around the retina–LGN–V1 system, it has also been long known that both the LGN and the pulvinar project directly to visual areas of the prestriate cortex. These projections have been relatively neglected in the past and their significance has only recently become evident, especially with reference to area V5. This relative neglect may be due partly to the greater prominence of the LGN–V1 pathway, partly to the historical progression of research, during which activity of cells in V1 was charted before that in prestriate visual areas, and partly because of the latency of responses to flash visual stimulation in V1 and in prestriate cortex. This showed that, broadly, there is a temporal hierarchy in responses, consistent with a hierarchical view, with responses in V1 having shorter latencies and therefore preceding responses in prestriate cortex. Probably, all three reasons played a role. But, a reading of the evidence shows that there is significant overlap in response latencies obtained from V1 and visual areas of the prestriate cortex. More recently, it has been found that, when stimuli tailored to the physiology of the visual areas, instead of flash stimuli, are used, the temporal order may not be in accord with the hierarchical order reflected in the connections from the LGN to V1 and from there to the specialized visual areas. With fast-moving visual stimuli, the latency of responses in V5 precedes those in V1. Thus, the input that reaches V5 from the subcortex in parallel with the input that reaches it from V1 also constitutes one of the best examples of parallelism in the visual brain. But the two parallel inputs do not deliver their signals synchronously; hence, V5 also provides one of the clearest examples to date of asynchronous parallel operations. There is evidence that this ‘V1-bypassing’ input can sustain a certain level of visual activity that has, as a correlate, a conscious visual experience. Patients blinded by lesions in V1 can have a rudimentary and much impoverished, though nevertheless conscious, experience of the direction of fast-moving visual stimuli without being aware of the other characteristics of the moving stimulus.. Such patients can apparently also be aware of coloured stimuli if they are large.

Parallelism involving parallel inputs from V1 and direct V1-bypassing inputs to prestriate visual cortex is not unique to V5. In the form system, stimuli constituted from oriented lines (lines, angles, rhombuses) appear to activate both V1 and areas V2 and V3 of prestriate cortex within the same time frame (25–40 ms). More complex stimuli constituted from lines (faces and houses) also activate V1 and areas of the prestriate cortex critical for their perception within the same time window of 25–40 ms. This stands in opposition to the common assumption that, in form perception, V1 is activated first and before areas outside it are activated. It follows that parallel processing is a very significant part of the strategy used by the visual brain to process visual signals, far more so than previously supposed. It helps to confer a certain autonomy on the nodes within a hierarchical chain, because it implies that their responses are not entirely dependent on input from antecedent cortical nodes.


Relative autonomy of nodes

The above suggests a relative autonomy for nodes within a processing chain, worth discussing briefly for two reasons. The first is that it is unlikely that a node within a chain that is completely disconnected from other cortical areas, in terms of connections with them, and thus solely dependent on subcortical visual inputs, will be able to process signals to completion. But which inputs and outputs are mandatory is not known. There is evidence that some inputs to, and outputs from, a node may not be necessary for that node to process signals in a way that makes the endpoint of what they have processed accessible to conscious experience. Equally, there is evidence to suggest that a node such as V5, isolated from V1 by a lesion in it, may be active when visually stimulated without the subject being able to perceive or discriminate, consciously or unconsciously, the visual stimulus. But, perhaps the clearest evidence for a relative autonomy of a node that is part of a hierarchical chain comes from studies of V5, which show that an input to it that bypasses V1 can, at least in some patients, confer a modest ability to experience, consciously, visual motion. As mentioned, the motion system extending from V1 to V5, both directly and through area V2, is one of the best examples of a hierarchical chain, both anatomically and physiologically. It is natural to suppose, therefore, that activity in V5 is entirely dependent on the healthy functioning of area V1. But this turns out not to be so. Physiological activity in V5, though impoverished, can apparently be sustained by the pathways that reach V5 without passing through V1, just as cells in V2 and V3 are reactive to appropriate visual stimulation in the absence of an input from V1, although with significantly reduced strength. The V5 activity mediated by this direct subcortical input can evidently acquire a conscious correlate. This is reflected in the Riddoch syndrome, when patients blinded by lesions in V1 are able to perceive, consciously, fast but not slow motion. (For the nature of this consciousness, see reviews.)

Critically, this autonomy is not only conferred on V5 by direct inputs to it from subcortical stations, but it is also independent of the feedback from V5 to V1, hence calling into question the notion that, to acquire conscious status, signals in a specialized visual area must mandatorily be referred back to V1. All this is not to imply that the perception of visual motion of those deprived of a V1 is not very significantly impoverished; it of course is. But it shows that input from V1 and feedback to it are not essential for activity in V5 to lead to a crude but conscious experience of fast visual motion.

Finally, it is important to emphasize here that not all activity in V5 of an intact brain reaches conscious awareness, because motion information in a peripheral location of the field of view, though invisible to humans, can modulate activity in V5. These results, together with results reporting the relationship between single cell activity in V5 and perceptual decisions, suggest that a direct relationship between activity of V5 cells and (conscious) perception and decisions relating to motion may be the privilege of subpopulations of cells in V5. This is consistent with the notion of the ‘quantized’ nature of visual awareness, which posits that visual awareness may arise from the action of a limited number of cells in the visual cortex or, indeed, within a single visual area or node.


Multiple asynchronous processings within a cortical area

A brief review of the operations undertaken by a single area, V5, suggests that visual areas may undertake several operations asynchronously. Signals from the parallel inputs to V5, from V1 and from the subcortex (LGN–pulvinar), reach it asynchronously. Signals from fast-moving stimuli (more than 22° s−1) reach V5 with latencies of about 30 ms, whereas those from slowly moving stimuli (less than 5° s−1) reach it (through V1) at latencies of about 60 ms. This temporal privileging of the fast motion input into V5 no doubt reflects the fact that, although the pathways to the cortex from the M, P and K systems are mixed within it, the M system probably constitutes the dominant one that inputs into V5. The asynchronous input into V5 from these two parallel systems is complemented by what are probably also asynchronous inputs into it from antecedent cortical visual areas, including V1 and V2. Smith et al. report that responses of cells that signal component motion in V5 start about 6 ms earlier than cells that respond to pattern motion and that it takes about 50–75 ms for pattern motion cells to build up their selective profile, suggesting a temporal hierarchy. Seventy-five ms is considerably longer than the shortest latency activation recorded in V5 with fast-moving stimuli. In the absence of a ‘clock’ in V5 that determines that processing in it starts only when all the signals reach it, it becomes reasonable to suppose that V5 processes signals reaching it at different times asynchronously, and that the activity produced by the fast input to V5 becomes perceptually explicit (i.e. requires no further processing) without support from the input from V1. While in Riddoch syndrome patients, the V1-bypassing input to V5 can result in a crude but conscious perception of the direction of motion of fast-moving stimuli without input from V1, it is likely that, in the normal brain, this V1-bypassing input is integrated into the temporally hierarchical elaboration of pattern motion cells in V5, which suggests a further asynchronous operation within it.

The above-mentioned time-based activation studies imply, theoretically at least, that the activity of cells detecting fast motion and driven by the V1-bypassing input may become perceptually explicit before the activity of cells that signal pattern motion, which are driven by V1 inputs. This alone makes it possible, and even likely, that V5 processes separate motion-related signals asynchronously. It is also possible that other stimulus-related features, for example motion in depth, are also processed asynchronously with respect to motion in the fronto-parallel plane. This would make of V5 an area that processes several distinct, but motion-related, signals separately, in parallel and asynchronously. Indeed, V5 may have subcomponents that are specialized for specific motion features such as optic flow, or a clustering (even if a relatively weak one) according to speed of motion, implying that different groupings in V5 may process signals relatively independently from each other, making parallel and asynchronous processing a probability.

I have concentrated largely on V5, because it is one of the most extensively studied visual areas. However, it is unlikely that V5 is unique in this; more likely other nodes in the visual pathways also process, in parallel and asynchronously, a variety of signals related to their specialization, but used for different ends in relation to that specialization.

Even if signals reach different visual areas in parallel and synchronously, it does not follow that they process them synchronously. In the visual form systems, signals apparently reach V1 and the prestriate areas (V2 and V3, or the visual areas critical for the perception of faces and houses) within the same time frame, as is shown by the parallel inputs to V1 and prestriate areas when subjects view perceptually simple and complex form stimuli. But, just like V5, prestriate areas such as the ones enumerated above also handle signals that reach them through V1, which may be asynchronous with respect to the signals reaching them directly from the LGN and pulvinar, pointing to possible asynchronous operations within them. The relationship of synchronous–asynchronous parallel inputs to synchronous–asynchronous operations within individual areas has not been tested and merits future study.


Parallel outputs from different nodes

If an area undertakes several parallel operations asynchronously and in parallel (regardless of whether signals reach it synchronously or asynchronously), it is likely that the outputs from it will also be asynchronous, unless one were to posit the existence of some clock within an area which dictates the timing of outputs from it. In the motion system, psychophysical experiments have shown that different directions of motion are perceived asynchronously, suggesting that the activity of cells at single nodes, in this instance V5, may acquire a conscious correlate at a different time from that of other cells in the same node.

If two or more areas process their incoming signals asynchronously, it is possible and even likely that the outputs from them may also be asynchronous, hence compounding the number of asynchronous outputs. In the form system, parallel outputs are implied by the results of psychophysical masking experiments which show that rhombuses constituted from oriented lines, whereas easily masked by rhombuses, are relatively resistant to masking by oriented lines, quite contrary to what might be expected from the widely adhered view of a strictly hierarchical strategy in form processing whose source lies in the orientation-selective cells of V1. Such a hierarchical system would predict results in which lines would be more effective at masking rhombuses than rhombuses would be at masking lines. This is because the rhombuses in these experiments were constituted from the same oriented lines whose perception they masked. This suggests, again, that there are parallel subsystems even within what is traditionally considered to be a single hierarchical chain—the form system—with parallel output possibilities from them. Clinical evidence supports this, too, because agnosias for static forms need not be accompanied by agnosias for them when in motion, whereas agnosias for line drawings of objects need not be accompanied by agnosias for the objects themselves. Together with the demonstration that one subdivision of the lateral occipital complex (LOC), heavily implicated in shape and object recognition, responds to shapes but not to orientation of lines, whereas another to orientation but not to shapes, these results argue against an interpretation of form construction solely in hierarchical terms, with the exclusive source of the hierarchy being the orientation-selective cells in V1. As well, parallel but asynchronous outputs from different nodes in the parallel visual processing systems are also strongly implied by the observation that the reaction times of human subjects to different visual attributes vary and the observation that, even under conditions of focal attention, errors made in correctly identifying colour and form (orientation) are independent, presumably because colour is processed faster than orientation.

Such parallel outputs are also very much implied by significant differences in the activity time courses of different visual areas when subjects view action movies consisting of many different visual features, and hence activity in many specialized areas. The activity time course between different visual areas decorrelates when viewing movies, compared with the resting state, the precise opposite of what one might have expected. This implies that the time courses of activity within different areas are not governed by a central clock but that activity at each is reset independently—the precise opposite of what one might have expected.


Higher levels of perceptual asynchrony and parallel, asynchronous ‘top-down’ inputs to visual areas

More demanding visual tasks show that specializations for colour, form and motion are taken to further levels, because both the grouping of visual signals according to attribute and the formation of concepts according to them engage anatomically distinct parts of the parietal cortex. Although the necessary experiments have yet to be done, it is intuitively reasonable to suppose that grouping according to colour will take temporal precedence over grouping according to motion, given that colour is perceived before motion. This raises the inter-attribute ‘binding’ problem at a yet higher level. Nor are parallelism and asynchrony to be thought of solely in terms of ‘elementary perception’ that is the result of feed-forward, ‘bottom-up’ processes. It may extend to ‘top-down’ processes, widely suspected to operate in the visual brain. In one of the few papers to address the question of perceptual asynchrony in relation to brain voxels that code for both colour and motion, Seymour et al. have used multivariate pattern analysis techniques in imaging experiments to show that there are conjunction units in the visual brain that code for both attributes. I have reservations about the interpretation they give to their results but these reservations are immaterial in the present context. What is interesting is their explanation for how such units, assuming them to represent actual cells, handle the asynchrony. They write of a feedback which would ‘gate’ their inputs, because ‘the timing of this gating might be important for adaptation of ‘double-duty’ units in V1 that are selective both for the color and the direction of motion of the stimulus', an idea also present in Clifford's review. Such a ‘feedback’ must, of course, take account of the asynchronous processing of colour and motion and be applied accordingly, thus highlighting once again the asynchronous nature of brain operations. As well, much discussed these days, is the error prediction system of the brain. Such a system must be operating on perceptual systems that are themselves asynchronous in their operation. The ‘top-down’ system is often thought of as operating in the direction of ‘lower’ areas from ‘higher’ ones. But, there is also the possibility that it operates within individual nodes or stations.

If processing within one system, say the colour one, is faster than in another system, such as the motion system, it follows that the predictive coding operating on the two systems will be doing so asynchronously. Indeed, such iterative operations between ‘higher’ and ‘lower’ areas need not be restricted to the cortex. The LGN is known to project directly to both V4 and V5. Given the asynchronous perception of colour and motion, all this implies that the results of action of different ‘top-down’ systems may not be applied simultaneously, because that would involve waiting for all the processing systems to complete their tasks. More likely, the massive error prediction system must itself act asynchronously.

It is interesting here to allude again to the temporal difference between inter- and intra-attribute binding. It would seem that the two do not occur synchronously, which suggests that asynchronous operations must be even more widespread.


A post-perceptual solution to inter-attribute binding?

Parallel and asynchronous outputs make the problem of interattribute binding even more emphatic. How to bind activity at so many different nodes, when processing speeds within and between them differ, as do the outputs from and return inputs to them? We had previously suggested that binding is a multi-stage activity, because it can involve any node within one processing system with any node in another. But, perhaps it is simpler than that. One solution that has been recently proposed to this complex and apparently insurmountable problem is that inter-attribute binding is post-perceptual; it does not occur by direct physiological interaction between cells in the specialized visual areas but post-perceptually, through fast-acting memory mechanisms, in the millisecond band, which are coincidence detectors. In such a system, the activity occurring at two nodes, no matter where they are located within the processing chains, would be bound if coincidence detectors detect these activities to have occurred within the same phase or cycle of some on-going activity. This may involve the hippocampus, in which temporal discontinuities may be bridged. The merits of such a proposition have yet to be tested.


An overall strategy for visual processing

So how could we envision the brain solving a problem that is imposed by a natural world in which different visual attributes do not co-occur but covary instead, and one in which different attributes are processed at different speeds?

One solution is to use parallel processing. This became evident a long time ago, but the extent of its use by the brain is only now becoming apparent. Parallel connections in the brain have been much discussed and their computational significance assessed. But, parallelism appears to be much more widespread than previously supposed. This is evident in the parallel inputs to a visual area not only from cortical, but also from subcortical sources. Moreover, parallel strategies appear to be used even within single processing systems such as the motion system, in terms of inputs to it and outputs from it and in terms of the parallel operations executed within it. The form system itself, almost universally considered to consist of a hierarchical chain commencing in V1, may consist of parallel subsystems, given that the orientation-selective cells of V1 may not be the sole source of inputs to the form system just as, in the motion system, V1 cells responsive to motion are not the sole source of the input to V5.

Another strategy is to confer a certain degree of autonomy on each station or node of each parallel system, giving activity at each of its nodes the capacity to acquire a perceptual correlate without the necessity for further processing. But the imposition of such an autonomy, however limited, also raises the necessity of allowing for parallel outputs from the different nodes, with an output from one area not being necessarily totally dependent on either the previous area in the hierarchical chain or a subsequent one. Moreover, if the processing time (as defined above) at each node is not necessarily the same as the processing time at another or other nodes, then the outputs from different nodes must be asynchronous with respect to each other, as must the return inputs to them. It follows that the visual perceptual system is massively parallel, both spatially and temporally.

It also follows that even a relatively simple system restricted to the processing of form, colour and motion would require an extremely complex coordination in time.


A possible solution

The solution, I suggest, that evolution has adopted for the brain is to make of the visual brain a totally asynchronous organ, one in which the parallel systems operate with a fair degree of temporal autonomy and in which activity at different nodes of different parallel processing systems is not simultaneously reset to zero continuously by some master clock in the brain. If that is the solution, then it follows that binding of different visual attributes must itself be subject to a different rule than the one we have been entertaining so far. One suggestion would be that discrete perceptual events occurring at different nodes are somehow related to another timing system, say, the theta rhythm in the hippocampus (6 Hz). Two or more events occurring within the hippocampal cycle might then be perceived as being bound. There is, indeed, some clinical evidence to suggest that this may be so. Although there is no experimental evidence for this, it emphasizes the need to study neural events surrounding very short memories.

As an example, and entirely speculatively, let us suppose that visual area A has an ongoing alpha cycle and visual area B has another alpha cycle, not in phase with that of area A (whether separate visual areas have their own alpha cycles is not known). When the subject views a stimulus consisting of two attributes, say colour and motion, the desynchronization between the alpha activity in the two areas becomes maximal, since stimuli cause desynchronizations, the so-called evoked response desynchronization. If alpha rhythms in area A and area B, which in this speculative argument are asynchronous with respect to each other, can nevertheless coincide in their cycle with the hippocampal theta rhythm or be related to it in some temporal way, signifying that the two events occurred concurrently, and are read as such by hippocampal ‘reader’ neurons, then the two separate events may be perceived as if bound. (Arnold writes similarly of coincidence detectors.) In fact, it is known that there are unique firing patterns in the hippocampus that correlate with unique visual events (see for a review). Hence, it is the relationship of two desynchronized rhythms to the rhythm in the hippocampus that becomes critical. It is evident that in such a system, no central clock is necessary. It is simply a question of one system ‘tagging’ onto another through a third. Whether this approaches what happens even remotely remains to be seen. This is not an entirely novel idea. Similar ideas have been proposed in the past, though not with reference to the visual brain or to binding different visual attributes. Nor is it necessarily the only solution. What seems to me to be necessary to emphasize in the future, far more than we have in the past, is the apparently ubiquitous asynchronous operations of the brain.

Computer technologists, who were relatively late in understanding the power of parallel systems and who have never acknowledged the primacy of anatomists in uncovering the parallel operations of the visual brain, are now seeking to develop a new generation of computers that are faster and more efficient than the present generation of computers. The defining feature of such computers is that they operate asynchronously.

The brain may, in fact, be much more like asynchronous computers than synchronous ones.

Or rather, asynchronous, parallel, computers may end up being much more like the brain than parallel, synchronous ones.


Brain/MINDS: brain-mapping project in Japan

Hideyuki Okano, Atsushi Miyawaki, Kiyoto Kasai — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4387516, CC BY 4.0.

There is an emerging interest in brain-mapping projects in countries across the world, including the USA, Europe, Australia and China. In 2014, Japan started a brain-mapping project called Brain Mapping by Integrated Neurotechnologies for Disease Studies (Brain/MINDS). Brain/MINDS aims to map the structure and function of neuronal circuits to ultimately understand the vast complexity of the human brain, and takes advantage of a unique non-human primate animal model, the common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus). In Brain/MINDS, the RIKEN Brain Science Institute acts as a central institute. The objectives of Brain/MINDS can be categorized into the following three major subject areas: (i) structure and functional mapping of a non-human primate brain (the marmoset brain); (ii) development of innovative neurotechnologies for brain mapping; and (iii) human brain mapping; and clinical research. Brain/MINDS researchers are highly motivated to identify the neuronal circuits responsible for the phenotype of neurological and psychiatric disorders, and to understand the development of these devastating disorders through the integration of these three subject areas.


Introduction: brain-mapping projects

As happened for the human genome projects almost a quarter of a century ago, there is an emerging interest in brain-mapping projects as an international big science, including The Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) initiative in the USA and the Human Brain Project (HBP) in Europe. In Japan, a brain-mapping project named Brain Mapping by Integrated Neurotechnologies for Disease Studies (Brain/MINDS) started in 2014 (http://www.brainminds.jp/). These three brain-mapping projects aim to reveal the structural and functional connectomics in the brain, and fundamentally contribute to the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of human brain diseases.

The USA and the European Union have different approaches toward brain mapping. The European Union HBP is a centralized, large-scale enterprise with a computational focus aimed at building detailed models of neural circuitry, along with 13 complementary sub-projects: SP1, Strategic Mouse Brain Data; SP2, Strategic Human Brain Data; SP3, Cognitive Architectures; SP4, Mathematical and Theoretical Foundations of Brain Research; SP5, Neuroinformatics; SP6, Brain Simulation; SP7, High-Performance Computing; SP8, Medical Informatics; SP9, Neuromorphic Computing; SP10, Neurorobotics; SP11, Applications; SP12, Ethics and Society; and SP13, Management (http://www.cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/programme/fet/flagship/). In the USA, the BRAIN Initiative is less centralized and is closer to traditional investigator-driven neuroscience research with different funding agencies (including the National Institutes of Health, National Science Foundation and Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency; http://www.whitehouse.gov/state-of-the-union-2013). An emphasis on the development of technologies to facilitate neuroscience research forms a basic theme for the BRAIN Initiative in the USA. In addition to the BRAIN Initiative and the HBP, there is an emerging interest in brain-mapping projects in Australia, China and Japan.


Brain/MINDS in Japan

Research on the non-human primate brain is essential for understanding the human brain and for developing knowledge-based strategies for the diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric and neurological disorders. For these reasons, one of the important characteristics of Brain/MINDS is to devote considerable effort to mapping the brain of a small New World monkey, the common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus). The rationale for using a marmoset model rather than another animal model, including another non-human primate model, for human brain science was sevenfold: (i) as a primate, the marmoset brain shares some aspects of the developmental process and anatomical structure of the human brain; (ii) the marmoset has similar social behaviours to humans, including particularly a strong relationship between parents and offspring; (iii) the marmoset has a unique social vocal communication and there is a likely convergent evolution in this characteristic; (iv) there are neurological disease models of the marmoset that are comparative to human disease; (v) some of the higher cognitive tasks in marmosets are equivalent to those found in macaques; (vi) the marmoset can be handled with comparative ease owing to its small body size; and (vii) the marmoset has a strong reproductive efficiency. In addition, the common marmoset has the following advantages for brain mapping: (i) its frontal lobe is more developed and more similar to humans than that of other commonly used animals including rodents, which have limitations when trying to understand the human brain because of differences in the structure of the neocortex and neuronal circuits and behavioural paradigms; (ii) the brain is compact (approximately 8 g) and is suitable for comprehensive analysis of the neural circuits; (iii) marmosets are near-lissencephalic, making functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), optical imaging, tracer injection and electrophysiological experiments easier; and (iv) marmosets can be genetically modified and manipulated.

In Japan, Brain/MINDS started in June 2014. To understand the higher brain mechanisms underlying human feelings and behaviours, researchers must integrate macro- and micro-level information from the whole brain. Through the development of novel cutting-edge technologies for brain imaging and manipulation, Brain/MINDS will use the marmoset model to reveal the structure and function of the brain, improve future diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric and neurological disorders, and establish new information technologies based on brain mechanisms.

The objectives of Brain/MINDS are categorized into three major subject areas, each undertaken by a separate group of researchers (see http://brainminds.jp): (A) structure and functional mapping of the marmoset brain;(B) development of innovative neurotechnologies for brain mapping; and(C) human brain mapping and clinical research.Brain/MINDS adopts both centralized and decentralized strategies. The researchers in Groups A and B belong to the RIKEN Brain Science Institute, which acts as a central institute, or to Keio University or Kyoto University, which act as affiliated institutes. The researchers in Group C are more distributed and are all involved in clinical neuroscience. The integration of these groups is essential for understanding human brain diseases from the standpoint of neuronal circuits. For example, in Brain/MINDS, researchers are highly motivated to identify the neuronal circuits responsible for disease phenotypes and reveal the causal relation between structural or functional damage of neuronal circuits and phenotypes of psychiatric disorders like schizophrenia.


Structure and functional mapping of the marmoset brain (Group A)

This research group is led by Hideyuki Okano (RIKEN Brain Science Institute and Keio University School of Medicine). The structural (anatomical) mapping of marmosets will be investigated at three different resolutions: macroscopic, mesoscopic and microscopic.


Macroscopic structural mapping

We will investigate the macroscopic structural map, particularly the inter-area map, of the marmoset brain using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-based diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), which enables the tracking and visualization of neuronal fibres by taking advantage of the anisotropy of water molecule diffusion within the neuronal axons. Previously, corticospinal tracts, optic tracts and the nigrostriatal pathway of marmoset brains have been investigated using diffusion tensor tractography. In Brain/MINDS, DTI-based mapping with a high resolution (voxels of approx. 50 µm3 for ex vivo analysis and approx. 200 µm3 for in vivo analysis) will be developed and used. DTI-based macroscopic mapping can be performed in a quantitative fashion together with voxel-based morphometric analysis, as already shown for a common marmoset model of Parkinson's disease. We have investigated whether DTI can be used to detect the denervation of the nigrostriatal pathway in the marmoset model of Parkinson's disease and found that 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-treated marmoset brains showed significantly increased axial and radial diffusivities in the bilateral nigrostriatal pathway, which is consistent with the observation that fibre structures of the nigrostriatal pathway were drastically decreased in the Parkinson's disease model. Thus, this study provides a potential basis for the use of DTI in the clinical diagnosis of Parkinson's disease. In 2011, we developed an MRI-based, tissue-segmented, population-averaged standard template of the common marmoset brain. This template of the whole marmoset brain is available at the International Neuroinformatics Japan Node website (http://brainatlas.brain.riken.jp/marmoset/). The development of an MRI-based, population-averaged standard template enables us to examine voxel-wise statistics including voxel-based morphometry (VBM), which can be used to provide objective and bias-free information about brain structure and to detect differences in brain anatomy between a control group and an experimental group, such as a disease model, or to detect longitudinal changes within groups, such as ontogeny mapping of brain structure. Currently, VBM is widely used in neuroanatomical study of various human mental or neurodevelopmental disorders including schizophrenia, drug-induced psychosis, autism and attention-deficit-hyperactivity disorder. In Brain/MINDS, we will investigate the MRI-based macroscale mapping of various marmoset disease models with close collaboration with the researchers of Group C, who are involved in human brain mapping and clinical research.


Mesoscopic structural mapping

The mesoscopic scale of analysis, which employs light microscopy, is intermediate to the macroscale defined operationally by MRI/DTI and the microscale defined by electron-microscopic analysis. This scale of analysis aims to uncover the brain-wide connectivity and inter-area mapping by tracer injection and comprehensive mapping of gene expression by in situ hybridization. In gene expression mapping, we will focus on genes related to neurological and psychiatric disorders or particular physiological functions that are well developed in primates, such as visual functions. For the tracer injections, we will use the following methods. First, we aim to inject anterograde virus tracers into various parts of the marmoset brain, particularly the prefrontal cortex, using adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors encoding three different fluorescent proteins (corresponding to green, red and blue colours) according to the marmoset brain in sterotaxic coordinates. This work will be performed based on the methods described in a recent paper reporting a whole-brain dataset of anterograde injections in the mouse brain from the Allen Institute of Brain Research. The stereotactic injections will be followed by systematic imaging of labelled axons by a high-throughput serial two-photon tomography system for constructing three-dimensional maps of the neuronal axons. In addition, Partha Mitra, a member of Brain/MINDS, will adopt a different approach by using anterograde and retrograde classical neuronal tracer injections on a systematic grid spanning the marmoset brain, and trace the axon tracts through the high-throughput Neuro Histology Pipeline in a similar way as in the Mouse Brain Architecture project (http://mouse.brainarchitecture.org). This work will be achieved collaboratively by the RIKEN Brain Science Institute in Japan and the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in the USA. Transgenic techniques that can be used in the common marmoset, including genome editing, would enormously contribute to the mesoscale brain mapping aim of Brain/MINDS. We will generate transgenic marmoset lines that specifically express Cre-recombinase in particular neuronal subtypes, which are deeply involved in the pathogenic mechanisms of neurological or psychiatric disorders, such as dopaminergic neurons, parvalbumin-positive neurons, serotonergic neurons, glutamatergic neurons and cholinergic neurons. These Cre marmoset lines will be crossed with various reporter lines such as floxed-green fluorescent protein (GFP) for labelling neuronal axons, floxed-wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) for trans-synaptic tracing, floxed-GCamp for Ca imaging and floxed-channelrhodopsin 2 (ChR2) for optogenetics. Alternatively, these reporters can be introduced into particular sites within the marmoset brain through viral vectors (AAV vector or lentiviral vector).


Microscopic structural mapping

The Brain/MINDS project aims to map neural connections (connectomes) at nanometre resolution. This will be achieved using a new method of serial electron microscopy (EM) developed by Prof. Jeffery Lichtman's laboratory at Harvard University. Serial EM is a recently developed technology that utilizes the scanning electron microscope to obtain serial images from continuous sectioning. The approaches involved in serial EM are widely applied to many projects, especially for analysing the three-dimensional microstructure of cells and tissues with high resolution. EM-based technologies enabled us to quantitatively map the precise location of cells, synapses and even organelles in a certain micro-domain of the brain. Even though the marmoset brain is compact (approx. 8 g), determining the EM-based micro-connectome for the entire marmoset brain is not feasible within a limited period. Thus, we will focus on mapping the brain regions that are intimately involved in higher brain functions or disease-sensitive areas such as the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus and language-associated areas.


Functional mapping

To understand the working principle of the brain, it is essential to integrate structural and functional maps. In the Brain/MINDS project, we aim to perform fMRI-based mapping, positron emission tomography imaging and electrophysiological recording (including electrocorticography (ECoG) and multi-electrode recording) and Ca imaging using a miniature fluorescent microscope inserted within the brain in combination with an activity-dependent fluorescent reporter such a G-Camp. fMRI-based functional connectivity has been studied through both task-based imaging and task-free imaging (resting state (rs)-fMRI). rs-fMRI is used for functional mapping of human brains in healthy subjects and patients with disease. However, the relation between anatomical connectivity and functional connectivity speculated from rs-fMRI remains largely unsolved in human brains, and should be clarified in the current marmoset brain-mapping projects by the precise registration of rs-fMRI maps to DTI and other maps. Task-based fMRI and positron emission tomography imaging will be used in the marmoset alongside the on-going development of behavioural tasks. In Brain/MINDS, functional mapping will also be performed for marmoset disease models such as Alzheimer's disease models, Parkinson's disease/dementia with Lewy bodies models, psychiatric disease models and autism models that will be generated through the various transgenic technologies.


Development of innovative neurotechnologies for brain mapping (Group B)

This research group is led by Atsushi Miyawaki (RIKEN Brain Science Institute). Group B consists of the following three subgroups: (B1) development of techniques for high resolution, wide-field, deep, fast and long imaging of brain structures and functions; (B2) development of techniques for controlling neural activity; and (B3) development of neuroinformatics for integrating heterogeneous and multi-scale data.

Outstanding advances in genome science and gene technology have led to numerous discoveries and the development of new technologies in life sciences. The new technologies include optogenetics, tissue clearing and super-resolution microscopy. This technological innovation has been achieved thanks to the combined efforts of molecular biologists, electro-physiologists, brain anatomists and optical physicists. These technologies are becoming popular in neuroscience, where the central challenge is to understand the mechanisms by which neurons process and integrate synaptic inputs and how those mechanisms are modified by activity.

GFP was originally isolated from the light-emitting organ of the jellyfish Aequorea victoria in 1962. Thirty years passed before the complementary DNA-encoding protein was cloned in 1992 and subsequently characterized in 1994. Since this time, the ability of researchers to unravel the fine details of biological events has improved remarkably. Furthermore, the emergence of the spectral variants of GFP, as well as GFP-like fluorescent proteins and chromogenic ligand-dependent fluorescent proteins from other organisms, has paved the way for researchers to simultaneously observe multiple biological events.

Optogenetic imaging with molecular sensors has great potential for investigations in neuroscience by virtue of its high spatial and temporal resolution. In the Brain/MINDS project, researchers have studied both the biological and practical aspects of various fluorescent proteins with the goal of enhancing their biological properties and making them practically useful. A large number of genetically encoded sensors have been developed for key intracellular environments or signalling molecules (events), such as calcium ions (excitation), membrane potential (excitation), chloride ions (excitation), pH (synaptic transmission), glutamate (neurotransmitter release/uptake), retinoic acid (metabolism) and bilirubin (metabolism). These sensors can be used to investigate the function of specific signalling mechanisms in synaptic transmission, integration and plasticity, and to study neuronal firing inside the brain.

Optogenetic control of neuronal activity allows us to selectively activate or inactivate genetically defined populations of neurons to examine how the activity of neurons contributes to the function of neural circuits in the brain. The light-activated ion channel ChR2 can be expressed in neurons, allowing brief flashes of blue light to activate the neurons. The expression of the light-driven chloride pump halorhodopsin allows for the inactivation of neuronal activity. However, many other important biological functions can also be controlled by light.

Such genetically encoded tools are introduced by gene transfer techniques into an intact organism and their expression is targeted to specific tissues, cell types or subcellular compartments, thereby allowing for the efficient detection or manipulation of neuronal activity. Owing to recent innovative progress in gene transfer techniques, including electroporation, viral-mediated gene transfer and germline transmission of transgenes, studies are no longer limited to mice but can also be performed in primates. The generation of transgenic marmoset lines (glowing monkeys) inspired the Japan neuroscience community to launch the Brain/MINDS project.

The emergence of new tools stimulates the imagination of many neuroscientists. Light microscopes will inevitably have to be equipped with special hardware and software to maximize their use. In the Brain/MINDS project, researchers are developing light microscopy systems that are amenable to the addition of new functions for new technologies.

One important advantage of fluorescent proteins over organic chemical dyes is their ability to be genetically introduced into biological tissues regardless of the depth of the target area. With the advent of transgenic techniques to label specific cells with fluorescent proteins, life scientists are awaiting a new optical technique that can provide large scale and finely detailed perspectives of labelled structures within a large biological specimen. There is an increasing demand for new techniques that seek to address this issue, such as Brainbow mice. Such techniques are critical for comprehensive connectomic analyses.

The three-dimensional imaging of large biological specimens requires sectioning in order to improve axial resolution. It is also necessary to achieve subcellular resolution for the three-dimensional reconstruction of fluorescently labelled structures within large tissue samples, such as those from whole mouse brains. Mechanical sectioning methods allow for the efficient observation of genetically or immunohistochemically labelled structures with subcellular resolution, but involve extremely laborious three-dimensional reconstruction when performed on a large scale in the absence of well-designed automation procedures. Optical sectioning methods are highly promising, but optical imaging deep into tissue is prevented, mostly by light scattering. To overcome this problem, tissue-clearing technology aims to increase tissue transparency and achieve refractive uniformity throughout a fixed sample. This technique involves the incubation of fixed brain samples in a clearing reagent for some time. Two types of tissue-clearing reagents are available: organic chemical-based solutions and aqueous solutions. Organic chemical-based solutions are highly capable of optically clearing fixed samples; however, the chemical clearing procedures substantially quench fluorescent proteins inside the samples. 3DISCO (three-dimensional imaging of solvent-cleared organs) was developed to solve this problem. The 3DISCO procedure was then simplified to establish a simple, rapid and inexpensive method called iDISCO, which permits whole-mount immunolabelling with volume imaging of large cleared samples. A few aqueous solutions have been developed as tissue-clearing reagents, including FocusClear, Scale, ClearT, CLARITY, PACT (passive clarity technique), SeeDB and CUBIC. In the Brain/MINDS project, we are improving these techniques to enable much larger scale three-dimensional imaging of molecularly labelled structures in cleared brain samples. Tissue clearing focuses on genetically expressed fluorescent markers, but should also be compatible with other labelling methodologies, such as immunohistochemistry. We also aim to prove the applicability of the clearing methods in tissue samples obtained from species that are not readily amenable to genetic modification, such as non-human primates and humans.

It is important to study the spatial regulation of a biological function within a sample at macroscopic, mesoscopic and microscopic levels. Although very few light microscopy techniques for three-dimensional reconstruction can penetrate tissue blocks thicker than 1 mm, most tomographic techniques, including optical projection tomography, computed tomography and positron emission tomography, as well as MRI, can analyse structural and quantitative features in much larger tissues, such as the whole body. Although current tissue-clearing techniques are limited to fixed biological samples, they are expected to enlarge the volume of three-dimensional reconstruction from light microscopy data, thereby bridging the imaging gap between the size of a specimen that can be visualized with light microscopy and the size of a specimen that can be visualized with other techniques. Likewise, the imaging gap between light microscopy and EM is also being reduced by strengthening the interactions between light microscopy and EM (correlative light microscopy/EM techniques) or by increasing the spatial resolution of fluorescence imaging (super-resolution microscopy), for which the Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2014 was awarded jointly to Eric Betzig, Stefan W. Hell and William E. Moerner.

In the third subgroup of Group B (B3), we plan to develop neuroinformatics for integrating heterogeneous and multi-scale data from microcircuit map, cortico-cortical projection, neural activity, and behaviour, with the aim of (i) the construction of a database and development of data analysis methods and (ii) multi-level data integration and large-scale model simulation. Notably, researchers in the B3 subgroup, including Yoko Yamaguchi, who is the head of the International Neuroinformatics Coordinating Facility (INCF) Japan Node, will improve the constructed databases through interactions within the Brain/MINDS project and will cooperate worldwide with the INCF, HBP, Allen Institute for Brain Science and the Kavli Foundation to generate refined databases with a common format. Basically, data sharing will be open source, with preference given to researchers who are interested in collaborating with the B3 group. Through these efforts, we will construct an atlas of the common marmoset brain by integrating heterogeneous big data. The data will be further used for multi-scale simulation to clarify the integrative principles of the marmoset and human brain using RIKEN's K Supercomputer.


Human brain mapping and clinical research (Group C)

This research group is led by Kiyoto Kasai (The University of Tokyo, Graduate School of Medicine). Here, we aim to map the brains of healthy control subjects and neuropsychiatric patients. Within Group C, the Clinical Research Organizing Team will organize three clinical research teams: the Psychiatric Disorders Research Team (Principal Investigator: K.K.), Neurodegenerative Diseases Research Team (PI: Hitoshi Okazawa, Tokyo Medical and Dental University) and Cerebrovascular and Neuro-rehabilitation Research Team (PI: Ryosuke Takahashi, Kyoto University). These clinical research teams will together generate a multi-centre database of patient MRI data and other biomarkers, and will provide feedback to marmoset researchers.


Background and goals

Disability-adjusted life years are an indicator of the impact of a disease on life and activities, and the number of disability-adjusted life years is larger for neuropsychiatric disorders than for diseases such as cancers and cardiovascular disorders. Neuropsychiatric disorders also represent a substantial financial burden on society; for example, the monetary cost of dementia in the United States was $100 billion in 2010. In medical research, the use of animal models is essential and effective for clarifying neurobiological mechanisms and screening drug discoveries. However, in research on neuropsychiatric disorders, particularly psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, rodent models have major limitations. The equivalence of behaviours and neurocircuits, particularly, those involving the prefrontal cortex, between humans and rodents cannot be assured. Thus, it has been a great challenge to identify molecular and circuit abnormalities and to develop pathophysiology-oriented intervention strategies through translation between basic and clinical research. The Brain/MINDS project uses marmosets, which are characterized by highly complex social behaviours and have a large prefrontal cortex (particularly lateral prefrontal cortex), which will be a major advantage for neuropsychiatric research over studies using rodents. Here, we propose a concept of a ‘translatable brain marker’, which refers to bridging the gap between human brain imaging and non-human primate brain imaging by using a measurement method common to both species (e.g. structural MRI, rs-fMRI, DTI, ECoG, electroencephalography (EEG), etc.). The main purpose of the clinical research teams is to develop translatable brain markers that are useful in research of neuropsychiatric disorders. This will be achieved by generating a large database of these markers in healthy individuals and in patients with neuropsychiatric disorders, and through tight communications with Groups A and B. The establishment of translatable brain markers will eventually lead to neurocircuit-based reclassification of neuropsychiatric disorders and neurocircuit-based biomarkers useful for clinical assessment and treatment. Standardization of the measurement protocol and acquisition parameters of the translatable brain markers will contribute to preclinical and clinical studies for drug discovery.


Plans

The Clinical Research Organizing Team plans to (i) coordinate multi-centre collection of neuroimaging, neurophysiological and behavioural data in patients with various neuropsychiatric disorders to identify neural circuit abnormalities that are common across diseases and specific to a disease; and (ii) innovate technologies for human neuroimaging measurements and analysis. The neural circuit abnormalities identified in (i) will be translated to non-human primate studies led by Group A, and the technologies developed in (ii) will enable precise translation between marmoset brain maps and clinical neuroimaging and neurophysiological data.

The Psychiatric Disorders Research Team plans to (i) identify disease-related neural circuits by using neuroimaging, neurophysiological and behavioural data; (ii) develop psychiatry-oriented ‘translatable’ brain markers that can be measured using techniques common to humans and primates; (iii) characterize the clinical relevance of neurocircuits by circuit analysis and manipulation experiments using marmoset disease models; and (iv) establish neural circuit markers that can be used to reclassify diagnostic systems and to develop supplementary diagnostic tools and innovative treatment strategies for psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder, major depression and bipolar disorder.

We here describe a more detailed plan by illustrating neurophysiological studies in schizophrenia as an example. Previous structural MRI studies have shown a progressive decrease of neocortical grey matter volume in the early stages of schizophrenia that was coupled with an abnormality in a neurophysiological index of glutamatergic neurotransmission called auditory mismatch negativity. Gamma-band frequency oscillations are thought be an index of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic neurotransmission and are abnormal in the early stages of psychosis. Rodent model and human post-mortem studies have indicated that insult to dendritic spines through glutamatergic/GABAergic dysfunction may underlie the perionset period of progressive pathology in schizophrenia. However, there has been no direct evidence of synaptic dysfunction in schizophrenia, a missing link between in vivo human, animal and post-mortem studies. To bridge this gap, neuroimaging and neurophysiological indices should be used to identify translatable brain markers that can be commonly measured in both humans and animals. Bidirectional animal and human research using translatable brain markers, such as markers from MRI and electrophysiology, will facilitate identification of effective molecular targets for early intervention for schizophrenia. Based on the hypothesis as described above, we plan to measure mismatch negativity and gamma-band oscillations in marmosets, macaques and in humans with and without psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, by using EEG and/or ECoG where applicable.

The Neurodegenerative Diseases Research Team plans to detect the earliest change of neurocircuits in human neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal degeneration and diffuse Lewy body disease, to uncover the underlying molecular mechanisms and to develop therapeutics for human dementia by taking advantage of neurocircuit maps of transgenic marmoset models generated by Group A.

The Cerebrovascular and Neuro-rehabilitation Research Team plans to identify the injured and compensatory circuits that are present in patients with cerebrovascular disorders including motor paresis and higher brain dysfunction and Parkinson's disease. This team will develop new technologies to analyse the neurocircuits using rodent disease models, apply them to newly generated marmoset disease models, and establish translatable brain markers for neurocircuit injuries and subsequent recovery that are common to humans and animal models. These efforts will contribute to the development of new diagnostic tools based on circuit injuries and innovative therapeutics that accelerate the recovery of circuits in cerebrovascular disorders and Parkinson's disease.

Group C will deeply consider ethical issues associated with biomarkers and databases used in human studies. The Clinical Research Organizing Team will include experts in clinical ethics and will help researchers at each institution to obtain institutional review board approval. These experts will also monitor the appropriateness of measurements and the registration of biomarkers obtained from patients at each site as well as the accuracy of the database.


Conclusion and perspectives

Brain/MINDS is an ambitious project that aims to understand the higher brain mechanisms underlying human feelings and behaviours, to improve future diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric and neurological disorders and to establish new information technologies based on brain mechanisms. To better understand the human brain, we will take advantage of a non-human primate, the common marmoset. If we are able to obtain detailed information on the structural and functional connectivity of the entire marmoset brain, this will enormously contribute to our understanding of the human brain and its diseases. Synthesis, mining and simulation of all datasets to understand human cognition and cure diseases are crucial for the success of the Brain/MINDS project.


Using perturbations to identify the brain circuits underlying active vision

Robert H Wurtz — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4528817, CC BY 4.0.

The visual and oculomotor systems in the brain have been studied extensively in the primate. Together, they can be regarded as a single brain system that underlies active vision—the normal vision that begins with visual processing in the retina and extends through the brain to the generation of eye movement by the brainstem. The system is probably one of the most thoroughly studied brain systems in the primate, and it offers an ideal opportunity to evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of the series of perturbation techniques that have been used to study it. The perturbations have been critical in moving from correlations between neuronal activity and behaviour closer to a causal relation between neuronal activity and behaviour. The same perturbation techniques have also been used to tease out neuronal circuits that are related to active vision that in turn are driving behaviour. The evolution of perturbation techniques includes ablation of both cortical and subcortical targets, punctate chemical lesions, reversible inactivations, electrical stimulation, and finally the expanding optogenetic techniques. The evolution of perturbation techniques has supported progressively stronger conclusions about what neuronal circuits in the brain underlie active vision and how the circuits themselves might be organized.

Keywords: brain-circuits, behaviour, monkeys, lesions, inactivations, optogenetics


Introduction

Our vision and that of all primates is a continuous interaction between input from the retina to the brain and eye movements produced by the brain. Primate vision relies on input from the central region of the retina, the fovea, the retinal region that provides the highest spatial resolution. It is this high-resolution vision that is critical for examination of all objects of interest. This fovea in turn requires eye movements that direct it sequentially to different parts of the visual field to examine one object after another. For this purpose, we have a specific type of eye movement, the saccade, that rapidly redirects the fovea. These saccades occur at a high rate, frequently two or three per second, which provides new and detailed visual information to the brain at that same rate. Saccades also produce problems for vision: the image of an object lying on one part of the retina suddenly lies on another part after each saccade, and during the high-speed saccade the image from the retina is a blur. Brain mechanisms have developed to compensate for these displacements in ways only roughly understood. This process of eye movement manipulated visual input has been termed active vision, and it is a functional amalgamation of visual processing and eye movement control. It is a complex system but it must be working well, given that primates have become the dominant vertebrate species on the planet.

What we want to understand is how circuits in the brain underlying the visual–oculomotor system are organized to produce this active vision, which is probably the most prominent and the most extensive sensory-motor system in the primate brain. It consists of systems comprising multiple types of visual processing and eye movements, but here we will consider only the visual and saccadic eye movement division of these systems. This saccadic system extends from the highest cognitive levels of the frontal and parietal cortex to the motor neurons in the brainstem. provides a global outline of the system. In addition to generating saccades, the system also provides information to other brain regions to inform them of the impending visual changes that result from the saccades.


Dissecting brain circuits for active vision: the role of perturbation

The challenge is to dissect out the brain circuits that are related to the integration of vision and eye movements from the myriad circuits in the brain. For example, how do we know that a neuron activated by a visual stimulus is in a circuit for object recognition, targeting the next saccade, or dilating the pupil? The primary method to identify these circuits is to perturb them to test whether and how alterations change behaviour. By circuit I mean a series of connected neurons, or a population of neurons, that are required to execute a given behaviour. I realize this is a glib definition, but it is consistent with the level of our current knowledge; few circuits in the brain have been worked out in detail so that evaluating the definition is part of the problem in studying ‘brain circuits'.

Examining a brain circuit and its relation to behaviour moves through a series of steps, though rarely in such a neat order as described here. The first step has been to determine the anatomical connections that might underlie a particular function. Many of the major pathways in the visual system have been known from the early twentieth century from anatomical studies and evoked visual potentials. Information about the oculomotor output became available in the middle of the twentieth century when neuronal activity studied in awake animals could be added to anatomical knowledge. Critical details are still lacking, but unfortunately anatomy has currently fallen out of funding favour, and most of the gaps are unlikely to be closed soon. Once connections are identified, the functional contribution to active vision can be considered, although on the basis of anatomy alone, these are largely guesses.

The second step is to correlate neuronal activity at different nodes of a putative neuronal circuit to a particular behaviour, from the visual input to the eye movement output, but with concentration on the vast processing in between. The earliest studies usually began with neurons of known anatomical connections on the input side (from retina though the lateral geniculate nucleus to visual cortex) and on the output side (from a few brainstem nuclei to motor neurons to eye muscles). The next step is estimating the function of these neurons, and here the prime method is correlating neuronal activity to visual behaviour, using both psychophysical measures of visual processing and motor performance measures of eye movements. This approach was the basis of the initial investigations of the visual system such as those of Kuffler in the retina and Hubel and Wiesel in the cortex of anaesthetized cats and monkeys, though of course the resulting behaviour was hypothesized not measured. The same correlation approach was later used by Wurtz in awake monkeys trained to hold their eyes steady for several seconds to allow analysis of neuronal receptive fields. In the oculomotor system, the comparable initial correlations were between motor neurons in the oculomotor nuclei and saccadic eye movements. The most difficult problem, however, has been relating the vast majority of the neurons that are neither at the input nor the output but that comprise the processing that lies between.

The third step is the most challenging: showing that a given visual–oculomotor activity is necessary for active vision and not some other function such as adjusting pupil size. This step is usually done by perturbing the system. We predict what should happen to behaviour when we either reduce or enhance the activity of a given element in a brain circuit. We then test the prediction by experimentally reducing or enhancing it to see whether the result is consistent with the prediction. Correlations hint at the functions of circuits, but they do not establish them. By perturbing the system the effect on behaviour can be assessed, and the element perturbed can be identified as one that does or does not contribute to the behaviour of interest. The sharper the prediction, the more precise the functional answer. Without this step of perturbation, we have only a catalogue of connections and a collection of correlations. Perturbation moves the understanding of neuronal activity from correlation closer to causality and has been the essential step in relating neuronal activity to active vision.

In this article, I will describe the series of perturbation approaches that have solidified our knowledge of the visual–oculomotor system underlying active vision in the monkey. The easiest way to describe the evolution of this approach is to describe the techniques in roughly historical order, and then illustrate them with example applications. As these are just examples, many will be from my own work, particularly those on the saccadic system. I trace not only the succession of techniques but what advances each provided and what the drawbacks were that led to the adoption of new techniques.


Ablations

Much of our initial knowledge of the visual–oculomotor functions resulted from observing the consequences of brain lesions. Humans who had suffered vascular accidents or trauma provided essentially all the information that was available. The limitation of these observations on humans was substantial; knowledge of lesion location within the brain was frequently lacking and only limited measures of behavioural deficits were performed. In the second half of the nineteenth century, this began to change as experimental animals came into use, mainly cats and dogs, but some monkeys as well.

An illustration of the importance of this new approach can be appreciated by recognizing one of the major early achievements of animal research: locating the primary visual cortex (V1). Ferrier in England had done ablations in the monkey cortex and concluded that V1 was located in the parietal lobe in the region of the angular gyrus. Monkeys with such lesions had a blank stare and ran into objects as they were led about the room. The conclusion was highly controversial because Munk in Berlin argued that lesions in the occipital cortex, rather than the parietal cortex, led to blindness. A spirited controversy followed, and as we now know, Munk was right and the possible reasons for Ferrier's error have been fully summarized by Glickstein. The reason this controversy is important for our purposes is that it illustrates a potential pitfall of using the technique. The changes in an animal's behaviour had to be systematically analysed just as the ablations had to be systematically placed in the brain. The resolution of the visual cortex controversy was based largely on better analysis of the behaviour demonstrating blindness (including recovery from the lesion that we will address later). The quantitative measure of behaviour is as important to the perturbation method as is the placement of brain lesion, if not more so. The central importance of the measurement of behaviour will persist through all of the uses of perturbation that we consider.

The use of experimental animals in ablation experiments incorporated at least two anatomical advances: specific structures could be removed and the extent of the removal could be verified post-mortem, including histological verification. For cerebral cortex, the most frequent ablation technique has been subpial suction of the cortical grey matter which can be extended over substantial regions of cortex depending upon the skill and the perseverance of the surgeon. A frequent technique for subcortical ablations has been electrolytic lesion that largely kills cells by the heat generated by electric current passing though the brain. Here, the lesion was less predictable because current spreads and can expand a lesion in unexpected directions, as was the case with some early electrolytic lesions of the superior colliculus (SC).

With the advent of neural recording, including evoked potentials, electroencephalography, and eventually single neurons, the lesions could be more accurately directed to those regions with known relations to a specific visuomotor behaviour. Furthermore, with the advent of imaging, a good estimate of the brain areas affected can be obtained while the subject is still alive.

A further example of the evolution of these techniques in the visuomotor system is the growth of knowledge on the organization and function of V1. The first information resulted from unplanned ablations: gunshot wounds studied following the Russo-Japanese war. By mapping visual field defects, a Japanese physician, Inowe, was able to establish an outline of the relation of different parts of the visual field to specific segments of visual cortex. When experimental animals were used, the mapping could be refined by using evoked responses and later neuronal activity to precisely map the visual field in V1 of anaesthetized cats and later in anaesthetized monkeys. In the awake monkey, subpial suction of V1 led to deficits in detection of briefly flashed stimuli in the regions of the contralateral visual fields just as expected. The monkey also could not make accurate saccades to targets in the contralateral fields, a deficit that was interpreted as ‘if you can't see it, you can't make a saccade to it’. Similar deficits in vision and in saccades were found in subsequent ablation experiments in V1.

What was less expected is a factor that is a major limitation of many ablation studies: both visual detection and saccade deficits gradually decrease, so that after a month or two, spots that could not be detected just after the ablation now could be seen, and saccades could be made to these targets. As the removed area of visual cortex is still not there, this can only indicate that pathways other than the one through thalamus to V1 are able to provide visual information. This recovered ability might well be related to the phenomenon of blindsight in which human subjects with extensive damage to visual cortex can respond to stimuli in the ‘blind’ visual field. What other brain regions provide the recovery after a cortical ablation is frequently difficult to determine, but in the case of recovery after ablation of V1, the structure that contributes heavily is well known: the SC. Mohler & Wurtz found that damage from electrolytic lesions of the SC alone did not produce a visual detection deficit or more than a transient saccade deficit. But ablation of both V1 and SC led to complete blindness in the part of the visual field where the effect of the lesions overlapped—for both visual detection and saccadic accuracy. This observation is the root of the hypothesis that what can be seen in blindsight (the ability for partial vision in an otherwise blind visual field) might be based in large part on what visual information can be derived from the SC via its pathways to cerebral cortex.

The major point to emphasize, however, is that recovery of sight in the monkey is a recovery that occurs over time after the ablation. So when the monkey's visuomotor ability continues to be studied after the ablation, two factors are actually being studied. The first is the loss of a function from the lesion, and the second is change in other brain areas that enable them to assume at least part of the function of the ablated brain. What is studied after an ablation is not a stationary process, but one that is constantly changing due the compensation mediated by other brain areas.

The interaction between brain areas after ablations is further illustrated by the finding that extending a single lesion to lesions of multiple brain areas need not create a greater deficit. The classic illustration of this is the Sprague effect. Removal of occipito-temporal cortex of a cat leads to reduced orientation to the contralateral visual field as expected. The surprise is that removal of the SC contralateral to the cortical ablation restores the orientation to the visual field that had appeared to be blind. Vision was restored by taking out additional brain. The explanation of this has been pursued over the last half century and has revealed the interactions between multiple brain areas, as has been recently summarized.

The significance of cortical ablations and electrolytic lesions is that they provided the first tests of the relation of cortical and subcortical areas to visuomotor activity. The original method for establishing the relation of a brain structure to behaviour is still a cornerstone technique in neuroscience in large part because of subsequent refinements. A major drawback is that as behaviour is studied following the ablations, it is a combination of the lesion deficit and the constantly changing recovery from that deficit.


Chemical lesions

Injection of neuro-active chemicals to produce a lesion addresses the problems of the interaction between lesion deficit and its recovery by measuring behaviour before there is time for recovery. The injections are small, usually done with a microliter syringe, and can be made on one day and the behavioural effect tested on the next day. The day wait follows from the fact that the neuro-active chemicals are killing neurons, and their effect is usually not instantaneous. Waiting until the process is closer to being complete avoids studying behaviour when there might be transient activity, such as a hyperactivity preceding neuron death. In addition to behavioural measurement soon after the lesion, a significant advantage of the chemical lesion over the surgical or electrolytic ones, is that the injection can be precisely directed by first locating the target area with neuronal recording. The precision can be increased further by verifying the location of the injection by concurrent recording from an electrode attached to the injection syringe. Finally, the chemical lesions leave a record of their location for future histology. This location also is relatively easy to determine because the integrity of the layered or nuclear structure is maintained. Only the damaged neurons are removed from the structure.

An example of such a chemical lesion, one produced by ibotenic acid, comes from injections into the cerebral cortex, specifically the motion areas in the middle temporal cortex (MT) by Newsome et al.. The injection affected a limited part of the visual field and the behavioural purpose was to test whether MT provided the directional motion information required to guide smooth pursuit. It did. The monkey's initial saccade to the moving pursuit target did not adjust for the motion of the target and the initial pursuit eye speed that results from visual motion input was reduced by the ibotenic acid lesion. The punctate lesion demonstrated the dependence of pursuit movement on the motion processing in one extrastriate area, MT. As in the lesion experiments we have considered in V1 and MT, the behavioural deficits recovered. Within about a week, the pursuit had recovered; the best tests of the deficit were on the day after the chemical lesion. The site of the injection was clearly determinable from the subsequent histology. This example emphasizes an added advantage of a chemical lesion; the adjacent structure beyond the area of damage continues to show the cortical lamination in MT. With that structure intact, the extent of damage to specific layers can be assessed.

In net, the advantage of chemical lesions is the minimization of any recovery before a behavioural measurement is made, and the precise localization and the histological verification of the site of neuronal removal. The major disadvantage is that the lesion persists and is present in all subsequent experiments on the particular monkey. An additional disadvantage is the time it may take for the lesion effect to develop and so, in principle, some recovery of function could occur before the injection effect is measured.


Reversible inactivations

The problems of permanent damage to the animal with a chemical lesion are solved by the use of reversible inactivation. Injections using such agents as transmitter agonists or antagonists (for example muscimol or bicuculine for GABAA receptors) produce reversible inactivations so that the effect on behaviour can be determined immediately. In addition, complete recovery within a day or so leaves an intact monkey (except for any damage from recording electrodes or the injection syringe). The first place where the efficacy of these reversible lesions was used in the visuomotor system was in the SC with the behavioural test being its effect on saccade generation. The original electrolytic lesions of SC by Wurtz & Goldberg produced surprisingly limited deficits, mainly a consistent increase in saccade latency and a transient increase in variability of saccade amplitudes. This was a surprise because the injections were made in the midst of neurons that discharged before saccades, neurons that were arranged in an orderly map within the SC to produce the vectors required for saccade generation. The role of the SC in saccade generation was reassessed when Hikosaka and Wurtz made reversible lesions in SC that were induced by microlitre injections of muscimol. The use of muscimol was inspired by the previous findings of a GABAergic projection from substantia nigra to SC; the SC neurons must therefore have the appropriate receptors. It was also one of the first experiments in the visuomotor system that used reversible inactivation in an awake monkey. In the SC, the inactivation produced the previously seen increases in saccade latency but also large changes in peak saccadic velocity and in the amplitude and direction of saccades, particularly to target locations that had to be remembered. The interpretation of this far greater effect by inactivation than by lesion was that the deficits with muscimol were tested within minutes of the inactivation rather than after a lapse of days for electrolytic lesions. Activation of neurons was also achieved by using the GABAA antagonist, bicuculine, that produced irrepressible saccades to one part of the visual field even though the monkey was being rewarded for maintaining visual fixation. Both a decrease and an increase in activity were produced by different drugs acting on the same receptor.

It is worth noting that the GABAA agonists and antagonists (muscimol and bicuculine) seem to act on the input to the SC neurons rather than directly on the output of the neurons and probably not on fibres of passage; the threshold for eliciting saccades with electrical stimulation of the neurons affected by these GABAA receptor drugs did not increase. By contrast, use of an anaesthetic such as lidocaine did raise the threshold indicating an effect on the output axons. The anaesthetic also affects any fibres of passage, whereas muscimol probably does not, and lasts minutes not hours.

Reversible inactivations in cerebral cortex are generally more difficult than those in subcortical areas such as those described for the SC because the area of cortex modified must be larger and across a relatively thin sheet of cortex to effectively alter behaviour. One solution is to make multiple injections spaced so that there is overlap between the separate injections. Another approach is to use the cooling of neurons to suppress their activity, which is obviously reversible. Using this technique, larger areas of cortex can be inactivated than by localized injections.

The general point of the reversible inactivations is that they change behaviour almost immediately after an injection so that compensation for any deficit is minimized. Inactivation reveals the deficit, not the compensation. The very recovery we value so highly because we still have an intact trained monkey at the end of the experiment also unfortunately has the disadvantage of leaving little indication of the location and extent of the inactivated area. Determination of the inactivation location requires marking lesions near the injection site, and evaluating the spread of the injection requires comparing injection effects across a series of injection sites.


Electrical stimulation

The perturbations considered so far usually have been designed to test the contribution of a particular population of neurons to a specific behaviour by removing neurons from a brain circuit. The opposite approach is to enhance the output of a circuit by injecting a signal into it at a given time and a given place in the circuit. A few neuro-active chemicals (such as bicuculine) can provide the selective place activation but not the timing; once the chemical is in the brain, it continues to act at least for minutes. In fact, one of the earliest stimulation experiments on the SC was done by Apter in 1945. Using strychnine to stimulate the surface of the SC, she activated neurons and determined the representation of the visual field across the surface of the SC. Electrical stimulation, in contrast to chemical stimulation, provides added temporal control, it has been widely used for perturbing vision and evoking eye movements. The stimulus can be turned on and off rapidly, and pulsed to approximate a normal train of neuronal impulses. It has been the major technique used to provide temporal control of neuronal activity. The major drawback is that the electrical stimulation probably activates neurons that normally are never activated together, and this might generate an ambiguity at downstream targets of the stimulated area.

Early examples of the use of stimulation can again be found in the SC. After neurons that discharged before saccades had been discovered, the issue was whether these neurons contributed to the generation of a saccade or were conveying a corollary of the saccade. By electrically stimulating these neurons, Schiller & Stryker were able to show that the neurons were driving saccades (a). With SC stimulation, saccades were directed to the same part of the visual field represented by the visual receptive fields of the stimulated neurons. The question of the generation of a corollary discharge by the SC, in addition to saccade generation was simply not asked by investigators at the time. That question was first addressed much later first by Sparks and co-workers and then by Sommer & Wurtz.

One of the most striking uses of SC stimulation was by Robinson who systematically stimulated at different points within the SC (b). From the direction and amplitude of the evoked saccades, he was able to derive the orderly map of the representation saccades in the primate SC. The map has become an icon in the field, and has consistently been confirmed and elaborated by other investigators.

Another frequent use of electrical stimulation has been to test the connections of one set of neurons to another set within a putative neuronal circuit—a key step in trying to identify circuits in the brain. This is a classic physiological technique, but its application to identifying circuits in awake monkeys is relatively recent, particularly in the visuomotor system. The goal in using the technique is to determine the inputs to neurons by determining whether given source neurons provide input to a set of target neurons (using orthodromic stimulation of the source neurons and recording the action potentials in the target neurons) and whether that group of neurons is the source of input to the next set of target neurons presumed to lie in the circuit (using antidromic stimulation of these presumed target neurons and recording the action potentials in the previous set of neurons). The advantage of the technique is that it moves the anatomical description of a presumed circuit to the reality of an identified circuit. The major disadvantage of the technique is that it is difficult to execute: there is no conclusion from negative results. In order to draw any conclusion about either orthodromic or antidromic connections, the stimulation must activate neurons. Lack of activation tells nothing because the failure could be related to multiple causes. The technique has been most successful when both the source neurons and the target neurons fall on a retinotopic map and the recording points for both source and target locations are in the same part of the map. Slight deviations in the position of the stimulation points produce nothing but unbearable frustration. Examples of the successful use of the technique is in establishing the pathway from the SC movement neurons through the medial dorsal nucleus of thalamus to frontal eye field neurons and from SC visual neurons through the inferior pulvinar to MT in parietal cortex. The technique is a powerful one, but it is probably worth the considerable effort primarily when attempting to establishing the functional connectivity needed to establish a brain circuit. This is a case where an optogenetic approach (considered below) might produce critical simplifications. Substituting light stimulation for electrical stimulation might allow light to cover a larger area, facilitate adequate stimulation alignment, and even permit stimulating only a subset of neurons that have had a light sensitive construct placed in their membranes.

In summary, electrical stimulation has been one of the most widely used methods to establish the relation of neurons to behaviour in the visual–oculomotor system and to establish the relation between neurons within hypothesized brain circuits. Its strength is the precise timing of the stimulation. Its drawback is that it is likely to be activating groups of neurons that are rarely associated in normal physiological functioning. This problem is a particularly confounding one for electrical stimulation, but it in fact applies in varying degrees to all of the perturbation techniques considered.


Perturbing neurons with optogenetics

The developing approach to perturbation referred to as optogenetics has the potential to speed the obsolescence of the perturbation methods summarized so far. Optogenetics provides a method to turn on or turn off neurons for brief periods by activating a photosensitive construct inserted into the neuronal membrane. The construct is usually fused to a fluorescent protein such as GFP in an adenoassociated virus (AAV) with an appropriate promoter. The virus is injected into a brain region and the virus installs the photosensitive construct (for an ion pump or ion channel) into the neuronal membrane. Shining a light onto the neuron, at a wavelength specific to the construct, either depolarizes or hyperpolarizes the membrane depending on the construct inserted into the membrane. Excitation of neurons is produced, for example, by a channelrhodopsin, which when activated opens a channel through the membrane to produce excitation. Inhibition is produced, for example, by ArchT that acts by pumping protons across the membrane to produce inhibition. As this is written, the expansion and refinements of the technique are continuing and the technique is a promising one rather than a fully developed one. Stay tuned.

In the visuomotor system of the monkey, two initial tests illustrate the potential power of the technique. In the visual system, activation of neurons in V1 led monkeys to shift their gaze towards the receptive field of neurons that were optically activated. The activation was driven by channel-rhodopsin-2-expressing neurons. Light for activation was provided by an optic fibre on the surface of the dura. In the SC, the technique was tested on the saccade-related neurons to test whether their optogenetic inactivation would produce deficits in saccade generation. An AAV virus carrying ArchT was injected into the intermediate layers of the SC where the saccade-related neurons are located. An optic fibre with an attached recording electrode for localization (an optrode as opposed to an injectrode) was inserted into the saccade-related neurons. As ArchT hyperpolarizes neurons, it should act on saccades like the reversible inactivations produced by muscimol. As illustrated by the sample inactivation in, the change in the saccades with inhibition is what we would expect from knowledge of the previous muscimol experiments: the amplitude of the saccade was reduced or shifted, the latency was increased and the peak velocity was reduced. So the optogenetic perturbation produced the same effects as muscimol, but the effects were substantially smaller. Size of effect is important because of the requirement in most cases that many neurons must be altered to produce clear changes in behaviour. In hindsight, the small size of the behavioural change is not surprising because ArchT produces membrane potential changes by using a proton pump rather than the more robust opening of a channel, a problem that is being addressed. A related issue is whether the volume of neurons sensitive to light can be sufficiently increased so that adequate light reaches enough neurons to modify behaviour. This is particularly important in deep structures where the size and number of optic fibres for light delivery is limited.

Even with the limitations of the present techniques, however, there are several salient advantages to the optogenetic method. First and most important is the interleaving of control and experimental trials, trials without the light and those with. This allows comparison of experimental and control trials with only seconds between them compared with chemical inactivations in which control trials frequently are in separate blocks and an hour away from the experimental trials at best. It is the ultimate elimination of any ambiguous results due to recovery! More importantly, it avoids the inevitable effects of changes in monkey performance as the testing session progresses, an effect that differentially alters whatever block of trials comes last. Second, optogenetic inactivation over a series of trials is nearly constant compared with the drug injections that are always changing due to the spread of the drug and its continuing degradation. Third, localized inactivation can be moved about to different locations within the region of transfected neurons simply by moving the optrode. Within what must be a gradient of transfection, the area activated or inactivated can be small enough to produce precise effects. Finally, given that the virus introduces the constructs into the membranes of the axons as well as the cell bodies, the projections from one area to another also should be not only visible but subject to selective activation and inactivation. The probability is that future advances will make the activation and inactivation of specific neuron types and selected neuronal connections possible, in some cases even in monkeys.

The net point is that the optogenetic technique is a more powerful technique for perturbing a system within the brain than any of the current techniques summarized here. All techniques arrive on the scene with parameters to be tested and limitations to be established and optogenetics is no exception. But these issues will be resolved just as they have been for the other perturbation techniques. Even if only some of these advances in the technique occur, optogenetic perturbations will certainly revolutionize the study of systems in the brain, at least for the visuomotor systems in the monkey.


Conclusion

Perturbation of the visual–oculomotor system underlying our active vision has been one of the key methods for establishing the relation of neurons to behaviour. Many of the same techniques have been used as well to determine the relation between neurons within the brain as we attempt to identify the neuronal circuits in the brain that underlie the visual–motor behaviour. Without the perturbation step, we have just a correlation between neurons and behaviour or between one set of neurons and another. With perturbation, we can establish that given neurons are causally related to a given behaviour or to succeeding neuronal activity. Perturbation is a key part of what makes systems neuroscience an experimental science rather than an observational one.

The perturbation techniques have been a major contributor to making the visual–oculomotor system one of the best understood in the brain. Reviewing the prominent methods of perturbation used over the last century provides a snapshot of the evolution of techniques, from both cortical and subcortical ablations, to chemical lesions, to reversible inactivations, and finally to electrical stimulation. The story has a happy future in that the optogenetic techniques on the horizon promise to expand the perturbation method to more easily dissect out neuronal circuits within the brain and relate them to specific visual–motor behaviour.


Playing the electric light orchestra—how electrical stimulation of visual cortex elucidates the neural basis of perception

Nela Cicmil, Kristine Krug — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4528818, CC BY 4.0.

Vision research has the potential to reveal fundamental mechanisms underlying sensory experience. Causal experimental approaches, such as electrical microstimulation, provide a unique opportunity to test the direct contributions of visual cortical neurons to perception and behaviour. But in spite of their importance, causal methods constitute a minority of the experiments used to investigate the visual cortex to date. We reconsider the function and organization of visual cortex according to results obtained from stimulation techniques, with a special emphasis on electrical stimulation of small groups of cells in awake subjects who can report their visual experience. We compare findings from humans and monkeys, striate and extrastriate cortex, and superficial versus deep cortical layers, and identify a number of revealing gaps in the ‘causal map′ of visual cortex. Integrating results from different methods and species, we provide a critical overview of the ways in which causal approaches have been used to further our understanding of circuitry, plasticity and information integration in visual cortex. Electrical stimulation not only elucidates the contributions of different visual areas to perception, but also contributes to our understanding of neuronal mechanisms underlying memory, attention and decision-making.


Introduction

The visual cortex is perhaps the most thoroughly investigated of any brain system in mammals. In primates, visual cortex has been delineated into more than 30 distinct areas based on their anatomical and functional properties. Research into visual cortical function reveals fundamental mechanisms underlying perceptual experience and also has the potential to improve our treatment of disorders such as amblyopia, blindness and visual hallucinations. Prominent methods currently used to investigate the function of visual cortex are often correlational and include neuroimaging, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and electrophysiological techniques, such as single cell neurophysiology. fMRI is very useful for measuring changes in activity throughout the entire human brain that can be correlated with perception and behaviour. However, its spatial and temporal resolution is too low to reveal functional properties of individual neurons or small groups of cells, and it measures blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) responses which are only indirectly coupled to neuronal firing. In neurophysiological recording, an electrode is inserted into the brain to directly measure the firing of neurons, individually or in small groups. This activity is correlated with simultaneous visual stimulation or perceptual reports to infer the information represented by neuronal firing.

It is often assumed that information represented in neuronal activity necessarily contributes to visual perception and informs behaviour. However, some neurons might echo information that is not used at downstream processing levels. One example is consistent neural tuning in visual cortex to anti-correlated binocular disparities that do not lead to a coherent visual depth percept. In order to infer a direct contribution of the information represented by neuronal firing to perception, it is necessary to use causal experimental interventions. Demonstrating that direct interference in the firing patterns of the candidate neurons leads to a measureable change in the perceptual responses of the viewer is one of seven empirical criteria proposed to support a critical link between neurons and perception.

Causal experimental interventions for investigating the visual system include electrical microstimulation, lesion studies, transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). Electrical stimulation of visual cortex involves the introduction of electrical current into a small cortical region through an electrode placed on the cortical surface or a microelectrode inserted into cortical matter. The current reversibly activates neurons in the vicinity of the electrode to fire action potentials. The size of the activated region is affected by the type of electrode used and the strength of stimulation. Lesion studies involve observing the effect of removing a particular brain area. These can provide a causal link between cortical areas and specific visual functions, but are irreversible and results can vary between individuals and change over time. TMS and tDCS are non-invasive approaches used to modulate neural activity, via electromagnetic induction from a coil placed on the scalp or electrical currents from scalp surface electrodes, respectively. TMS and tDCS have helped advance our understanding of sensorimotor function and multi-sensory integration, also involving vision (for a review see Yau et al.). However, electrical stimulation approaches have proved to be the most powerful tool for establishing a direct contribution of neuronal activity at different levels of visual processing to visual perception and cognition in a reversible and controlled way.

General principles of neural mechanisms for cognition and behaviour as revealed by causal approaches have been comprehensively reviewed elsewhere. In this article, we consider the perceptual functions of visual cortex in primates as revealed by causal intervention methods with a special emphasis on the direct activation of small groups of visual cortical neurons. We explore a number of themes that become apparent when comparing results from human and non-human primates, striate and extrastriate cortex, and superficial versus deep cortical layers. We discuss why it works to ‘mix’ visual and electrical stimulation in cortex and what a significant number of unexplained gaps in the ‘causal map’ of visual cortex tells us about visual processing and perception. This leads to new questions and insights about the interaction between visual cortical activity, causal experimental approaches and perception.


Humans and monkeys detect electrical stimulation of visual cortex

Different visual cortical areas have been investigated with electrical stimulation by measuring the threshold current required for stimulation detection or by documenting the nature of the percept evoked by supra-threshold stimulation. These studies apply electrical stimulation without any specific simultaneous visual input.


Electrical stimulation of visual cortex in humans

Electrical stimulation of visual cortex in humans has the potential to reveal the distinct functional contribution of specific cortical regions to visual perception since humans can report their induced perceptual experiences. Since the surgery necessary for direct electrical stimulation comes with risk of infection and cortical damage, it is unethical to perform stimulation experiments on typical human volunteers. Neurological patients who already undergo surgical treatment for electrode placement, e.g. for localization of epileptic foci or for tumour resection, constitute an important potential participant group for cortical stimulation. For example, temporal lobe epilepsy is a common form of localized epilepsy, and as a result extrastriate visual areas located in the temporal lobe have been accessed for stimulation experiments. Another important potential participant group are visually impaired individuals who volunteer to test electrical visual prostheses implanted in cortex, usually in area V1 and neighbouring regions. Notwithstanding possible differences in activity between typical, healthy brains and those with neuropathology, patients' reports of their experiences under stimulation have revealed perceptual effects of activating particular groups of neurons in visual cortex.


Electrical stimulation of area V1 in humans

Cortical surface stimulation of the human occipital pole in the region of the calcarine fissure, the location of area V1 and other early visual areas, results in the sensation of light, called a phosphene, described as ‘like a star in the sky’ (a). Locations of phosphenes with respect to the stimulating electrode agree with retinotopic maps of the visual field in cortex, and patients report that phosphenes move in the direction of voluntary eye movements, demonstrating the retinocentric representation of space in early visual areas. Phosphenes are reported to be around 1 mm in diameter and can be elicited by current levels between 1 and 5 mA (methodological parameters are summarized in). Substantial supra-threshold stimulation sometimes produces a second phosphene that follows a mapping pattern reflected about the horizontal meridian, the horizontal midline across the visual field. One interpretation of this effect is that higher currents can spread to neighbouring regions of cortex, for example, from dorsal to ventral V1. Overall, the electrical stimulation of area V1 reliably induces perception of retinotopically organized simple light sensations.

Descriptions of perceived phosphenes, however, are not uniform across volunteers. In most cases, phosphenes were round, but occasionally patients have reported elongated phosphenes ‘like half a matchstick at arm's length’. Some studies reported a lack of colour sensation upon stimulation, while in other cases the chromatic effects of phosphenes were vivid reds, blues or greens or ‘unreal’ colours, described as being ‘from another world’. Some of these differences could be due to on-going cortical changes after deprivation of sight in blind patients, or differences in electrode placement, stimulation patterns or local cortical circuitry.

An alternative to electrical stimulation with electrodes placed on the cortical surface are stimulation microelectrodes inserted into the cortical matter—allowing finer control of the precise location of the current injection. When such ‘microstimulation’ of the occipital pole was applied through intracortical microelectrodes, reported phosphene sensations were very similar to those elicited with surface electrodes: small, light, simple forms, which were either whitish-yellow or brightly coloured. Current thresholds required to produce phosphenes by intracortical microstimulation are 10–100 times lower than those required for non-penetrating surface stimulation (methodological parameters are summarized in); stable detection thresholds can be reached at below 50 µA.


Electrical stimulation of extrastriate visual cortex in humans

In contrast to area V1 and its immediately neighbouring regions near the occipital pole, it is generally more difficult to evoke detectable sensations with electrical stimulation of extrastriate visual areas using surface electrodes. Even when detectable sensations are elicited, reports differ regarding the content of the evoked sensation. In some studies, patients reported sensations of ‘complex forms’, such as faces or visual scenes from memory, while in other studies only simple form sensations, such as phosphenes or colour spots, were evoked (a). The circuitry of visual areas further downstream may generally support more complex electrical activity patterns that cannot be readily induced by focal electrical stimulation. We discuss in §2b(i) how these differences in evoked percept might arise from anatomical and functional differences between primary and extrastriate visual cortex in both the human and non-human primate brain.

In cases where a detectable sensation could be elicited from stimulation of higher visual areas in humans, the current threshold for detection at that site is similar to thresholds found in early visual areas, suggesting that there might be particular regions of extrastriate visual cortex that naturally support more focal activation patterns similar to those induced by electrical stimulation. Earlier studies of human extrastriate cortical stimulation, which include reports of sensations of complex forms, generally used lower stimulation frequencies (50 Hz) than more recent studies that reported only simple phosphenes (200 Hz). Further research is required to understand how different electrical stimulation patterns might potentially lead to different percepts.

Crucial to linking cortical processing to perception, in some studies, neuronal response properties were characterized at the stimulated cortical site, and shown to relate to the evoked perceptual sensation. Allison et al. recorded visually evoked potentials (VEPs) from chronically implanted cortical surface electrodes placed over occipital and temporal cortex of patients with epilepsy. They found a significant colour adaptation-related VEP response over the lateral lingual and fusiform gyri, which upon electrical stimulation sometimes evoked colour sensations. Nearby regions, such as the medial lingual or cuneate gyri, did not show significant VEP adaptation responses to colour, and electrical stimulation evoked only monochrome phosphenes. Similarly, Murphey et al. stimulated an electrode placed over the anterior colour centre (putative area V4α, mesial fusiform gyrus), localized with BOLD fMRI, of a patient with epilepsy. The patient reported that electrical stimulation evoked a percept of a ‘blue, purple colour’, and subsequent local field potentials recorded with the same electrode showed the greatest response to blue-purple colour. This demonstrates a close link between selectivity for visual stimuli and contribution to colour perception of small sections of ventral temporal cortex.

It has not been possible, however, to demonstrate such tight links across multiple experiments in all cases. One investigation of face-selective regions in ventral temporal cortex, identified by face-specific N200 event-related potentials, showed that upon stimulation two-thirds of such sites either evoked face-related hallucinations or transiently disrupted patients' ability to name familiar faces. But in another study, stimulation of an electrode placed over the fusiform face area (FFA) in ventral temporal cortex either failed to produce a percept when stimulated, or evoked only a simple phosphene. These differing results may be due to individual differences in extrastriate function between patients. But, they might also reveal current limitations in our understanding and control of the effects of direct electrical stimulation on the volume of brain tissue below a cortical surface electrode, particularly in the absence of intracortical microelectrode data from extrastriate visual cortex (a), which can specifically activate smaller groups of neurons and therefore provide more control.

Since causal stimulation approaches require specific, rare patient populations, the time available to test human volunteers is dictated by clinical demands and is therefore limited. It is often not possible to perform fully controlled psychophysical studies on multiple volunteers. Brain regions available for testing are limited by the type of neuropathology and the surgical access that is indicated for the particular patient. For example, apart from in early cortex-wide stimulation experiments, dorsal visual areas such as V3A and hMT+ have not been specifically investigated using electrical stimulation methods in humans. Therefore, there is a ‘gap’ in the causal map of human visual cortex (a). Under the ‘dual stream hypothesis’ of vision, dorsal visual stream areas are concerned with vision for control of movement and visual motion perception. However, in the only electrical stimulation study in which patients reported moving phosphenes, the visual areas involved were mainly medial or ventral, rather than dorsal. It is also possible that in that study the perceived motion was due to eye movements, which were not measured (eye movement recordings would help to interpret human visual cortical stimulation studies more generally). Therefore, electrical stimulation studies in humans have to date provided little evidence for the dual stream hypothesis.

Overall, electrically stimulating early visual cortex in humans elicits reliably simple visual phosphenes in the predicted retinotopic location, but evidence for complex visual percepts from electrical stimulation is limited. While significant practical and ethical constraints provide challenges for such experimentations, crucial experiments remain to be done to reveal how cortical signals give rise to specific sensory experiences.


Electrical stimulation of visual cortex in non-human primates

Owing to the inherent limitations of studies with human patient volunteers, non-human primates have also been used in electrical stimulation detection studies. In detection tasks, animals report the presence or absence of electrical stimulation within a given time period, for example, by pressing a lever or making an eye movement (saccade) to an appropriate target. Intracortical microelectrodes, rarely used in human studies, can be used with animal models. Early studies that stimulated sites throughout cortex used currents of up to 1 mA, while more recent studies that focus on the primary visual cortex (V1) in well-trained animals tend to stimulate within a much lower range of 1 to 50 µA (see for a summary of methodological parameters).


Detection of electrical stimulation of visual cortex in non-human primates

With little prior training to recognize electrical stimulation, rhesus monkeys can reliably detect strong electrical stimulation of area V1. However, extensive training, numbering over thousands of trials, is necessary to achieve stable low detection thresholds (i.e. below 50 µA) at V1 sites and to reliably detect electrical microstimulation in extrastriate areas (b). This resembles the pattern found in humans, described above.

In both humans and monkeys, such differences in detectability of electrical stimulation in primary versus extrastriate visual cortex are likely to be related to differences in anatomical and functional connectivity. In the rhesus macaque, extrastriate visual areas show a more extended pattern of intrinsic horizontal connectivity. Although individual axons in area V1 can be up to 8 mm long, clusters of monosynaptically connected cells tend to be less than 4.5 mm apart (a). In extrastriate visual areas, however, directly connected clusters of neurons can be more than 10 mm apart and such clusters tend to be more widely spaced (b). This pattern of local connections is important because it has been suggested that electrical microstimulation directly activates axons in a volume tens of micrometres in diameter. The potentially increasing spatial range, coupled with a decreasing cortical magnification in many higher visual areas relative to V1, could result in a more widespread, less detectable microstimulation effect.

Regarding functional connectivity, area V1 may respond to natural visual input in a spatially and temporally restricted pattern, similar to that induced by artificial stimulation, perhaps reflecting its retinotopic, columnar organization with small receptive fields. Cortical regions higher in the visual processing hierarchy may, on the other hand, support neuronal activity patterns that are more spatially distributed and temporally complex—in other words, quite different from the pattern introduced by artificial stimulation. In the absence of appropriate simultaneous visual stimulation, focal electrical microstimulation of extrastriate cortex might not even lead to significant activation beyond the local area or might lead to widespread inhibition. Baseline firing rates of neurons could also affect how effectively they can be activated by electrical stimulation. For example, in studies with cats, it was found that surface electrical stimulation of regions with high spontaneous activity can result in the inhibition of neural responses, particularly with low current strengths. Such functional differences may underlie whether or not artificial stimulation patterns can effectively propagate action potentials and thus support perception prior to specific detection training.

Experiments measuring detection thresholds for microstimulation applied to different cortical layers of macaque V1 have forged further links between anatomy and stimulation detectability. Current thresholds generally decrease as a function of cortical depth and are lowest in the deepest layers (V and VI), in line with findings in humans. The lower thresholds found for deep layers may depend upon the brain circuits to which neurons in these layers connect. In macaque V1, layers V and VI contain pyramidal cells that project to subcortical nuclei: projections from layer V neurons terminate in the pulvinar, superior colliculus and brainstem centres; layer VI neurons project to the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) (a). Electrical stimulation of the LGN in the macaque is detectable at mean currents of 40 µA without specific detection training. The direct fast feedback loop from V1 deep layers to the LGN and back may therefore magnify the effect of V1 electrical stimulation in a spatially localized fashion via the sensitive LGN, and thus aid detectability. At strong currents, LGN stimulation can also activate the pulvinar, and vice versa, indicating another subcortical pathway that could transmit or even amplify the microstimulation signal to higher brain areas. The efficacy of focal electrical microstimulation may therefore be intrinsically linked to the neuronal projection pattern of different cortical layers.


Training animals to detect electrical stimulation

After extensive detection training, all visual cortical areas in which microstimulation detection has been tested (V1, V2, V3A, V5/MT and inferotemporal cortex, known as IT) have yielded reliable, low detection thresholds. Post-training detection thresholds increase along the visual cortical hierarchy but overall remain relatively low, from around 6 µA in area V1 to 11 µA in area IT. This suggests that neuronal signals of similar magnitude in any part of visual cortex can be accessible to behaviour after sufficient learning and practice.

Local cortical changes with microstimulation detection training appear to occur through a slow process, the time scale of which resembles that of perceptual learning of sensory stimuli. Alternatively, electrical stimulation of extrastriate visual cortex might immediately affect perception, but for some reason, the animal does not report it. This could occur if the induced sensation does not appear task-relevant, for example, if it is qualitatively very different to the visual stimulus to which the animal was exposed during training. Improvement in detection accuracy over time may therefore reflect the animal gradually learning that the qualitatively different sensation is indeed behaviourally relevant for obtaining rewards in the detection task. In any case, the behavioural data does not support a sudden realization that responses should be guided by a qualitatively novel sensation, which would be expected to result in a sudden performance improvement.

In order to investigate the mechanisms by which microstimulation detection thresholds improve, Ni & Maunsell trained monkeys to detect low currents of stimulation of small (3 × 3 mm) V1 sites with a defined receptive field location. After learning to detect currents of 6–10 µA, animals' detection thresholds for visual stimuli placed within the site's receptive field were reciprocally increased. The point has previously been raised that on-going microstimulation could damage neurons near the stimulation site; this may be responsible for the subsequent changes in visual discrimination thresholds. However, after retraining on the visual task, animals' visual thresholds decreased back to baseline levels, while microstimulation detection thresholds reciprocally rose. The recovery of visual detection thresholds suggests that the original decrease was because of reversible synaptic changes. Additionally, for the first V1 sites stimulated in each monkey, the number of trials at which the highest stimulating current (50 µA) was undetectable was greater than for subsequent sites, revealing a small general training effect across area V1 as a whole (discussed in; see also). These results indicate that V1 retains significant plasticity into adulthood, but there appear to be fundamental limitations on the range of different neural activation patterns accessible to behaviour that can be simultaneously supported by the cortical circuitry under a given training regime.

Earlier we saw that detection of artificial stimulation in V1 is different to other visual areas, precisely because detection of strong stimulation is reliable with no prior experience. Nevertheless, it would be interesting to explore how detection (or discrimination) thresholds for tailored visual stimuli versus an artificial microstimulation signal in extrastriate cortex might be reciprocally affected by training. This could provide further insight into the relationship between the patterns of neural activation evoked by microstimulation and by visual processing in these areas. If the difference between natural and focally induced artificial activation patterns were greater for extrastriate visual areas compared with V1, then we would expect learning to take longer and the relative reciprocal decrease in visual discrimination ability after stimulation detection training to be greater for extrastriate areas.


Limitations of stimulation detection experiments in animals

Stimulation detection experiments in non-human primates have provided important information about visual cortical function. However, as for human studies, response properties of the stimulated neurons have not been routinely characterized. In some cases, background multi-unit (MU) activity levels were recorded, while in others, only receptive field locations of stimulated sites were measured (see for details). Detailed information about the tuning properties of stimulation sites would be useful for further interpreting the results of some studies, for example, response properties of microstimulated V1 sites before and after microstimulation detection training in Ni & Maunsell. A decrease in neuronal sensitivity to visual stimulation could explain the increase in visual detection thresholds; a subsequent increase in responsiveness after visual retraining could explain the regaining of sensitivity to visual stimuli. On the other hand, an absence of changes in neuronal responses would suggest that synaptic changes at other brain sites are responsible for the reciprocal detection threshold effect. For example, improved sensitivity to weak visual motion after perceptual learning correlates with changes in motion-driven responses of neurons in sensorimotor lateral intraparietal cortex (area LIP), but not in motion-selective visual cortical area V5/MT.

Another limitation of microstimulation detection studies is that animals usually report only the presence or absence of microstimulation and not the nature of any evoked percept. To our knowledge, only one study directly investigated the perceptual appearance of electrical microstimulation in monkey visual cortex. Monkeys were first trained to compare two different visual targets and to saccade to either the higher contrast or the larger target. One of the visual targets was then replaced by electrical microstimulation of a V1 site with a corresponding receptive field location. Then the contrast and colour of the visual background was systematically changed until the targets evoked by microstimulation ‘disappeared’. Thus, it was revealed that microstimulation evoked the percept of a small spot that was darker than the display background and that ‘microstimulation spots’ were composed of a variety of low contrast colours. However, these results are difficult to reconcile with human reports of bright, strongly coloured phosphenes during stimulation of V1 with intracortical microelectrodes (see §2a). Overall, the contribution that the direct activation of particular cortical regions makes to the visual perceptual experience requires further investigation.

While we do not know enough about the qualitative nature of the artificially evoked sensory experience in monkeys, it is clear that animals can reliably detect electrical microstimulation with small currents in area V1 as well as in extrastriate visual areas, at least with appropriate training (b). The detection training studies in animals showed a reciprocal relationship between thresholds for visually and artificially evoked responses. This suggests that electrical activation of visual cortical neurons may produce a neuronal activity pattern quite different from that evoked by natural viewing of visual stimuli. This might be particularly evident in the context of viewing an unchanging empty background like in many detection studies. Therefore, we need to determine how the neural and visual context in which a cortical site is activated affects information integration and polysynaptic propagation to sensorimotor structures that initiate and control behaviour.


Electrical microstimulation ‘mixed’ with visual stimulation

One way artificial electrical activation of visual neurons has been put into context is through its application at the same time as the presentation of a visual stimulus that is expected to activate the same part of visual cortex, while monkeys perform a perceptual task involving the visual stimulus. The expectation is that artificially introduced and visually induced sensory signals will integrate, which could provide a more natural, task-relevant brain activity pattern for investigating the contribution of visual neurons to perception.


Combined electrical and visual stimulation reveals a perceptual shift

Salzman et al. devised a causal experimental approach that overcame many of the previously discussed limitations. They combined systematic neuronal recordings and visual stimulus presentation with quantitative measurements of the perceptual effect of electrical microstimulation. Rhesus monkeys performed a motion task in which they discriminated the overall direction of motion of a random dot kinetogram. They reported decisions with an eye movement (saccade) to a corresponding response target in order to receive a fluid reward if correct (a). Clusters of neurons in visual area V5/MT increase their firing rates for a ‘preferred’ direction of visual motion, and decrease firing for the opposite (‘null’) direction. Salzman et al. characterized the receptive field location and direction preference of a V5/MT site, and matched the random dot stimulus to the site's receptive field. The percentage of dots moving in the preferred direction was varied systematically from trial to trial. Electrical microstimulation (10 µA current) was applied to the V5/MT site during visual stimulus presentation in a randomly selected half of the trials. Animals were significantly more likely to report motion in the preferred direction on microstimulated trials compared with non-stimulated trials, demonstrating that activation of the V5/MT site biased motion perception towards the neurons' direction preference. This bias was evident in a consistent shift of the whole psychometric function, i.e. it was evident for stimuli that were harder to discriminate and stimuli that were easier to discriminate (b). Increasing the stimulation current to 80 µA eliminated the directional bias and impaired overall performance, indicating that this current level introduced noise into the cortical area and may have spread beyond the selected V5/MT site. Changing the electrode position on the order of 100 µm also abolished the bias. This suggests that electrical microstimulation in area V5/MT primarily activates small, localized populations of neurons with similar tuning preference, perhaps on the scale of a cortical column. These experiments established the causal role of V5/MT neurons in the perception of visual motion by tightly and quantifiably linking the activation of specific neuronal representations to perception.

Applying this experimental approach, others have quantitatively demonstrated the causal contribution of different cortical areas to visual perception as predicted from neurons' specific tuning properties (c). For instance, neurons in the medial superior temporal (MST) area are also selective for motion direction, but with larger receptive fields than in V5/MT, and some are selective for concentric motion. Electrical stimulation of MST sites causally biased perception of both motion direction and heading direction (optic flow) according to the direction preference of the stimulation site. Primates use binocular disparities to discriminate visual stereoscopic depth, and many visual cortical areas contain neurons that are tuned to binocular disparity. Electrical microstimulation of binocular disparity-tuned neurons in area V5/MT biased stereoscopic depth judgements towards the disparity preference at the stimulation site in a coarse depth discrimination task, whereas stimulating area V4 neurons biased fine judgements of depth between centre and surround, demonstrating a causal contribution of these cortical regions to stereoscopic depth perception but for different stimulus configurations. The inferotemporal cortex (visual area IT) contains neurons selective for faces and for specific three-dimensional structures. Afraz et al. trained monkeys to perform a categorization task to judge whether visual images were faces or non-faces. Stimulation of face-selective IT sites strongly biased decisions towards the face category, with the magnitude of the effect depending upon the degree of face selectivity of the site. Similarly, in a three-dimensional structure categorization task (concave versus convex), stimulation of structure-selective IT sites biased monkeys' choices towards the preferred structure of the neurons. Thus, combining electrical and visual stimulation has revealed a direct relationship between neural tuning and visual perception for many extrastriate visual areas in the monkey.


Relationship between neuronal tuning and microstimulation

In all the experiments described in §3a, visual stimuli and task were carefully matched to neuronal response properties at the recording site. The number of studies cited above might suggest that causal activation of tuned visual cortical neurons always successfully biases perception according to their tuning preferences. But is this true? If yes, then diligently performing causal experiments in each and every visual area becomes less important; if not, causal approaches remain necessary to clarify in which situations neuronal activity actively contributes to perception and behaviour. A stumbling block to answering this question is that negative experimental results (an absence of an effect) are less common in the literature, perhaps because it is generally more difficult to assess the validity of a negative result. So for instance, it is difficult to know whether the absence of significant microstimulation effects in combination with visual stimulation for V1 sites (c) means that it does not work or that nobody has tried it.

There are, however, a small number of published examples of negative findings for causal contribution of tuned neurons, usually in the context of a positive microstimulation effect for another stimulus parameter. For example, although multi-sensory neurons in dorsal MST (area MSTd) are tuned to both optic flow and vestibular heading direction signals, microstimulation of such neurons significantly biased monkeys' heading percepts in an optic flow task, but not a vestibular task. The cortical sites identified in the study had generally weak vestibular tuning, and therefore they may not causally contribute to perception of heading direction.

Uka & DeAngelis microstimulated disparity-selective V5/MT sites as monkeys performed both a ‘coarse’ depth task that involved discrimination of larger binocular stimulus disparities relative to the animal's fixation point (absolute disparity), in the presence of visual noise, and a ‘fine’ task that involved depth discrimination of small changes in the binocular disparity of a patch relative to its immediately surrounding annulus (relative disparity). Microstimulation of area V5/MT biased depth judgements in the coarse task but not in the fine task, even though disparity-tuning curves of some V5/MT neurons were sufficiently sensitive to account for the animal's performance in the fine task. The authors suggest that the tuning of most V5/MT neurons is for absolute rather than relative disparity, regardless of tuning sensitivity (at least in this spatial configuration—), and that this may be the reason that V5/MT sites they stimulated did not contribute to depth judgements in the fine task. Indeed, many neurons in area V4 encode relative disparity between adjacent surfaces, and microstimulation of V4 sites has been shown to bias depth judgements in a fine disparity task. Hence, causal experiments differentially link representations of binocular disparity in cortical areas V5/MT and V4 to the areas' functional contributions to depth perception dependent on the spatial configuration of the stimulus.

Other aspects of the neurons' receptive field, not immediately task-relevant, may also affect their functional contribution to visual perception. One study indicated that only microstimulation of direction-selective V5/MT sites with an antagonistic receptive field surround, but not those without, caused a shift in monkeys' visual pursuit movements towards the preferred direction of the stimulated neurons. This could be due to the importance of antagonistic surrounds in V5/MT to the segregation of object versus background motion. In another study, DeAngelis & Newsome microstimulated motion direction-selective sites in area V5/MT and also measured the stimulated sites' binocular disparity tuning, even though the task itself involved motion direction discrimination only. They found that for two of three monkeys, microstimulation of V5/MT sites that were not tuned to binocular disparity produced the largest bias in direction judgements, while stimulation of direction- and disparity-selective sites had little or no effect even when the random dot kinetogram was presented at the cortical sites' preferred disparity. But, when causal activation of a disparity-selective site did influence direction judgements, the effect was strongest when the stimulus was presented in the preferred depth plane. Therefore, even if visual neurons are tuned to a task-relevant stimulus dimension, they may not necessarily contribute to behavioural responses; instead, their perceptual contribution may depend on tuning to other visual features that seem task-irrelevant. Causal experimental approaches should probe more deeply how context affects the contribution of specific visual neuronal representations to behaviour.


From simple features to visual objects

The question of when information represented by neuronal firing is causally relevant to perception, especially of more complex visual objects, has led us to consider conjoint tuning for neurons representing more than one sensory dimension. For example, neurons in visual area V5/MT are tuned to both the direction of visual motion and binocular depth of a stimulus. In the discrimination task described in the previous paragraph, only one parameter (motion) but not the other (binocular depth) was relevant to the animals' task. However, in natural viewing, judgements about visual objects require a combination of multiple parameters, including direction, colour, depth and speed. Krug et al. demonstrated that V5/MT neurons contribute directly to judgements about a rotating structure-from-motion cylinder stimulus that requires the joint encoding of both motion and depth. The cylinder was made up of two transparent surfaces of random dots moving in opposite directions, such that assigning dots with opposite motion directions to different visual depth planes defined the direction of rotation. Monkeys indicated their choice about cylinder rotation direction with an eye movement (a). Electrical microstimulation of a motion- and depth-tuned V5/MT site biased choices towards the rotation direction represented by the conjoint tuning at that site (b). For example, stimulating a site selective for rightwards motion in the near depth plane boosted the rightward motion signal at the near surface of the cylinder only, resulting in an increased proportion of choices for the corresponding direction of rotation. At another site with selectivity for rightwards motion in conjunction with far disparity, choices were biased in the opposite rotation direction. Since both motion directions and depth planes are simultaneously present in the stimulus, neither motion nor disparity selectivity alone can explain this pattern of stimulation results. Therefore, this causal intervention implicates the conjoint tuning for motion and disparity in V5/MT in shaping the visual percept of a structure-from-motion object.

Krug et al. compared the size of the microstimulation bias on perceptual choices in their study to a previous study that investigated the effect of stimulating V5/MT neurons in a planar depth discrimination task with the same stimulating current of 20 µA. This was possible because both studies used similar experimental paradigms and, crucially, the same methods to quantify both the selectivity of neurons for depth at the stimulated sites (Disparity Tuning Index) and the behavioural bias induced by the causal intervention (horizontal shift of the psychometric function). Although strength of disparity tuning was similar for cortical sites in the two studies, there was a systematically larger effect of microstimulation on perceptual judgements in the conjoint structure-from-motion task than in the planar depth task. This suggests the presence of a specialized functional organization in area V5/MT representing the relationship between motion and depth. Furthermore, area V5/MT also contains neurons that are not selective for the conjunction of motion and disparity although they are selective for either one alone. Thus, there may be a smaller pool of neurons available for the structure-from-motion task described here, and microstimulation may drive a greater proportion of these neurons, explaining the greater biasing effect. In order to arrive at a better understanding of how visual cortex supports the perception of visual objects and scenes, we require further investigation into the effects of microstimulation in different cortical areas for the same visual task, and in the same area but with different visual tasks.


How does microstimulation change visual percepts? Evaluating animals' strategies

Experiments combining visual and electrical stimulation in rhesus monkeys demonstrated a shift in perceptual choices towards the visual parameters represented by the stimulated neurons. Does this show integration of visually evoked and artificially introduced electrical activity? To what extent might animals be aware that they are being microstimulated on some trials? As we have seen in previous sections, animals can learn to detect electrical microstimulation in extrastriate visual cortex when specifically trained and rewarded. Human patients report phosphenes and flashes of light under electrical stimulation of visual cortex, albeit under different experimental and stimulation protocols. It is conceivable that a flash of light might be noticeable to the animal during microstimulation. So, rather than integrating visual and electrical stimulation, could animals have learned to detect when they were being stimulated and act differently on those trials?

A number of strands of evidence converge to suggest that this is not the case. In all the studies described above, animals did not receive an incentive to bias their behaviour in the direction predicted from the selectivity of the simulation site. Animals were only rewarded for choices that were correct with respect to the visual stimulus, regardless of whether electrical microstimulation was introduced on a particular trial. Therefore, the only incentive animals had was to ignore the microstimulation signal, because they lost some of the available rewards through being biased by microstimulation. In an in-depth study of the microstimulation effect in V5/MT in the motion discrimination task, Salzman et al. characterized a behavioural phenomenon, the ‘null choice bias’, whereby monkeys' choices were apparently biased toward the site's null (non-preferred) motion direction in trials without electrical microstimulation (b; see also b for the cylinder task). This bias was not present in prior psychophysical testing without microstimulation trials. Salzman et al. presented the results of several experiments that explain this null bias as a probability-matching behavioural strategy, in which the animal makes a roughly equal number of responses in favour of the preferred and null directions over the course of the experiment to match overall choice proportions to the reward contingencies (similar to when reward probabilities change for different options). The null choice bias is evident for non-microstimulated trials, because it was applied across all trials to match reward distributions. If animals could tell the difference between stimulated and non-stimulated trials, the optimal strategy would be to apply the null bias to the microstimulation trials only in order to maximize reward (cf. b–d), but this has not been observed experimentally. In contrast, the observed pattern of responses shows that animals did not discriminate between microstimulated and non-stimulated trials (b for the motion task and b for the cylinder task).

Furthermore, in these experiments, stimulating currents ranged predominantly between 10 and 40 µA, lower than detection thresholds found for sites in visual cortex before extensive training took place to detect electrical microstimulation. Such training, involving 1000s of trials, was necessary for detection thresholds of microstimulation alone to reach a stable low value (discussed in §2b(ii)). Considering further that detection thresholds did not fully generalize under training across cortical sites in one visual area, and that in Salzman et al. and similar studies, a new microstimulation site was selected at least once each day, it is unlikely that animals had sufficient training opportunity to reliably detect the amplitude of microstimulation in the extrastriate visual areas tested. Finally, there is a contextual difference between detecting punctate electrical stimulation in an otherwise not specifically stimulated visual region in a pure detection task, and detecting the same activation in a visual area that is specifically activated by a concurrent visual stimulus, such as area V5/MT by the random dot kinetogram. Identifying the artificial stimulation among simultaneous visually evoked neuronal activity may be much more difficult.

Overall, the evidence strongly suggests that animals were not able to detect when they were being microstimulated in experiments combined with visual stimulation. Nevertheless, subjects' potential capacity for perceptual learning to detect microstimulation during visual stimulation is an important question. In order to evaluate the extent to which electrical microstimulation and visual stimulation are comparable and detectable, it would be important to test whether microstimulation detection training (as in) would increase, decrease or have no effect on the microstimulation-induced perceptual bias in a visual discrimination task, and whether it would affect relevant discrimination thresholds (e,f). This would also provide further insight into the sites of synaptic changes underlying perceptual learning.


Current gaps in understanding

Measuring the effect of electrical microstimulation on the performance of well-controlled visual tasks has established the contribution of a number of extrastriate visual areas to visual perception. This technique has extensively characterized the contribution of dorsal stream areas V5/MT and MST to motion and depth perception; a smaller number of studies have linked inferotemporal cortex (area IT) to face and shape perception and area V4 to depth perception. Based on these studies, there are gaps in our ‘causal map’ concerning the specific perceptual contribution of visual areas V1, V2 and V3; moreover, the ventral stream is under-represented overall (c). Considering that area V1 has been a popular site to study the detection of electrical stimulation in animals and humans (a,b) and has a well-established columnar organization, it seems surprising that perceptual shift studies have not been carried out in V1 yet. Perhaps electrically elicited phosphenes are too bright to allow any discrimination of visually evoked percepts of, for instance, stimulus orientation.

Studies investigating the causal contribution of colour representations are also notably missing from current literature with non-human primates. This is at odds with human stimulation studies that successfully combined recording and stimulation of colour areas in the temporal lobe. Investigating causal contributions of, for example, areas V1 and V4 to colour discrimination in monkeys could provide further evidence for the progression from wavelength selectivity in early cortical areas to colour constancy down the ventral stream. These apparent ‘gaps’, if due to failure to elicit significant microstimulation effects in the corresponding areas and tasks, could point to differential interactions between a punctate electrical stimulation source and the cortical architecture (see also §2b(i)).

Finally, there are clear advantages to being able to compare quantitatively the results of electrical stimulation across studies (for example). Notwithstanding time and other limitations, future microstimulation studies with human patients would benefit from incorporating quantitative measures of discrimination judgements in visual stimulation tasks, in addition to recording subjective reports, in order to better enable comparisons across studies and species.


Investigating mechanisms of visual cognition

In addition to exploring functional properties of different visual cortical areas and their contribution to perception, vision research also investigates the mechanisms of cognition. Causal approaches, such as electrical microstimulation and pharmacological interventions, play their part in testing different models of these mechanisms. In this section, we briefly review three examples in which microstimulation was used to elucidate neuronal mechanisms for memory, attention and perceptual decision-making (d).


Cortical mechanisms for working memory and perceptual learning

The approach to combine electrical microstimulation with specific visual stimulus presentation has been extended to study the localization of cortical changes underlying memory and perceptual learning within visual cortex. Bisley et al. trained macaque monkeys in a working memory task in which animals had to press one of two buttons to indicate whether the direction of motion of a test stimulus was the same or different from a previously presented sample stimulus. Electrical microstimulation of direction-selective V5/MT sites during the presentation of the sample stimulus biased animals' choices towards those test stimuli whose motion direction matched the neurons' preference. During the delay period, stimulating an opposite motion direction to the sample disrupted performance. Neurons in area V5/MT can therefore provide the directional information for visual working memory where visual motion is involved.

Electrical microstimulation of visual cortex has also been used during perceptual learning paradigms. Kawasaki & Sheinberg paired electrical stimulation of area IT with perceptually ambiguous visual patterns, and showed that the differential activity of electrical stimulation combined with an otherwise identical visual stimulus was sufficient for learning new perceptual classifications. In another study, by Carey et al., animals performed a smooth pursuit task in which they learned to predict a precisely timed change in the motion direction of the visual target. When the change in visual target direction was replaced by microstimulation of direction-selective neurons in area V5/MT, animals learned to modulate their eye movements in a manner similar to when instructed by real visual motion. These studies suggest that activation of visual cortical areas can provide a powerful and precisely timed instructive signal for both learning and memory. Further experiments are needed to determine the sites of the underlying synaptic changes.


Functional connectivity mediating attentional signals in visual cortex

Spatial attention involves the enhancement of visual signals at a location of interest. For example, when attention is directed to a preferred stimulus within a V4 neuron's receptive field, firing rates of orientation-tuned V4 neurons were amplified by around 20%. It has been hypothesised that the same circuits that mediate preparation of eye movements (saccades) to a visual target also contribute to covert attention towards a visual location of interest. Moore & Armstrong provided evidence for a direct link between oculomotor control and attention by stimulating sites in the macaque oculomotor area, frontal eye field (FEF), while simultaneously recording from single neurons in visual area V4. Sub-threshold microstimulation of FEF, used in order not to evoke saccades, resulted in an enhancement of visual responses of V4 neurons to a preferred stimulus in a manner comparable with that found in studies of spatial attention. This effect was dependent on the spatial correspondence between FEF saccade response fields and the V4 neuron's receptive field; when non-corresponding sites were stimulated, V4 responses were suppressed. Sub-threshold FEF stimulation also significantly improved animals' performance in a visual dimming detection task: when the visual target was placed inside the stimulated FEF response field, performance was improved in a manner comparable with the effects of spatial attention, but when stimuli were placed outside the response field, performance was impaired.

Electrical microstimulation combined with pharmacological intervention was used to investigate the neuropharmacological basis of the enhancement of V4 responses by FEF activation. The FEF neurons' response field was elucidated by microstimulation and then small volumes (0.5–1 µl) of a selective dopamine D1 receptor (D1R) antagonist or D2 receptor (D2R) agonist were delivered to the FEF site. V4 neuronal responses to visual stimuli were altered when D1R activation was manipulated, in a manner similar to attentional effects, but were not affected by the D2R manipulation. The enhancement of V4 signals was restricted to neurons with receptive fields that overlapped with the FEF response field, indicating a potential role for dopaminergic neuromodulation in mediating spatial attention.

Taken together, these experiments provide evidence for an inextricable link between a cortical area that governs oculomotor control and the visual effects of attention, down to the level of neurotransmission (for a wider discussion of oculomotor circuits, see Wurtz in this issue). Combining electrical and pharmacological causal approaches to link prefrontal cortical activity, visual cortical and subcortical activity, and animal behaviour, could elucidate the functional circuits that mediate other top-down processes in visual cognition, such as feature attention.


Cortical mechanisms for perceptual decision-making

The function of visual cortex cannot be understood simply by mapping cortical representations of the visual world; we must also understand the mechanisms by which this information is read out to guide behavioural choices. Inserting an artificial signal into cortical representations of sensory evidence allows us to test models of how visual information is utilized by downstream areas to guide behaviour.

Microstimulation detection experiments have been used to investigate mechanisms for the perceptual integration of neural signals in different parts of the same cortical area. Ghose & Maunsell stimulated pairs of V1 sites either singly or jointly, at currents between 1 and 20 µA, while monkeys reported detection of activation at either cortical site. For sites separated by less than 1 mm, animals' detection ability was well described by linear summation of single site current levels. At larger separations, performance was determined by the maximum of the two sites, indicating a ‘winner-takes-all’ competition. A limitation of this approach is that brain circuitry may be optimized for integrating naturally evoked patterns of activity but not those with the artificial spatio-temporal properties of electrical microstimulation. Nevertheless, these results indicate that signal integration in V1 is dependent on spatial configuration.

Earlier studies in V5/MT investigated whether read-out mechanisms for motion evidence were best described by a ‘winner-takes-all’ algorithm, in which only the strongest focus of activation informs the decision, or alternatively by ‘vector averaging’, in which all direction-selective V5/MT columns contribute in proportion to their response intensity. Electrical microstimulation of direction-selective V5/MT sites in a visual direction discrimination task that allowed for veridical choices provided evidence that both methods might be used depending on the precise configuration of the task. Mirroring the greater cortical distance of the two stimulation sites in the V1 study, for large angular separations between visually and electrically stimulated neurons (greater than 135° of preferred motion direction), or in tasks in which responses must be binned into one of two opposing categories, results were consistent with a ‘winner-takes-all’ mechanism. For smaller separations, and in a visual pursuit task, there was clear evidence for vector averaging and therefore signal integration.

More recently, electrical microstimulation was used to probe the extent to which the quantitative framework of an accumulation-to-bound model can accurately describe the neuronal mechanisms underlying perceptual decision-making in two-alternative forced-choice tasks, such as the direction discrimination task used by Salzman et al.. In this model, sensory evidence towards each of two competing perceptual choices is represented by firing rates of visual neurons tuned to decision-relevant stimulus parameters, and the subsequent integration of evidence over time is represented by neuronal firing rates in sensorimotor cortical regions, such as area LIP. When firing rates reach a particular decision threshold, the corresponding decision is made. Direction-selective sites in area V5/MT, representing sensory evidence, were electrically stimulated while monkeys performed a version of the direction discrimination task in which the duration of motion viewing was controlled by the monkey (reaction time task). In addition to biasing perceptual choices, as previously reported, microstimulation also quickened decisions in favour of the stimulated sites' preferred direction and slowed decisions towards the null direction. Microstimulation affected response times even on trials where it did not induce a preferred direction choice. This causal intervention supports the hypothesis that sensory evidence for competing visual interpretations, represented by V5/MT neurons, is accumulated and compared at a subsequent stage.

This framework is also supported by a microstimulation study that demonstrated differential effects of stimulating V5/MT and LIP neurons in the motion task. V5/MT microstimulation had stronger effects on decisions than did LIP microstimulation; moreover, LIP microstimulation has a greater relative effect on reaction times than on choices, compared with V5/MT. In the accumulation-to-bound framework, this is explained by a change in V5/MT firing being integrated as a function of time, and therefore having a substantial, cumulative effect on the decision, whereas the effect of stimulation of LIP is not cumulative. In this way, causal approaches have been instrumental in supporting an accumulation-to-bound model of visual perceptual decision-making.

The perceptual effects of microstimulation itself have also been investigated in the context of this decision-making framework. Monkeys were trained on a variant of the motion task in which they were sometimes allowed to ‘opt out’ of the decision for a small but certain reward, perhaps if their confidence in the correctness of their choice was low. Microstimulation of direction-selective sites in area V5/MT at low currents (5–10 µA) biased perceptual choices towards the preferred direction, but did not reduce overall confidence in the decision. Instead, the effect of microstimulation on decision confidence mimicked a consistent change in the visual motion signal plus a small increase in sensory noise. This demonstrates that artificial manipulation of signals in V5/MT preserves the relationship between accumulated evidence and decision confidence, such that from the perspective of downstream areas, cortical microstimulation is largely equivalent to changes in neural activity produced by a visual stimulus. To directly test the hypothesis that microstimulation affects the drift of the decision variable represented in area LIP in the same manner as equivalent motion energy added to the visual stimulus, it would be necessary to record from neurons in area LIP during microstimulation of area V5/MT when a perceptual decision is taken.

Given that artificial activation of a visual cortical area representing sensory evidence can be integrated almost seamlessly into animals' perceptual decisions about visual stimuli, electrical microstimulation could be used to dissect the contribution of different brain processing stages to decision-making. For example, interactions between microstimulation and contextual factors, such as reward, should vary depending on the cortical area in which microstimulation is inserted and the levels at which reward information is represented and integrated into the process. Causal intervention studies investigating the accumulation-to-bound model of perceptual decision making have been largely limited to the motion task and areas V5/MT and LIP (d). Similar experiments using other tasks, such as depth discrimination, or stimulating a different visual cortical area, such as area IT in the context of a face discrimination task, would be necessary to test whether these mechanisms generalize across visual cortex.


New horizons for causal interference methods


Optogenetics

Optogenetics is a state-of-the-art causal experimentation method in which light is used to selectively control specific neuronal populations that have been genetically modified to contain light-sensitive proteins. These proteins can be coupled to ion transporters or channels, so that illumination of the neurons increases ion movement across the cell membrane and thereby changes cell activity. Optogenetic techniques have been successful in modulating stereotypic behaviour in invertebrates (see also Oswald et al. in this issue) and driving behavioural responses in rodents (e.g. see; see also Saunders et al. in this issue). The potential of optogenetics as a method for advancing understanding of visual processing, beyond that of other causal methods such as electrical microstimulation, is based upon its ability to target different groups of neurons that cannot be differentiated by the microelectrode. With optogenetics, photosensitive proteins can be targeted to particular subclasses of neurons, such as GABA-ergic inhibitory neurons or excitatory pyramidal cells, or neurons that send axons to a particular brain structure. This allows selective causal interrogation of the contribution of different cell types to visual processing and behavioural responses, and thereby linking anatomical and functional knowledge about the visual cortex with more precision and specificity than electrical microstimulation. Furthermore, unlike electrical microstimulation, which is generally thought to increase neural activity, optogenetic methods can be used to either activate or silence neurons, depending on the nature of the photosensitive protein. This allows a fine-tuned perturbation of activity that could reveal detailed elements of the neural code.

Optogenetic approaches have already been used to investigate visual processing in rodent models. In one study, activity in visual cortex in mice was inhibited by activating parvalbumin-expressing inhibitory neurons with channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2), a photosensitive protein linked to a non-specific cation channel. Mice were trained to detect changes in the contrast or orientation of visual stimuli, and their detection thresholds were measured. Suppressing activity in V1 substantially impaired detection thresholds, demonstrating that cortical representations are important for simple visual behaviours in rodents. In another study, mice were trained to report detection of optogenetic activation of excitatory pyramidal cells in area V1 while light pulses were varied in duration and arranged into trains of varying temporal frequency. Detection behaviour was predicted by total spike count, independent of the temporal arrangement, providing evidence for a linear integration mechanism in rodent visual cortex.

Although optogenetic techniques have revealed mechanisms of rodent visual cortical processing, translating results from rodent models to primates is not straightforward because of species differences in visual ability, cortical size and the relative importance of vision compared with other senses; these differences are also evident in their different behavioural repertoires and habitats. However, optogenetic approaches in non-human primate models have been slower to develop. Building on an approach that used ChR2-mediated activity in frontal cortex to influence saccade latency, one study reported a behavioural response evoked through optogenetic activation of the visual system. Macaques either fixated a central point or made a saccade to a visual target. ChR2 was introduced into area V1 via a viral vector, which was pressure injected. When optical stimulation was applied, the saccade endpoints after fixation point offset were significantly biased towards the receptive field of the optogenetically stimulated neurons. Moreover, saccade latencies were significantly longer when optogenetic stimulation was applied at the same time and in the same receptive field location as a visual target compared with when the visual target was presented alone. Effects on saccades latencies appear comparable with those found in electrical microstimulation experiments in area V1. This is an important proof of concept that optogenetic techniques can be used to drive behaviour in non-human primates as well as in rodents (see for a summary of methodological parameters across species).

A number of technical hurdles currently limit the application of optogenetic techniques in primates compared with other animal models. For instance, it is more difficult to genetically target particular groups of cells whose activation would transmit a coherent signal to downstream brain areas. According to the results from electrical microstimulation detection experiments, the deepest layers of area V1 support the lowest detection thresholds. However, Jazayeri et al. found that in spite of the viral vector having been injected uniformly throughout the cortical depth, channelrhodopsin-2-positive cells were mainly found in layers IVB, with some scattered expression in the deepest layers V and VI. Development of techniques to target particular neuronal cell types and particular layers of visual cortex might be necessary to make the optogenetic technique more effective in primates. In order to generate effective protocols, visual task training also must be matched carefully to the perceptual experience which a particular optogenetic protocol might give rise to. Different microstimulation studies reporting ‘dark’ versus ‘light’ phosphenes indicate that the generated perceptual experience itself requires investigation. The goal would be to use optogenetics not simply to evoke behavioural responses, but to combine optical stimulation with visual stimulation to further interrogate the contributions of different neurons and activity patterns in visual cortex to the perception of visual attributes such as orientation, motion and colour, as well as to object recognition more generally.


Visual prosthesis through cortical stimulation

The body of work in humans and animals indicates that area V1 is a good candidate for reliable detection of electrical stimulation. In principle, a prosthesis made of electrodes, linked to a video camera, could be implanted to generate representations of visual information, thereby allowing some extent of sight recovery in blind patients. A prototype visual prosthesis was developed that stimulated six phosphene-inducing V1-surface electrodes in such a way that the letters of the braille alphabet could be read with an accuracy of 73–85%. More recently, an edge-detection processor combined with a television camera and visual prosthesis (64-electrode array implant) allowed a blind individual to navigate between objects in a room.

The effects introduced by surface electrical stimulation can be unpredictable and heterogeneous between individuals, and the underlying physiology is not fully understood. With improvements to aseptic chronic implantation techniques, intracortical microelectrodes may provide an even more effective prosthetic approach, targeting specific subregions of cortex and using smaller currents. A chronic (2-year) implantation of an array of 100 penetrating microelectrodes in a macaque resulted in consistent behavioural responses to stimulation across the array, providing evidence for the feasibility of this approach in human patients. Given the development of arrays with ever-larger numbers of electrodes, visual information could be conveyed through increasingly complex patterns of electrical stimulation of visual cortex. As we have seen, work in animals suggests that the interactions between different foci of activation can differ dependent on distance, but the type of percept evoked by more complex patterns of stimulation is not well understood. Electrical cortical prostheses may be associated with certain perceptual distortions, as discussed with regard to artificial stimulation of the retina by Fine & Boynton. The capacity of adult primate visual cortex to make perceptual sense of novel stimulation patterns and to learn novel perceptual associations suggests that cortical electrical prostheses will one day be a viable option for sight recovery.


Summary and conclusion

Causal experimental methods have been responsible for important findings in vision research. Focally localized electrical stimulation of human visual cortex, especially in early visual cortical areas, gives rise to distinct visual experiences. Further explorations of effects on perception and learning are required to better understand how specific cortical activations give rise to visual experiences in humans. Studies in which animals have been trained to detect electrical stimulation of their visual cortex reveal principles of cortical coding and plasticity and demonstrate that animals can learn to detect novel patterns of neuronal activity in striate and extrastriate visual areas. This basic research builds a necessary prerequisite to consider the function of visual cortical prostheses.

Electrical microstimulation combined with visual stimulation in forced-choice tasks has successfully been used to demonstrate the contribution of visual cortical neurons to animals' visual perception. Microstimulation quantifiably biases animals' perceptual choices towards the visual features represented by the tuning properties of the activated neurons. Most such studies have focused thus far on a small number of extrastriate visual areas, including V5/MT, MST, IT and V4. The gaps in the monkey's cortical microstimulation map—including V1, V2 and V3—are surprising given that humans and monkeys can detect V1 stimulation alone reliably. Relevant experiments may simply not have been attempted thus far. Alternatively, cortical architecture might support different interactions between electrical signals generated by visual input and cortical microstimulation at different cortical sites. The answer to this question will contribute to our understanding of cortical codes for underlying visual experience. Further experiments might consider the neuronal processing of colour, from wavelength selectivity to colour constancy, which might be particularly amenable to such an investigation.

Causal methods have also been used to successfully demonstrate functional connectivity between different brain regions, and increasingly to reveal mechanisms of perceptual decision-making by probing the effect of introducing artificial signals at different levels of the proposed decision-making pathways. In order to reveal the cortical codes for perceptual processes, we require techniques that provide more fine-tuned, distributed patterns of activation and inhibition. Control of the spread of neuronal activation, which is difficult with metal electrodes, will be aided by the on-going development of optogenetic techniques, with promising work on non-human primates in development. Further progress in our understanding of the interactions between artificial stimulation of visual cortical neurons and perception will support visual cortical prosthesis to become a viable option for sight recovery in the future.


Biological and bionic hands: natural neural coding and artificial perception

Sliman J. Bensmaia — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4528821, CC BY 4.0.

The first decade and a half of the twenty-first century brought about two major innovations in neuroprosthetics: the development of anthropomorphic robotic limbs that replicate much of the function of a native human arm and the refinement of algorithms that decode intended movements from brain activity. However, skilled manipulation of objects requires somatosensory feedback, for which vision is a poor substitute. For upper-limb neuroprostheses to be clinically viable, they must therefore provide for the restoration of touch and proprioception. In this review, I discuss efforts to elicit meaningful tactile sensations through stimulation of neurons in somatosensory cortex. I focus on biomimetic approaches to sensory restoration, which leverage our current understanding about how information about grasped objects is encoded in the brain of intact individuals. I argue that not only can sensory neuroscience inform the development of sensory neuroprostheses, but also that the converse is true: stimulating the brain offers an exceptional opportunity to causally interrogate neural circuits and test hypotheses about natural neural coding.


Introduction

Imagine you could move your body—your arms, your legs, your torso—but anytime your skin came into contact with something, you would not feel it. If you closed your eyes for any length of time, you would lose track of where your arms and legs were. Anytime you grasped an object, you would not be sure it remained in your hand without looking. And you would miss out on the important affective experience that is to touch the ones you love and to be touched by them. This mental exercise highlights the importance of our senses of touch and proprioception in everyday life.

Tetraplegia is a devastating condition—typically caused by an upper spinal cord injury or by a disease of the nervous system—in which the body below the neck is no longer connected to the brain. As a result, tetraplegic patients can no longer move nor feel their bodies below the neck. One way to restore some independence for these patients is to equip them with anthropomorphic robotic arms, controlled by reading out signals from the motor areas of the brain. Indeed, the areas of the brain that sent signals to the arms before injury are spared and intended movements can be decoded from the neuronal activity in these motor areas (see for a review). However, the functionality of these neuroprostheses will be limited if they do not also provide for somatosensation. Indeed, in individuals with intact arms and motor pathways, but without somatosensory feedback, movements are slow, clumsy and effortful. Furthermore, thought-controlled neuroprostheses without somatosensory feedback are experienced by patients as disembodied robots, despite the fact that they can control them by mere thought (Jennifer Collinger 2015, personal communication), which will limit their adoption. Finally, tetraplegic patients often yearn for the opportunity to touch loved ones, an experience that motor neuroprostheses currently do not afford.

One way to restore somatosensation in tetraplegic patients is to electrically stimulate neurons in the somatosensory parts of the brain. Indeed, the area of the brain that received sensory signals from the arm before injury—namely primary somatosensory cortex (S1)—is also spared. In brief, S1 comprises four different modules—Brodmann's areas 3a, 3b, 1 and 2—each of which exhibits somewhat different properties. Neurons in area 3a respond primarily to movements of the joints, neurons in areas 3b and 1 respond to light touch, neurons in area 2 respond to both touch and proprioception. In principle, it should be possible to evoke meaningful sensory percepts by electrically activating somatosensory neurons. In attempting to do so, we can leverage decades of research investigating how information about touch is encoded in the brains of healthy individuals and attempt to reproduce patterns of brain activation that would be naturally evoked during everyday interactions with objects. To the extent that we are successful, these artificial somatosensory percepts will be verisimilar or at least informative. In our quest to restore touch using this biomimetic approach, we will be poised to test hypotheses about how the brain naturally encodes stimulus information. Thus, basic science will inform the development of next-generation neuroprostheses and neuroprosthetics will lead to new insights into basic science.


Two key precursors to somatosensory neuroprostheses

Beginning in the 1930s, Wilder Penfield and colleagues electrically stimulated the surface of the brain in search of the focus of pharmacologically intractable epilepsy—the area of the brain wherefrom it originates. The idea was that electrical stimulation of the epileptic focus would induce a seizure. When Penfield stimulated the surface of S1, subjects reported tactile sensations that were localized to specific locations on the body. These electrically induced sensations were typically described as numbness, tingling and sometimes pain. Importantly, the projected location of these sensations varied systematically with the location of the stimulating electrode, leading to the discovery that somatosensory cortex is somatotopically organized (see a for the macaque homunculus).

In Penfield's studies, and others in which the surface of the S1 was stimulated, the evoked percepts were relatively diffuse and consisted primarily of paresthesias, which did not bode well for using electrical stimulation of cortex as a means to evoke meaningful percepts. The outlook improved considerably in the wake of a series of landmark experiments in the laboratory of Ranulfo Romo. The team had taught animals to discriminate vibratory stimuli delivered to their fingertips. The animals' task was to judge which of two vibrations was higher in frequency. Romo showed (as Mouncastle had before him) that skin vibrations evoke entrained responses in S1; that is, each stimulus cycle evokes a burst of spikes, which in turn results in a highly periodic neuronal response. Romo speculated that it was this patterning in S1 responses that carried the information about vibration frequency. He tested this hypothesis by having the animals perform the frequency discrimination task based on intracortical microstimulation (ICMS) rather than skin vibrations: having learned to perform the vibratory discrimination task described above, animals were presented with two electrical pulse trains of different frequency, and their task was to judge which of the two trains was higher in frequency. As each pulse evokes a burst of activity in cortex, pulse trains will evoke entrained responses whose frequency matches that of the pulse train. If indeed entrainment conveys information about frequency, then discriminating the frequency of ICMS pulse trains should be analogous to discriminating the frequency of skin vibrations, since both evoked periodic responses in S1 neurons. Romo showed that the animals' performance on the task based on ICMS was comparable to that based on skin vibrations. In fact, the animals could compare the frequency of an ICMS train to that of a skin vibration. These results were significant for two reasons. First, while previous studies had revealed a correlation between temporal patterning in S1 and vibratory frequency, the study showed that this patterning conveys information about frequency using a causal manipulation of neuronal activation. Second, Romo and colleagues demonstrated that animals were able to perform a perceptual discrimination task based on artificially generated sensations. The trick had simply been to replace the natural afferent input with ICMS that mimicked the relevant aspect of neuronal activation, in this case neuronal entrainment. The landmark study demonstrated that artificial somatosensory percepts with specific properties could be elicited using ICMS, setting the stage for the development of somatosensory neuroprostheses.


The birth of somatosensory neuroprostheses

Two major innovations revolutionized neuroprosthetics in the twenty-first century. The first is the development of anthropomorphic robotic limbs that reproduce much of the function of a native human arm. The second is the development and refinement of algorithms that decode intended movements from the neuronal activity measured in motor areas of the brain. Together, these innovations make it possible for a human patient to move a robotic arm by thought alone. Because these bionic arms can move in most of the ways that a biological one can, to control the bionic arms requires somatosensation for the same reasons that controlling a native one does: visual feedback is a poor substitute for its somatosensory counterpart when it comes to using hands to manipulate objects. Furthermore, somatosensation is required for embodiment and allows for affective communication. The importance of touch in everyday life spurred efforts to develop ways to restore it artificially.

The approach to restoring touch, then, consisted in delivering trains of electrical pulses to the somatosensory areas of the brain in the hopes of eliciting percepts that convey information about grasped objects. Early examples of somatosensory neuroprostheses demonstrated that animals could perform behavioural tasks based on largely arbitrary patterns of ICMS delivered to S1. These studies applied Romo's finding—that animals could discriminate ICMS that varied in frequency—to establish a proof-of-principle that this approach might be applied to bi-directional brain–machine interfaces—i.e. neuroprostheses that are under brain control and provide sensory feedback. In fact, not only could animals discriminate ICMS pulse trains that varied in frequency, but they could also distinguish ICMS that was delivered to different neuronal populations. An important commonality between the studies mentioned above is that the ICMS was not designed to evoke naturalistic patterns of neuronal activation. Rather, the idea was to create a systematic mapping between sensory events and ICMS such that the animal learned to use them to guide its behaviour.

Another approach to eliciting artificial percepts, and the one that we will be exploring in depth here, consists in leveraging what is known about how the brain encodes somatosensory information, and attempting to reproduce the relevant pattern of activation in the hopes of conveying this information intuitively and perhaps even of eliciting verisimilar sensations. On the face of it, this approach seems doomed to failure. First, while sensory neuroscience has made huge strides in the past 50 years, there is still much about neural coding that we do not understand. We cannot hope to reproduce relevant patterns of neuronal activation if we are not sure what those patterns are. Second, ICMS is a blunt tool: it produces unnaturally synchronized patterns of activation that one would never observe in a healthy brain. Furthermore, it excites neurons of various types, most near the electrode but some far away, so the neural consequences of ICMS applied to a given volume of tissue are largely unknown. In the light of the seeming hopelessness of biomimetic ICMS, Romo's study is that much more significant. And so, inspired by Romo's success, we pursued the biomimetic approach to artificial somatosensation.


Exploiting the somatosensory homunculus

To grasp an object, it is critical to know which parts of the hand make contact with the object. Minimally, the thumb and one of the fingers have to make contact before it can be picked up. How is contact location encoded in the brain? As mentioned above, Penfield discovered that stimulating the surface of primary somatosensory cortex elicits sensations on the body surface that are somewhat localized. Furthermore, systematically changing the location of the electrode on S1 resulted in somatosensory percepts that shifted systematically across the body surface. As the electrode proceeded away from the midline, sensations progressed from the legs, to the trunk, to the arm, to the hand, to the face. Single-unit recordings in S1 have since revealed a systematic, somatotopic organization: the population of neurons that respond to the little finger is always medial and posterior to the population of neurons that respond to the ring finger, which in turn is medial and posterior to the population of neurons that respond to the middle finger, etc. (a). This organization is consistent across four complete body maps in S1, one in each of its modules (areas 3a, 3b, 1 and 2). Thus, when the index fingertip comes into contact with an object, a specific population of neurons becomes activated. When the thumb makes contact with an object, a nearby, largely non-overlapping population of neurons becomes activated. One might hypothesize, then, that contact location is encoded spatially in S1: the location of the activated neuronal population will determine the location of the evoked percept. Indeed, that is what Penfield found when stimulating the surface of the brain. The question, though, is whether artificial percepts could be sufficiently and repeatably localized for this principle to be used to convey information about contact location in a neuroprosthesis. Indeed, as discussed above, surface stimulation of S1 causes very diffuse sensations, probably owing to the fact that it excites diffuse populations of neurons. The development of invasive neural interfaces opened the possibility, then, that smaller populations of neurons could be stimulated, leading to more localized percepts.

One of the challenges facing the biomimetic approach to artificial somatosensation is that it requires that specific properties of artificial sensations be probed. With humans, this would be trivial: one would simply stimulate and have the subject report the resulting sensation, as Penfield did. To date, however, no human patient has ever been implanted with an invasive neural interface in S1. Even when it does happen (and it is only a matter of time at this point), time with the patient is at a premium, and it is virtually impossible to develop a new technique based solely on human testing. It is therefore necessary to develop approaches based on animal studies. To probe the quality of sensations in animals is challenging and requires that we train them to perform tasks that will allow us to infer what they feel.

To test the localization of ICMS-elicited sensations, we trained animals to discriminate the location of pokes applied to the skin. The animals were sitting in front of a computer monitor that conveyed information about the flow of each experimental trial with their hand fixed palmar surface facing up. On each trial, two pokes were sequentially delivered to two locations on the palmar surface of the skin using a high-precision robot (b). The animal's task was to report whether the second poke was to the right or the left of the first. After a few months, the animals were able to perform this task accurately. The animals were then implanted with electrode arrays in the hand representation of S1 (areas 3b and 1; pink-shaded region in). For each electrode, we mapped receptive fields by delivering pokes across the surface of the hand and measuring the evoked neural activity. We could then determine to which patch of skin each electrode was most sensitive. Using these maps, we had the animal perform a modified version of the location discrimination task described above where, on some trials, we replaced one of the two pokes with ICMS to an electrode with the corresponding receptive field (b). For example, on one trial (a so-called mechanical trial), we might poke the index fingertip then the middle fingertip of the left hand, leading to a ‘left’ response. On the following trial (a so-called hybrid trial), we might poke the middle fingertip then electrically stimulate through an index fingertip electrode; we hoped that the second stimulus would be experienced as a virtual poke on the index fingertip. On that trial, then, the correct answer was ‘right’. Importantly, mechanical trials were interleaved with hybrid trials, and a variety of skin locations and electrodes were used in each experimental block. Thus, the animal could not learn to associate sensations with responses. It could only do the task based on the perceived location of pokes and virtual pokes.

We found that the animal performed both the mechanical and hybrid tasks well above chance (c). In fact, its performance on hybrid trials was nearly as good as that on mechanical trials when the ICMS was delivered to area 3b. Furthermore, the animal's performance was almost at asymptotic levels on the very first day that hybrid trials were introduced, further demonstrating that it was performing the task based on the location of virtual pokes rather than by learning arbitrary stimulus–response pairings. These experiments led to the conclusion that ICMS of S1 through individual penetrating electrodes results in highly localized tactile percepts. From a scientific standpoint, this result confirms the hypothesis that contact location is encoded spatially in S1; that is, perceived location is determined by where across the surface of S1 the evoked activity is located. From a neural engineering standpoint, the results provide a blueprint on how to convey information biomimetically about contact location in a neuroprosthesis.

Imagine that a tetraplegic patient has been implanted with an array of electrodes in the hand representation of S1, which can be found based on anatomical markers. We now know that if we stimulate through an electrode on this array, the patient will experience a tactile sensation on a specific region of his or her hand. Now, suppose that stimulation through electrode 53 elicits a percept on the thumb tip. We can then connect the sensor on the prosthetic thumb to electrode 53. Anytime the thumb touches something, ICMS will be delivered through electrode 53, and a sensation will be elicited on the thumb, thereby signalling the contact location in an intuitive way. We are exploiting the organization of the brain to intuitively convey information about a specific stimulus property, namely its location on the skin.


Embodiment

One might argue that, when the prosthetic thumb touches an object (thus resulting in stimulation through electrode 53), the evoked sensation will be on the tetraplegic patient's native thumb, not the prosthetic one. The patient still has to make an association between locations on his or her skin and locations on the prosthetic hand. That the locations are matching might make this mapping somewhat more intuitive, but is it worth all of this trouble? Evidence suggests that, with time, the sensations might migrate to the prosthetic hand. In other words, the patient may embody the prosthetic limb and start to feel as though the robot is part of his or her body! To understand how this might happen, we need to examine a phenomenon called ‘the rubber hand illusion’. In an example experiment, a fake arm is placed in front of a subject in a natural posture, while the native arm is hidden from sight. Then, the experimenters pair visually experienced pokes delivered to the fake hand with matched, felt pokes delivered to the real hand. After a few repetitions, subjects begin to experience the rubber hand as their own (even though they know that it is not). The sense of embodiment is so vivid that, if someone injures the fake hand, subjects exhibit a fear reflex as if their native hand had been injured. Thus, when visual experience of contact is paired with spatially congruous tactile experience of contact, patients begin to embody the extra-corporeal limb.

The rubber hand illusion has been exploited to help amputees embody prosthetic limbs, as illustrated in an experiment with a population of patients who had undergone a procedure called targeted muscle reinnervation (TMR). In this technique, the residual nerves that used to innervate the now missing distal limb are rerouted to the pectoral muscle. After the surgery, nerve fibres begin to invade and make connections with the muscle and the overlaying skin. Motor commands that were intended to move an amputated digit, say, resulted in contractions of patches of pectoral muscle. Signals from sensors placed on this muscle can then be used to move that digit in the prosthetic hand. At the same time, touching patches of skin on the chest evokes sensations that are projected to the amputated arm. Indeed, these skin patches are innervated by fibres that used to innervate the arm so the resurrected signals originating from these fibres are interpreted as stemming from the missing limb. The experiment, then, consisted in touching an unseen patch of chest skin while poking a (seen) fake limb at the location wherefrom the sensations seemed to originate. After repeated tactile stimulation paired with congruous visual stimulation, the patient began to feel as though these tactile sensations originated from the limb (which, again, they knew to be fake). That is, they began to embody the arm. A similar effect was achieved when touches to the stump of amputees (who had not undergone TMR) were paired with seen pokes to a prosthesis. While this phenomenon has not been investigated with artificial somatosensation delivered through a brain interface, the biomimetic mapping described above will likely lead to embodiment of the prosthetic limb. Indeed, patients will experience concurrent and congruous visual sensations, the necessary preconditions to achieve embodiment. The neuronal tissue that once represented the biological limb will be fully appropriated by the bionic one.


Feeling pressure

When we grasp an object, we minimally need to know not only which fingers are in contact with it, but also how much pressure we are exerting on it. We need to apply just enough pressure so that the object does not slip from our grasp when we pick it up but not so much that we crush it. Tactile signals convey very precise information about contact pressure. In primary somatosensory cortex, an increase in pressure results not only in an increase in the activity of the neurons that are most sensitive to the skin location at which it is applied (neurons in the hotzone of activation) but also in the recruitment of nearby neurons (a). A biomimetic approach to conveying information about contact pressure would then be to modulate both the firing rate of the neurons in the hotzone and the volume of neurons activated in responses to changes in skin pressure. It turns out that we can achieve both of these changes in neuronal activity by modulating the ICMS amplitude. Indeed, increases in current amplitude will result in stronger depolarization of nearby neurons, thereby increasing the strength of their response, and in greater current spread, leading to the recruitment of more distant neurons.

To test the hypothesis that changes in ICMS amplitude could be used to convey information about contact pressure, we trained animals to perform both a tactile detection task and a pressure discrimination task. On each trial of the detection task, a poke was presented in one of two stimulus intervals and the animal reported in which of the two intervals it occurred (by saccading to one of two visually presented targets). As might be expected, the animal's performance improved as the amplitude of the poke increased. On each trial of the discrimination task, two pokes were delivered to the same location on the hand and the animal reported which of the two was stronger. As the difference in amplitude between the two pokes increased, the animal's performance improved. Once animals were trained on the task, we had them perform the same tasks, except that the pokes were replaced by ICMS. As had been the case with the location discrimination task described above, the animals were immediately able to perform the detection and discrimination tasks based on ICMS after having been trained with pokes. This immediate transfer provided an initial clue that the sensory correlates of changes in contact pressure and in electrical amplitude were at least somewhat comparable. On each day, the animals would perform the detection and/or discrimination task with pokes on the hand followed by the same task with electrical stimuli applied to an electrode whose receptive field matched the poked skin location.

From these data—mechanical and electrical amplitude detection and discrimination performance—we derived a sensory encoding function that mapped the pressure exerted on the skin onto a perceptually equivalent ICMS pulse train. This mapping was achieved by assuming that stimuli that were equally detectable were perceptually equivalent. In other words, if a 150 μm poke on the index fingertip and 30 μA ICMS to an electrode with a receptive field on the index fingertip were both detected 75% of the time, we assumed that their sensory magnitude was the same. Then, if a 500 μm poke was discriminable from the 150 μm poke 75% of the time and the 60 μA was discriminable from the 30 μA ICMS 75% of the time, then 500 μm and 60 μA were equivalent, and so on. The resulting function converted pressure to ICMS amplitude such that the perceptual magnitudes of the evoked sensations were equal in the two modalities, precisely the kind of mapping we need in a prosthesis (b).

We then tested this sensory encoding function in two ways. First, we had animals perform a hybrid pressure discrimination task. In this task, a mechanical stimulus that was matched in perceived magnitude with 50 μA ICMS was paired with ICMS that ranged from 20 to 80 μA. As predicted from our sensory encoding function, if the ICMS was less than 50 μA, the animal judged it as being weaker than the poke and vice versa, thereby validating the mapping. That the animals could do this at all was very promising because, once again, it suggested that skin pokes and ICMS could readily be compared. This is not to say that the artificial tactile sensations felt exactly like pokes, however, but real and virtual pokes fell on a common perceptual continuum. Second, we had the animals perform the mechanical detection and pressure discrimination task described above, except they felt the pokes through a prosthetic hand. Specifically, we used our indenting robot to poke the prosthesis with the same stimuli we had used in the tactile detection and pressure discrimination experiments described above. We then used our sensory encoding function to compute, in real time, the amplitude of ICMS from the time-varying output of the force sensors on the prosthetic finger. With our set-up, we were able to provide the animals, in real time, with biomimetic information about contact pressure through ICMS delivered to S1. In other words, we had implemented our sensory encoding function in a real neuroprosthesis. We found that the animals performed identically on detection and discrimination tasks whether the pokes were delivered to their native finger or to the prosthetic finger (c). In other words, our sensory encoding function performed exactly as we had hoped. Note that we could have easily made the animals better at pressure discrimination by making the function steeper, or worse by making it shallower. The consequence would have been to reduce or extend the range of discriminable pressure increments. The goal, however, was to evoke a sensory percept that was appropriate to the applied pressure; our sensory encoding function allowed us to do that by mimicking, at least qualitatively, the representation of pressure when natural afferent input is present. Again, that animals could so readily go back and forth between natural and artificial input supported the underlying neural coding hypothesis, which was that pressure is encoded in the increase in the activation of neurons at the hotzone and in the recruitment of nearby neurons that accompany an increase in applied pressure. At the same time, the sensory encoding function provided a blueprint on how biomimetic information about pressure could be conveyed in a neuroprosthesis.

Of course, in a tetraplegic patient, sensory encoding functions cannot be developed for each matched electrode and skin location, as was done with the monkeys, whose nervous systems were intact. However, sensory encoding functions that were independently derived for different skin location/electrode pairs and from different monkeys were very similar. In a tetraplegic patient, then, we could use a canonical sensory encoding function—for example, the mean of all the functions we obtained from our monkeys—for all electrode/sensor pairings. We could calibrate this canonical function—make it steeper or shallower—by adjusting the ICMS level such that it perceptually matches a benchmark tactile stimulus (e.g. delivered to the face, where sensation is intact).


Timing contact

When we reach for an object, we preshape our hand to match the shape of the object. The instant we make contact with the object, we terminate our reach and complete our grasp. Precise information about when we make contact is important to avoid overreaching. The sensory encoding algorithm described above would not be well suited to signal contact events, because initial contact is characterized by very low pressure levels that increase over tens or hundreds of milliseconds. Thus, by the time contact is signalled by the sensory encoding algorithm described above, it is too late and the hand has reached too far. In S1, both the onset and offset of contact are signalled by very precisely timed phasic responses, so-called on- and off-responses. These responses originate from peripheral mechanoreceptors that are very sensitive to changes in applied pressure. One way to restore precise timing information, then, is to deliver phasic ICMS pulses, lasting approximately 50–100 ms, at the onset and offset of contact to mimic the on- and off-responses that are ubiquitous in S1. The phasic ICMS at contact would then be followed by tonic ICMS that tracks the pressure applied to the object based on the sensory encoding algorithm. When the object is released from grasp, another phasic ICMS would be delivered to mimic the native off-response. Some evidence suggests that ICMS-evoked percepts are slower to guide behaviour than are their tactile counterparts, which may corrupt information about contact timing. Perhaps this sluggishness of artificial tactile percepts can be overcome by increasing the stimulation amplitude or delivering ICMS trains that more closely mimic natural patterns of neuronal activation. Either way, the functional benefits of these transient signals have not yet been tested. When we can compare the performance of an animal or a patient on a task that requires grasping and manipulating objects with a prosthetic hand with and without these biomimetic signals about contact timing, we will be in a position to determine not only the benefit of these signals to neuroprosthetics, but also the extent to which contact transients signal contact timing in intact individuals. Ultimately, such contact-related transients can be replaced with more sophisticated sensory encoding functions that not only take into consideration the instantaneous pressure that is applied to the skin (as does the sensory encoding algorithm described above), but also the rate of change in pressure. Such mappings would not only mimic natural on- and off-responses, but also accommodate the dynamics of responses to time-varying pressure that naturally occur during everyday interactions with objects.


Expanding the sensory repertoire

The experiments described above provide a blueprint on how to convey basic tactile information—about contact location, contact pressure and contact timing—through ICMS of S1. However, our sense of touch conveys much more elaborate information about objects: information about their size and shape, about their material properties and surface microstructure (texture), and about how they move across the skin. In somatosensory cortex, different populations of neurons encode these different properties: some S1 neurons respond to the shape of objects by encoding the orientation of their edges; others are sensitive to the curvature of object contours; others are tuned for the direction in which the objects move across the skin; others seem to encode coarse and fine surface microstructure. Higher-level object features seem to be encoded more explicitly at higher levels of cortical processing, with relatively non-selective responses in area 3b and stronger selectivity in areas 1 and 2. One possibility, then, would be to exploit feature-specific representations in somatosensory cortex to convey richer tactile information about objects.

In a landmark study investigating the neural basis of visual motion perception, Newsome and colleagues provided a first glimpse that this approach might work. In this experiment, animals were presented with a visual display consisting of moving dots. A proportion of the dots tended to move in the same direction, while the rest moved in random directions. The animals' task was to judge in which of two directions the ensemble of dots was moving. The task was easy when all of the dots were moving in the same direction, but became more and more difficult as a greater proportion of the dots moved randomly. A subpopulation of direction-selective neurons had been identified in the medial temporal (MT) cortex, a visual area dedicated to motion processing. Newsome and colleagues then probed whether the perception of the dot patterns could be biased by stimulating direction-selective neurons. In other words, would the animals' tendency to perceive a display as moving leftward, say, increase if a neuron selective for leftward motion was stimulated? Indeed, they found that motion perception could be systematically biased by stimulating direction-selective neurons. The scientific implication of this study was that these direction-selective neurons in MT were causally involved in motion perception, extending beyond the standard correlational study linking neuronal response to stimulus properties. The implication for neuroprosthetics was that feature selectivity could be exploited to produce artificial sensations with specific qualities.

Indeed, we could convey information about the shape of objects by stimulating shape-selective neurons in somatosensory cortex. Simple edge detection algorithms could be used to identify the orientation and curvature of object contours impinging on each fingertip. Then, S1 neurons selective for that particular orientation and curvature could be stimulated. In principle, at least, stimulation of these feature-selective neurons might evoke a percept of that feature. London and Miller have provided preliminary evidence that this approach might work in the context of a proprioceptive neuroprosthesis. Indeed, they identified a subpopulation of neurons in area 2 that are selective for the direction of limb motion in a manner that is qualitatively analogous to the visual motion-selectivity observed in MT. Then, Miller and colleagues had animals perform the proprioceptive analogue of the visual task described above: the limb of the monkey was lightly bumped in one of two directions and the animal's task was to report the bump direction. As was found in the visual experiments, when the physical bump was accompanied by ICMS applied through an electrode with known direction preference, the animals exhibited an increased tendency to judge the bump as having been in that direction. Critically, when ICMS was delivered without a physical perturbation, the animal tended to respond as if a bump had been delivered in the preferred direction of the stimulated neuron. On those trials, interleaved with the paired mechanical/electrical trials, the physical bump was entirely replaced with a virtual one, and the animal still responded as if a physical bump were presented. To the extent that this approach is robust, it could be used to convey information about all stimulus dimensions that are explicitly encoded in S1, including stimulus orientation/curvature, motion and texture. In a tetraplegic patient, the feature selectivity of neurons would not be characterized based on their responses to natural afferent input but rather based on the patient's reports of the evoked percepts when ICMS is delivered through the corresponding electrode.

Conveying information about basic sensory information (contact location, pressure, timing) and higher-level features might be achieved by stimulating different neuronal populations. Indeed, as mentioned above, feature selectivity is stronger at higher stages of cortical processing. Thus, one might convey basic contact information by stimulating low-level areas, say area 3b, and convey feature-specific information by stimulating higher areas, including areas 1 and 2 and even secondary somatosensory cortex. This approach might actually benefit from the fact that ICMS-induced neuronal activation does not seem to propagate normally through hierarchical networks of neurons. Indeed, activation of primary visual cortex by ICMS does not evoke excitatory activation in secondary visual cortex in the same way that natural afferent input does. It may then be that ICMS of area 3b will only minimally interfere with ICMS of areas 1 and beyond. The power of this approach is that it exploits the processing that takes place in upstream circuits and culminates in explicit representations of behaviourally relevant stimulus features. Of course, this feature-based tiling of artificial touch faces significant technological challenges, some of which are discussed briefly below.


The problem of cortical plasticity

When afferent input from a limb is eliminated, the part of the brain that used to respond to that limb starts to respond to other body parts. Typically, the invading signals stem from body regions with adjacent S1 representations (the face, the trunk) or that are overused to compensate for the missing limb. If the brain is so malleable, one might expect that spinal cord injury or amputation would completely change the underlying neuronal representations. Does it even make sense to invoke a biomimetic approach to artificial touch if the brain is changing so much post-injury? It turns out that the reorganization of S1 after deafferentation is not as dramatic as it might seem. First, invading signals from other body regions reflect the unmasking of lateral connections at the level of the cuneate nucleus, rather than major structural and functional changes in deafferented cortex. Second, phantom hand ‘movements' evoke activity in the deafferented cortex. Third, electrical stimulation of deafferented limb regions of S1 in human amputees evokes sensations on the phantom limb rather than on the invading body regions. Thus, while deafferented cortex can be excited by other body parts, downstream cortical regions still interpret this activation as originating from the missing or deafferented limb.

The question remains whether the functional properties of these neurons, whose somatotopic organization seems to be rather stable, change after deafferentation. For example, does tuning for tactile motion direction disappear a year post-injury? If so, feature-specific representations cannot be exploited to expand the repertoire of tactile sensations, as sketched out in the previous section. While refined through sensory experience, feature selectivity is driven in part by endogenous mechanisms of development, so it likely reflects structural properties of cortex that are not so easily undone. While we will not know for sure until a deafferented human patient is stimulated intracortically in S1, it is likely that neuronal representations are stable enough to be exploited to achieve artificial touch.


Practical considerations

While the cutaneous representation of the hand is approximately 7 × 4 mm in monkeys, so can be covered using a small number of arrays, it is about 30 × 20 mm in humans. To blanket it would thus require tens of electrode arrays. Given the current state of the art in neural interface technologies, one might elect to target the fingertip representations, for example, by splitting one array five ways, with a relatively small set of electrodes impinging upon each digit representation. In fact, interfacing with just the thumb and index finger tips might go a long way towards improving the functionality of prosthetic hands. Such a modest number of electrodes will likely limit the spatial resolution of the artificial touch, and eliminate any possibility of restoring a wide range of tactile sensations. Regarding spatial resolution, a hard ceiling is set by the spread of stimulating current, which radiates out hundreds of micrometres to multiple millimetres away from the electrode tip over the detectable and safe range of amplitudes. In the experiments described above, we never tested whether two adjacent electrodes evoked spatially distinct percepts. Therefore, it is unclear whether the bottleneck on spatial resolution is current spread or electrode spacing.

The electrode density and coverage demands are considerably greater if one wishes to elicit percepts with different qualities at each location based on the feature selectivity of neurons, as discussed above. Indeed, this would require the ability to selectively activate neurons with different feature preferences (hopefully resulting in percepts with different qualities) but overlapping receptive fields.

In the light of these considerations, efforts are underway to increase the density of electrodes and their coverage. Regardless, full sensory restoration is not necessary to achieve substantial function, as evidenced by the success and widespread use of the cochlear implant.


The future of somatosensory neuroprostheses

Brain interface technologies are still rather primitive, consisting of metal electrodes, which cause major inflammation and often fail catastrophically. Electrical stimulation is a blunt tool that unselectively and synchronously activates neurons near the electrode tip. Nonetheless, these primitive tools have already been fruitfully used to evoke informative sensations. Electrodes will improve by becoming more biocompatible and compliant, thus less damaging to the neuronal tissue. Optogenetics will replace electrical stimulation, and thus allow for much more controlled and selective stimulation. As these technologies progress, artificial touch will increasingly mimic its natural counterpart. The hope is that a tetraplegic patient will one day be able to dexterously manipulate objects with an embodied robotic hand and regain that critical sensory experience that is touch.


Light, heat, action: neural control of fruit fly behaviour

David Owald, Suewei Lin, Scott Waddell — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4528823, CC BY 4.0.

The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster has emerged as a popular model to investigate fundamental principles of neural circuit operation. The sophisticated genetics and small brain permit a cellular resolution understanding of innate and learned behavioural processes. Relatively recent genetic and technical advances provide the means to specifically and reproducibly manipulate the function of many fly neurons with temporal resolution. The same cellular precision can also be exploited to express genetically encoded reporters of neural activity and cell-signalling pathways. Combining these approaches in living behaving animals has great potential to generate a holistic view of behavioural control that transcends the usual molecular, cellular and systems boundaries. In this review, we discuss these approaches with particular emphasis on the pioneering studies and those involving learning and memory.

Keywords: Drosophila, behaviour, cellular resolution, optogenetics, thermogenetics, reporters


Introduction

The appreciation that behaviours are orchestrated by functioning neural circuits has led to several large-scale projects that are attempting to map neural diagrams of mammalian and insect brains. Although these static views of circuit architecture, or connectomes, are important road maps, they will not explain behavioural control. Even the relatively simple 302 neuron connectome of the round worm Caenorhabditis elegans, which has been known for 30 years, is insufficient to explain the animal's behaviour because internal states and experience modulate and alter the efficacy of the neural networks. Therefore, one needs to understand functional connectivity—how individual neurons and neuronal assemblies operate together—within the brain.

This is not a trivial task by any means. On top of a connectome, one needs to assign the mode of signalling to each component neuron, have an appreciation of the strength of connections between neurons, in addition to learning how different behavioural states of the animal alter the neural circuit dynamics. It perhaps seems obvious that achieving such a complete picture of a brain is easier when studying animals, such as invertebrates, that have a relatively small nervous system. These numerically reduced systems are likely to provide the first opportunities to model realistic brain function and to understand how adaptive and context-appropriate behavioural control arises. A small number of neurons is not the only desirable feature, because deciphering neural circuit function requires intervention. Recent revolutionary developments allow investigators to switch identified neurons on and off while recording consequences in larger neural networks, as the animal behaves. Many of these tools and approaches were first demonstrated in research using the fruit fly Drosophila as a model, and these will be emphasized in this review.

At the heart of all of the new developments has been the general concept that biology can be understood by harnessing the numerous intricate cell biological processes that have arisen across species; shaped and honed by the selective pressures of evolution. In this review, we will discuss how some of these highly evolved mechanisms from a multitude of organisms, including the fly itself, have been exploited as transgenic tools. By expressing them in either a heterologous or ectopic manner, fly researchers have probed how neural circuit activity translates to behavioural control, and even how memory is used.


The fruit fly as a model for behaviour

Behaviour has been studied in the fruit fly since the pioneering neurogenetic studies in the early 1970s by the late Seymour Benzer and colleagues. The principle was straightforward—the same mutagenesis strategies that uncovered mysteries of developmental biology would yield insight into the generation of behaviour. These early efforts in the Benzer laboratory initiated the field by jumping into some of the most interesting areas, such as circadian rhythms, courtship and learning and memory. More recently, studies have extended to include feeding, aggression, sleep and motivation, as well as longevity and neurodegenerative conditions.

We now know that in addition to being a fantastic genetic model, the fruit fly nervous system has an intermediate numerical complexity to the worm or mouse, making it an appropriate model to study conserved neural circuit underpinnings controlling a fairly sophisticated behavioural repertoire. The approximately 100 000 neurons of the fly brain orchestrate behaviours that facilitate the survival and propagation of the species. Recent genetic tools now allow one to reproducibly and specifically manipulate the activity of many neuron types in the fly brain. This ability to directly influence the function of specific cells is a key feature of the studies emphasized here.


Cell-specific gene expression

The first critical step towards controlling cells is to have a means to express effector genes with the desired cellular specificity. Most of these approaches in the fly rely on transposable elements and binary gene expression systems. Promoter regions confer cell-type-specific expression to genes that lie downstream. These promoters, and their cell-type-specific expression, can be captured if a transposable P-element carrying a reporter gene reading frame inserts downstream. The reporter carried by the transposon then ‘enhancer-traps' the promoter and gains expression in the cells that usually express the trapped gene. P-elements have been genetically engineered to a fine art in the fly and many variants now exist. Critically, their mobilization can be controlled at will, and engineered elements are not capable of moving again in an unassisted manner. This has allowed the generation of thousands of stable fly strains with P-elements inserted in unique positions in the fly genome, and that by virtue of position can be used to express other genes in specific cells in the animal.

If the P-elements encode a transcription factor, this transcription factor can be used in a binary manner to express another gene with the same cell-type specificity as that governed by the enhancer driving the transcription factor. The critical trick is to use a transcription factor from another organism that lacks a cognate factor in flies. The first version of this was developed using the budding yeast GAL4 transcription factor and the upstream activating sequence (UASGAL4) that is bound by GAL4 driving a reporter gene. Selecting a suitable transcription factor for this type of application is not trivial. One needs to make sure the same transcription factor binding site is not used by a homologous or unrelated fly transcription factor; e.g. the budding yeast PHO4 shares a site with c-Myc making it less suitable for this purpose. The GAL4 and UAS-reporter parts were imported into the fly on two engineered P-elements. When combined, the cell-type-specifically expressed GAL4 drives expression of the reporter with the same cellular specificity, allowing one to visualize the expression.

Rather than relying on random transposon insertion, one can logically select promoter regions from genes that are known to be expressed in the cell type of interest, to drive GAL4 with a similar cell-specificity. For example, the TH gene encodes tyrosine hydroxylase, an enzyme that is required for the synthesis of dopamine. Consequently, a fragment from the TH-promoter directs gene expression in some dopaminergic neurons (although this not always infallible; in fact, the heavily employed TH-GAL4 does not label rewarding dopaminergic neurons). Similarly, a fragment from the acetylcholine transporter drives gene expression in many cholinergic neurons. These two examples, however, provide expression control confined to most of the cells that use dopamine or acetylcholine but not to defined subsets of this cell type in a particular region of the brain. This is important because it is clear that anatomically discrete neurons that use the same transmitter have unique functions. This is exemplified by fly dopaminergic neurons; those in the central complex regulate arousal, whereas others innervating discrete zones in the mushroom body lobes convey positive or negative reinforcement, or provide motivational/state-dependent control. Clearly, it is critical to control individual dopaminergic neurons to understand how each one functions. Although more precise control can sometimes be obtained with the randomness of different P-element strains, the GAL4 system also provides some logic to increase cellular specificity.

In yeast deprived of galactose, GAL80 binds to GAL4 and represses its activity. Ectopic co-expression of GAL80 therefore allows one to inhibit GAL4 activity in the fly. Partially overlapping GAL4 and GAL80 expression domains limit GAL4 activity to a subset of cells that only express GAL4. Several useful GAL80 strains exist, such as Cha-GAL80, that suppresses expression in cholinergic neurons, TH-GAL80 in dopaminergic neurons, DvGlut-GAL80 in glutamatergic neurons and teashirt-GAL80 that removes most expression in the ventral ganglion and thus confines expression to the brain.

GAL80 has additional strengths. Classic studies in yeast genetics often screened for temperature-sensitive mutations. Such a temperature-sensitive variant of GAL80, when ubiquitously expressed in the fly, permits temporal control of GAL4-directed gene expression. GAL80ts exhibits a similar temperature sensitivity in the fly as it does in yeast, inhibiting GAL4 below 25°C and losing suppression above 29°C. Simply elevating ambient temperature alters the body temperature of the flies and releases GAL80ts inhibition of GAL4. GAL80ts is particularly useful to control the expression of activity-regulating tools that lack intrinsic temporal features, e.g. when ectopically expressing potassium channels such as Kir2.1, EKO or DORK to silence, or at least reduce neural activity, inhibitors or toxins such as tetanus to inhibit exocytosis, or pertussis to inhibit Gi signalling, genetically encoded RNA interference, or constitutively active dominant negative transgenes.

The general principles of the GAL4-UAS system have been replicated in additional binary systems based on the bacterial LexA transcription factor and its LexAop and the Neurospora crassa QF and its QUAS. In addition, methods exist that allow one to temporally control each of these systems. The QF factor can be suppressed by expression of the Neurospora protein QS and the QS inhibition can in turn be relieved by feeding flies with quinic acid. A fusion of the LexA DNA-binding domain with either the GAL4 or QF activation domain to form LexA-GAL4AD or LexAQF permits control using the GAL80 or QS systems, whereas a LexA::VP16 version that uses the herpes viral VMW65 activation domain is resistant to GAL80 and QS control. Combining the three binary systems in parallel in the same fly allows simultaneous and independent labelling of three sets of neurons, or when combined with the numerous effector and reporter transgenes, described later, permits an amazing combination of parallel and independent circuit manipulations in the same behaving fly.

One can also intersect the binary expression systems in logical ways to limit expression to either cells that are common to the two lines, or cells that are unique to one of the two lines. There are many ways to do this, for example one can use LexA to drive expression of the yeast FLP recombinase which removes a FLP-recombinase target (FRT) sequence flanked transcriptional stop cassette from a UASGAL4 target transgene. Therefore, only where LexA overlaps with the GAL4 will the GAL4 be able to drive the UASGAL4 target transgene. Alternatively, the FRT sequences can flank the target transgene reading frame so that the target is not present in the LexA/FLP positive cells and so is only driven in the cells that are unique to the GAL4 line.

A similar intersectional logic can be used with components of a split-GAL4 system. Independent expression of separate DNA-binding and activation domains in partially overlapping patterns only reconstitutes the active transcription factor in the cells that are common. Sometimes the resulting cellular specificity is spectacular. A large library of mushroom body-related split-GAL4 lines has recently been published. A split LexA system has also been reported and approaches have been generated that permit exchange of cassettes encoding GAL4, LexA, QF and the split systems within transposable element backbones in a known genomic context. This incredible genetic flexibility greatly facilitates production of a customized tool-kit to direct cell-specific expression of effector transgenes.


Temporal control of specific neurons

The most successful tools that have been developed can be driven by the GAL4-, LexA- or QF-based systems and provide the ability to control specific neurons with temporal resolution. In this section, we will overview the various effectors—putting their development in a historical context. However, the reader should note that beyond discussing the founding examples, other studies have been selected to highlight a particular use, and it is not our objective to provide a comprehensive list here.


Shibirets1-temporal blockade of neurotransmission

Shibire was the first genetically encoded tool that permitted temporal control of neural function and it fundamentally altered the way neural circuit analysis is approached in the fly. In a seminal study in the early 1970s, a set of non-complementing temperature-sensitive Shibire alleles were discovered. Mutant animals showed impaired locomotion at temperatures above 29°C. They also lost the on and off transients in electroretinograms suggesting a possible defect in neural signalling. Importantly, the disruption was reversible; the flies regained wild-type behaviour and physiology within seconds/minutes of being returned to room temperature. When cloned, Shibire was shown to interact with the membrane dynamics of endocytosis and to encode a dynamin protein. In addition, at restrictive temperatures, shits1 dynamin has been shown to lead to rapid synaptic fatigue within 20 ms of repetitive stimulation at the dorsal longitudinal muscle neuromuscular synapses of adult Drosophila. The groundbreaking development involved cloning the Shits1 coding region under UASGAL4 control. This UAS-Shits1 transgene allowed one to misexpress Shits1 in neurons of choice and transiently block their neurotransmission by elevating the temperature of the flies above the restrictive 29°C.

The utility of UAS-Shits1 was first demonstrated in a memory study testing for an acute role of dorsal paired medial (DPM) neurons in memory consolidation and was quickly followed by studies of the mushroom body neurons. DPM neurons were identified as expressing the amnesiac locus and they project complex processes throughout the mushroom body lobes. This DPM study exemplified a key strength of the temporal control provided by UAS-Shits1. Efforts to ablate the DPM neurons using cell death genes were ineffective because earlier larval expression of the GAL4 line that labels DPM neurons in the adult fly lead to lethality. Instead, acutely blocking DPM neurons in the adult fly using UAS-Shits1 disrupted the stability of olfactory memory; a near phenocopy of the defect observed in amnesiac mutant flies.

Another invaluable feature of UAS-Shits1 is reversibility. In most cases, normal neural function resumes when the flies are returned from the restrictive to permissive temperature. This was exploited in mushroom body studies that used UAS-Shits1 to temporally limit inactivation to discrete periods of the learning and memory process. By only elevating the temperature during either the training, testing or intervening periods of the experiment, mushroom body neurons could be selectively crippled during the memory acquisition, retrieval or consolidation phases. Follow up studies on the mushroom body have led to the general idea that olfactory memory is processed by the anatomically discrete γ, α′β′ and αβ subsets of the overall 2000 mushroom body neurons functioning together as a time-sensitive system. This interaction is most clear following appetitive conditioning where neurotransmission from the γ neurons is required for short-term memory retrieval, α′β′ neuron output is required after training with the DPM neurons to stabilize memory, and the αβ neurons are most critical for long-term memory retrieval.

UAS-Shits1 of course has caveats. It is not clear whether it uniformly blocks the release of all synaptic vesicles, such as those that are ‘dense core’ containing monoamine and neuropeptide transmitters. Nevertheless, there are numerous examples where the tool has created a phenotype in dopaminergic and peptidergic neurons. For example, UAS-Shits1 has been instrumental in determining the nature of dopaminergic reinforcement in the fly and it is noteworthy that the mushroom body αβ and γ neurons express short Neuropeptide F, although some phenotypes might result from disruption of the co-release of a currently mysterious fast-transmitter. Even after 15 years, UAS-Shits1 remains the tool of choice to test the importance of specific neurons in a particular neural process.


Optogenetic neural stimulation

Neuroscience across species has recently been revolutionized by light-triggered neural activation, or as it was later termed ‘optogenetics'. The proof of concept of optogenetics was demonstrated using heterologous expression of components of the fly visual system—arrestin 2, a rhodopsin, and the alpha subunit of a G-protein—in hippocampal neurons. Broad illumination of a population of neurons elicited action potentials only in those cells expressing the ‘chARGe’ system. This study firmly established the precedent that if such switches could be selectively expressed in neurons of interest, they could be specifically activated by light that was generally applied across the brain.

The second pioneering step demonstrated the utility of optogenetics in live-behaving fruit flies. Rather than use the three visual system components of chARGe, the authors expressed the rat ATP-responsive P2X2 receptor that does not have a clear equivalent in the fly genome. Neurons expressing P2X2 could then be selectively activated in intact flies by photo-release of an injected caged ATP; in effect producing light-controllable animals. The first results were spectacular. Expression of UAS-P2X2 in the fly giant fibre neurons led to light evoked take-off, even in flies that lacked a head! In addition, activating the TH-GAL4 labelled population of dopaminergic neurons lead to alteration of locomotor behaviour. Another study from the same group used UAS-P2X2 to generate male-specific courtship song by activating fruitless-expressing neurons in the thoracic ganglion of female flies. Although these females sung ‘out-of-tune’, their song could be perfected if the females also expressed the male-specific fruM isoform. These results suggest that a song-generating motor programme exists in female flies, but that it lacks the male physiology and neural commands for song initiation. Another impressive demonstration formed phantom aversive memories by pairing odour exposure with P2X2-mediated light-activation of TH-GAL4 dopaminergic neurons.

The optogenetic tools that are now the most widely used are based on microbial opsins that are integral to cation channels. As the name suggests, the Channelrhodopsins provide an easier tool for neuronal activation because the product of a single transgene can be directly gated by light. There is no requirement for photo-uncagable compounds but in many cases the critical all-trans-retinal cofactor needs to be provided in the fly's diet. However, until recently, low channel conductance and poor penetration of the fly cuticle of the short wavelength light required to activate Channelrhodopsin have impeded its application to adult fly behavioural studies.

The first optogenetic study of learning in Drosophila bypassed the issue of the adult cuticle by expressing a UAS-Channelrhodopsin 2 (ChR2) in transparent larvae. One hundred millisecond light pulses delivered to motor neurons expressing ChR2 evoked activity in body wall muscles at the neuromuscular junction. The authors also expressed ChR2 in either TH-GAL4 labelled dopaminergic or Tdc2-GAL4 labelled octopaminergic neurons and paired their photoactivation with odour exposure. Whereas dopaminergic neuron activation formed aversive memory, the octopaminergic neuron encoded experience was appetitive. UAS-ChR2 was also employed to study the consequences of peripheral sensory neuron activation in adult flies and it has been successfully used in physiological studies where part of the head cuticle is removed and the brain is directly illuminated.

Recent technical improvements have made Channelrhodopsin variants that are much more useful for adult fly behaviour. For instance, shifting the activation into the red spectrum in UAS-ReaChR increased penetration of the fly cuticle as well as using wavelengths of light that apparently do not interfere with normal fly vision. UAS-ReaChR permitted time-resolved activation of courtship song. ReaChR was also employed in a recent study to demonstrate that activating output neurons from the tips of the horizontal lobes of the mushroom body, drives avoidance behaviour. Further novel variants of Channelrhodopsins with distinct properties have been identified by de novo sequencing more than 100 algal transcriptomes. The activation wavelengths of CsChrimson lie within the red spectrum. The authors demonstrated CsChrimson's value for studying fly behaviour, by expressing it in projection neurons that mediate CO2 avoidance and observing that flies avoid illuminated quadrants of a plate. CsChrimson was also instrumental in a recent study of mushroom body output neurons. CsChrimson-mediated activation of individual sets of mushroom body output neurons was shown to either drive avoidance or approach behaviour. Lastly, mutagenesis has been used to generate ChR2-XXL, a Channelrhodopsin with high expression level and a long open-state and chemical engineering has provided artificial retinal analogues that can alter colour tuning and light sensitivity of ChR2 variants.


Temperature-triggered neural activation

Changes in ambient temperature such as those that are appropriate for inactivating neurotransmission with Shibirets1 can also be used to activate neurons that misexpress temperature-sensitive transient receptor potential (TRP) channels. Both the fly heat-activated dTrpA1 and cold-activated rat TRPM8 channels have been effectively used in the fly.

The fly dTrpA1 gene encodes a non-specific cation channel that is required in a small number of neurons in the brain for temperature preference. Ectopically expressed UAS-dTrpA1 depolarizes neurons when flies are exposed to more than 25°C, allowing one to stimulate specific neurons by raising the temperature of the flies. An early study expressed UAS-dTrpA1 in circadian neurons with pdf-GAL4 and found that continuously stimulating these neurons, by housing the flies at 27°C, promoted wakefulness in the early night. More acute activation protocols were used in another study that identified three layers of a neural circuit that provides hunger control of the behavioural expression of sugar-reward memory. UAS-dTrpA1 mediated activation of Neuropeptide F (dNPF), the fly orthologue of mammalian NPY, producing neurons prior to memory testing mimicked food-deprivation and led to expression of sugar memory even in food satiated flies. By contrast, similarly timed dTrpA1-mediated activation of the mushroom body innervating dopaminergic MB-MP1 neurons suppressed sugar memory retrieval in hungry flies.

In another striking study, dTrpA1-mediated activation of dorsal fan-shaped body neurons was shown to be sufficient to put flies to sleep. Furthermore, the artificially induced sleep was capable of facilitating long-term memory formation.

Acute neural activation with UAS-dTrpA1 has also been instrumental in studies of reinforcement signalling during learning. As briefly mentioned above, blocking dopaminergic neurons with UAS-Shits1 implicated specific groups of these neurons in aversive and rewarding reinforcement during olfactory conditioning. Furthermore, the optogenetic study of Claridge-Chang et al. revealed that dopaminergic neurons in the PPL1 cluster were those that were likely to be sufficient to provide aversive reinforcement. Further studies with dTrpA1-mediated activation established that the MP1 and MV1 neurons within PPL1 have reinforcing properties, in addition to the MB-M3 neurons from an anatomically discrete cluster called PAM. dTrpA1-mediated neural activation combined with UAS-Shits1 experiments also facilitated the discovery of rewarding dopaminergic neurons in the PAM cluster. Pairing their heat-activation with odour formed robust odour approach behaviour, whereas blocking them compromised sugar- or water-rewarded learning.

To date, the cold and menthol-activated TRPM8 has been less frequently employed. In the original fly study, UAS-TRPM8 was driven in neurons that express the CCAP neuropeptide and activation of CCAP neurons by placing the flies at 15°C was shown to induce wing expansion in newly eclosed adults. UAS-TRPM8 was also used to corroborate the dTrpA1 findings that activation of the MB-MP1 dopaminergic neurons suppressed appetitive memory expression in hungry flies.

Ectopic expression of UAS-TRPM8 or UAS-dTrpA1 driven by large GAL4 collections has also been used to screen for neurons contributing to a wide-range of behaviours, such as feeding, walking, grooming, courtship, copulation and aggression. Lastly, a clever recent study showed that dTrpA1-mediated activation of random collections of mushroom body Kenyon cells could be paired with an electric shock punishment to induce aversive memories; with the flies subsequently avoiding the zone of a temperature gradient that would lead to the reactivation of these same neurons.

In principle, it should be possible to combine dTrpA1 and TRPM8 tools by using the different binary expression systems, to express them in discrete sets of neurons of the same fly. These neurons could then be independently controlled with the relevant changes in temperature required to activate the two TRP channels.

It is important to note that the onset of activity is much slower with heat than it is with light control, and that opto- and thermogenetic stimulation will not always provide similar results. For instance, a separation between a deterministic and a probabilistic component of male courtship song was evident using UAS-ReaChR mediated activation of neurons but not using thermogenetic UAS-dTrpA1. Most of the optogenetic and thermogenetic neural stimulation studies discussed above stimulate particular neurons without detailed consideration of the firing dynamic. The obvious success of these studies therefore surprisingly questions the importance of temporal activity patterns in these neurons. It will be interesting to record from neurons during stimulation with these tools and to compare the evoked activity patterns with those generated by physiologically relevant stimuli. It is conceivable that some neurons are constrained to adopt one of a few possible firing states, regardless of the activity that is injected with the optogenetic or thermogenetic actuators. Another potential issue of artificially induced firing is the observation that excessive firing can put neurons into a refractory depolarization block period where they do not fire at all. In such a case, investigators might be misled to think an observed phenotype results from excitation when in fact the neurons have been inhibited.


Recording circuit physiology

Stimulation and inhibition techniques allow one to assemble a low-resolution idea of how certain neural circuits are ordered and operate to direct behaviour. These models can be challenged and extended by using the same cell-specific expression control to produce a number of genetically encoded reporters of neural activity and cell-signalling processes.

Despite having lower temporal resolution, genetically encoded reporters do have advantages over single electrode electrophysiology. They can be relatively easily and reproducibly targeted to the same cell type and with the right control, they can facilitate recording from specific cells or neural ensembles in the small fly brain. Lastly, they can be monitored by a somewhat less invasive procedure that only requires a small window to be opened in the head cuticle of a fly that is mounted in a suitable orientation for viewing under the microscope and that permits the fly to respond to the relevant stimuli. All of the currently popular reporters rely on variants of fluorescent proteins that ‘report’ activity, or a particular cellular event, by changing their emission. The difficulties in their use are therefore mostly related to recording fluorescence. Although the animal is mounted under the optics of a suitable microscope, movement of the tissue needs to be minimized and accounted for because subtle shifts of the focal plane lead to measurable changes in fluorescence. This is a particular issue if the sensitivity and signal-to-noise ratio of the reporter is low. One way to account for that is to co-image a second non-activity reporting fluorescent marker in the same focal plane. Lastly, as some of the reporters bind ions or metabolites, they could potentially buffer, and therefore disrupt, the cellular process that they are designed to record. Nevertheless, the advantages of genetically encoded reporters largely outweigh the concerns. The ability to specifically express the reporter of choice in the neurons of interest means that targeted recording is readily and reproducibly achievable. At present, the most commonly used reporters monitor changes in calcium concentration, synaptic vesicle fusion, second messengers (such as cAMP) or voltage. Most of these tools have been used to observe spontaneous or stimulus-evoked responses, as well as to measure neural responses to artificial stimulation of potentially afferent neurons.

A pioneering study used the GAL4-UAS system to express the calcium-sensitive luminescent protein apoaequorin in Drosophila Kenyon cells. Surprisingly, when the essential cofactor coelenterazine was added to dissected brains in a luminometer, the mushroom bodies exhibited a synchronous oscillation in intracellular calcium; a phenomenon that was altered in brains taken from forgetful amnesiac mutant flies. Three landmark studies imaged odour-evoked neural activity in the antennal lobe using either live fly or partly dissected fly head preparations. Expression of the ratiometric calcium sensor UAS-cameleon 2.1 in projection neurons measured odour-evoked activity in the antennal lobes and mushroom body calyces. A more detailed study measured synaptic transmission at multiple layers of the olfactory system by expressing the synaptic vesicle localized pH-sensitive UAS-Synapto-pHluorin (spH) in olfactory sensory neurons, projection neurons and inhibitory local neurons in the antennal lobes. Natural odours were seen to elicit similar combinatorial patterns of activity in the sensory neuron and projection neuron layers of the antennal lobe suggesting a faithful transmission of odour information within identifiable glomeruli. In addition, the ability to record synaptic transmission revealed that projection neurons have recurrent synapses in the antennal lobe and that local neurons provide broad interglomerular inhibition. A similar conserved sensory-projection neuron activation was also observed using the calcium-sensitive UAS-GCaMP reporter.

Although Synapto-pHluorin provides a more direct measure of vesicle dynamics than presynaptic calcium influx, the increased sensitivity and improved speed of a new generation of GCaMP reporters (GCaMP6 can detect single action potentials) has made GCaMP the most popular activity reporter. However, GCaMP and spH have both been heavily employed at all levels of the neural circuitry involved in olfactory memory. For example, several studies have identified physiological changes in odour-evoked responses after training, or ‘memory traces' in the mushroom body neurons, and the mushroom body-associated DPM and anterior paired lateral (APL) neurons, some of which are altered in memory defective flies, suggesting their plausible importance in learned behaviour. Other applications have included the visualization of sparse odour coding in the Kenyon cell population, reward and punishment signalling in reinforcing dopaminergic neurons, activity in dopaminergic neurons after training and learning-induced changes in odour-evoked drive to neurons downstream of the mushroom body.

As calcium is only ever a surrogate for neural activity, and direct physiological recording is tricky for single cells and impossible for larger ensembles, there has been great interest in developing genetically encoded fast voltage sensors. There is still someway to go, but the recently described ArcLight and FRET-opsin reporters suggest robust millisecond resolution voltage recording will be achievable. The ideal voltage sensor would partially replace the need for classical electrophysiology and make it possible to perform multi-channel ensemble recording in the small fly brain.

Genetically encoded sensors can also allow one to monitor changes in cAMP second messenger signalling. These are particularly useful in neuroscience because several neuropeptide, monoamine and fast-transmitters evoke metabotropic responses in recipient neurons through G-protein-coupled receptors. The Epac1-camps cAMP sensor was first employed in fly circadian neurons to show a modulatory effect of the PDF neuropeptide and to later determine that the clock network comprises multiple independent oscillators. Epac1-camps and a Protein kinase A sensor AKAR2 have also been used to measure the effect of extraneous dopamine on mushroom body neurons. Finally, genetic approaches also exist to mark cells that are subject to dopaminergic modulation.


Combining the approaches to assemble functional neural pathways

Opto- and thermogenetic stimulation and inhibition and recording studies permit the identification of component neurons that contribute to behaviours but do not themselves provide information about neural circuitry. It is necessary to understand how they are embedded within a larger context—what neurons lie upstream and downstream. Knowing the neurotransmitter a particular neuron uses can be very helpful for this purpose. If neural stimulation allows one to generate an overt behavioural change, such as mimicking a change in the animals state or forming a memory, one can assume that the relevant downstream neurons must express receptors to receive the signals. Cell-specific expression of RNA interference constructs to neurotransmitter receptors can therefore be used to identify the sites in the brain where the gain of function transmitters act, and therefore to map functional connectivity. This is more difficult for fast-transmitters because of the complexity of the number and subunit composition of their receptors but it is fairly straightforward for neuropeptides and monoamines, which often exert their function via single or small numbers of receptors that are single subunits.

As previously discussed, dTrpA1-mediated activation of peptidergic dNPF neurons conferred a food-deprived like state that promoted the behavioural expression of appetitive memory. After finding that loss of the dNPF receptor npfr1 gene locked the flies in an apparently food-satiated state and inhibited appetitive memory expression, the authors used cell-type-restricted expression of UAS-npfr1RNAi to identify where dNPF acts. They identified the MB-MP1 dopaminergic neurons as a key site where dNPF signalling is required to gate appetitive memory expression. As noted earlier, UAS-Shits1 and UAS-dTrpA1/TRPM8 experiments subsequently established an inhibitory mode of operation for MB-MP1 neurons, thus leading the authors to propose a hierarchical inhibition circuit motif. Hunger promotes the release of dNPF, which releases the inhibitory influence of MB-MP1 dopaminergic neurons to facilitate the expression of food-relevant memories.

If stimulation of a particular set of neurons results in an ectopic behaviour, the relevant downstream receptor can also be identified, by testing whether the activation phenotype remains in a receptor mutant background. For example, pairing odour exposure with UAS-dTrpA1 mediated activation of Tdc2-GAL4 labelled octopaminergic neurons formed a labile appetitive memory, but it could not be formed in flies that were compromised for either the Oamb alpha-adrenergic-like receptor or the octβ2R beta-adrenergic-like receptor. These two receptors appear to exert their learning-related functions in different subsets of reinforcing dopaminergic neurons. Consequently, Tdc2-GAL4 activation also failed to implant reward memory in a dumb1 mutant background that lacks the D1-like dopamine receptor.

A similar mutant background approach established that the aggression-promoting effects of dTrpA1-mediated activation of Tachykinin-releasing neurons required the function of the Takr86C-encoded receptor.

With sufficient and independent cell-specific control, investigators can combine as many of the described tools as they can muster in one fly brain. For example, calcium imaging can be combined with UAS-dTrpA1 and UAS-Shits1-mediated activation or inactivation of neural subtypes to understand functional connectivity. Such an approach was used in a recent study that uncovered feedback inhibition within the mushroom bodies. Odour-evoked activity was higher at the restrictive temperature in mushroom body neurons that coexpressed UAS-GCaMP3 and UAS-Shits1. The feedback comes from the GABA-ergic APL neurons that have elaborate processes throughout the mushroom body. Expressing lexAop-dTrpA1 in Kenyon cells and UAS-GCaMP3 or UAS-spH in APL neurons revealed that the mushroom body drives the APL neurons. Further experiments that required intersectional genetics to express UAS-Shits1 or UAS-dTrpA1 cleanly in APL neurons and lexAop-GCAMP3 in Kenyon cells revealed that APL neurons inhibit odour-evoked activity in the mushroom body, thereby closing the feedback loop.

A similar strategy was used to investigate the effects of dopamine release onto the mushroom body. Discrete subsets of dopaminergic neurons were activated using UAS-dTrpA1 expressed under the control of various GAL4 drivers. Cyclic AMP levels or PKA activity were simultaneously monitored in the mushroom body neurons expressing either Epac1-camps, TEpacVV or the PKA-reporter AKAR3, respectively. Alternatively the Ca2+ sensor GCaMP3 driven by a mushroom body neuron-restricted promoter was used to measure odour-evoked activity following an artificial learning paradigm pairing odour-presentation and dTrpA1-mediated activation of dopaminergic neurons. The use of temperature-regulated tools in combination with imaging is thus a powerful approach, although temperature-induced movement can make the imaging of small processes tricky.

An alternative to thermogenetics is to combine optogenetics or chemogenetics with imaging or electrophysiology. For example, application of ATP onto mushroom body neurons that express UAS-P2X2 while recording electrophysiologically from projection neurons and local neurons in the antennal lobe suggests a functional feedback within these layers of the olfactory circuit in the fly. Using a similar approach, glutamate was shown to be an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the fly antennal lobe. Activating glutamatergic local neurons using UAS-P2X2 expression and ATP application while recording from projection neurons revealed a hyperpolarizing response. UAS/lexAop-P2X2-mediated activation of pdf-GAL4 expressing circadian neurons was also successfully employed in combination with GCaMP and Epac1-camps imaging in putative follower neurons in the clock system.

Channelrhodopsins have also been useful in such endeavours. An impressive study combined GCaMP imaging of individual dendritic claws on a single Kenyon cell with UAS-ChR2 optogenetic activation of subsets of projection neurons and electrophysiological recordings of Kenyon cells. The authors found that each of the average of seven claws per Kenyon cell responded as an individual, and that activity in three to four of them was likely to drive the cell to spike.

Another study demonstrated functional connectivity in the motion detection part of the fly visual system. UAS-ChR2 was expressed in small-field T4 and T5 cells and electrophysiological recordings were made from lobula plate tangential cells.


Closing remarks

Beyond being a fabulous test-bed for new genetically encoded tools, the future looks very bright for studies of neural circuit function in the fly. Many studies already suggest that important neuroscience questions can be addressed and that conserved mechanisms will be revealed that have general relevance.

With improved resolution of microscopy and tools that are localized to cellular subcompartments, one can foresee the ability to combine systems neuroscience and synaptic physiology in the brain. Recent studies in the more accessible preparation of the larval neuromuscular junction have for example used synaptically targeted GCaMP3 to distinguish between spontaneous and evoked modes of neurotransmission. Others have employed ChR2 or a light-gated ionotropic glutamate receptor to fine-tune synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular junction. In principle then, it should be feasible to combine on and off switches with both detailed synaptic recordings and behavioural analyses. This will not be trivial but tethered fly preparations have already been developed that permit neural manipulation and recording while the animal is still able to fly or walk.


The impact of neuroscience on society: cognitive enhancement in neuropsychiatric disorders and in healthy people

Barbara J Sahakian, Annette B Bruhl, Jennifer Cook, Clare Killikelly, George Savulich, Thomas Piercy, Sepehr Hafizi, Jesus Perez et al. — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4528826, CC BY 4.0.

In addition to causing distress and disability to the individual, neuropsychiatric disorders are also extremely expensive to society and governments. These disorders are both common and debilitating and impact on cognition, functionality and wellbeing. Cognitive enhancing drugs, such as cholinesterase inhibitors and methylphenidate, are used to treat cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, respectively. Other cognitive enhancers include specific computerized cognitive training and devices. An example of a novel form of cognitive enhancement using the technological advancement of a game on an iPad that also acts to increase motivation is presented. Cognitive enhancing drugs, such as methylphenidate and modafinil, which were developed as treatments, are increasingly being used by healthy people. Modafinil not only affects ‘cold’ cognition, but also improves ‘hot’ cognition, such as emotion recognition and task-related motivation. The lifestyle use of ‘smart drugs' raises both safety concerns as well as ethical issues, including coercion and increasing disparity in society. As a society, we need to consider which forms of cognitive enhancement (e.g. pharmacological, exercise, lifelong learning) are acceptable and for which groups (e.g. military, doctors) under what conditions (e.g. war, shift work) and by what methods we would wish to improve and flourish.

Keywords: cognitive enhancers, neuroethics, cognitive training, schizophrenia, game, smart drugs


Cognitive enhancement in neuropsychiatric disorders

In addition to the increasing prescription use of cognitive enhancers, there is also a growing lifestyle use by healthy people. The evidence for this trend comes mostly from increasing sales numbers, in addition to purchases via the internet and sporadic seizures such as reported in a recent newspaper article about a £200 000 smart drugs seizure. However, solid longitudinal data on cognitive enhancing drug use by healthy people using rigorous survey methodology are needed. There is also a lack of data on the dangers of these drugs. For example, in the case of the racetam class, piracetam is relatively well studied. However, the newer racetams being sold via the internet are far more potent and indeed, some drugs being sold have no published clinical trials on their safety and efficacy. For these and other neuroethical reasons, including justice, the Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues has reported on cognitive enhancing drugs as one of the top four priorities in their recent Gray Matters report.

To get a better understanding of potential effects, benefits and also potential dangers of so-called smart drugs, we first need to define this group of drugs. From a scientific point of view, the definition of ‘enhancing’ is difficult: does it refer to an improvement of a function relative to its previous level or beyond a particular point? This might seem relatively easy to define in patients with clear cognitive deficits such as in chronic schizophrenia or stroke, but might prove more difficult in people without a medical diagnosis but subjective deficits or in healthy people with the wish to improve their cognitive performance. For example, a healthy person who is sleep-deprived or jet lagged may want to counteract that state with cognitive enhancing drugs. Would that be considered restoration or enhancement? Similarly, an elderly person who is still working may wish to perform as they did when they were in their twenties. Again, if they use cognitive enhancing drugs to obtain their previous optimal state, would that be considered restoration or enhancement? From a pharmacological perspective, drugs with a supposed cognitive enhancing effect can be found in a variety of classes with a variety of pharmacological targets ranging from acetylcholine to serotonin, glutamate, noradrenaline and dopamine, plus drugs where the mechanism by which they exert their cognitive enhancing effects is still not fully understood. The aim of this review is to summarize studies on cognitive enhancers in patients, including a new study of our group on a non-pharmacological method of enhancing motivation and cognition. The review also presents research studies on healthy volunteers that use drugs as tools to understand the neuromodulation by neurotransmitters of cognitive processes, including attention, memory, planning and problem solving. In addition, the article discusses the increasing use of ‘smart drugs' by healthy people as well as the use of neuromodulating devices in both disorders and health. Finally, we consider the implications for society and future research directions.

Neuropsychiatric disorders are disorders of cognition. Cognitive manifestations of neuropsychiatric disorders include disturbances in the regulation of attention (attentional biases), learning (aberrant learning), and in top–down regulation by the prefrontal cortex. Furthermore, impairments of memory and executive function have been found in many neuropsychiatric disorders. Many neuropsychiatric disorders have a neurodevelopmental origin and an onset or prodromal stage in childhood, and mental disorders affect young people disproportionally, with 75% of mental illnesses beginning before the age of 24 years. This is the period during which the brain is undergoing major developmental processes, particularly in the prefrontal cortex, which is why it is not that surprising that environmental influences, such as stress or substance abuse, may have especially profound effects on prefrontal functions.

Neuropsychiatric disorders affect the functionality and wellbeing of individuals and pose an economic burden for society. These disorders are not only costly with respect to treatment and other services related to disorders, including special accommodation, social services and informal care, but even more so when considering the indirect costs, such as lost income and productivity owing to not finishing school or reaching only low grades, inability to train for a job, lower academic achievement, absence from work or early retirement. Currently, treatment for mental disorders, both psychologically and pharmacologically, targets the obvious symptoms of the disorders, but rarely the cognitive impairments (except for some treatments for Alzheimer's disease and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)). These cognitive symptoms often persist even after remission of the more acute symptoms of, for example depression or psychosis, and they have a great impact on the indirect costs and loss of productivity, quality of life and wellbeing. Therefore, ‘smart drugs' or cognitive enhancing drugs are needed to improve cognitive problems in patients with neuropsychiatric disorders. Improving functionality of patients suffering from neuropsychiatric disorders will lead to a reduction of the costs of these disorders for society and governments in the range of about £90 billion in the UK.

A wide variety of interventions that can enhance cognitive performance in mental disorders have been identified. Some of them are behavioural interventions, such as exercise, meditation, sleep hygiene or cognitive stimulation (e.g. cognitive training, CT). Others involve the application of exogenous agents such as cognitive enhancing drugs or nutritional supplements with supposedly positive effects on cognitive performance and mood. A last group of interventions targets the brain physically by applying electromagnetic fields to the surface of the skull, e.g. transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) or transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). All of these interventions aim to improve neural circuits in a neuroplastic way and to improve cognitive functions (including socio-affective functions).


Alzheimer's disease

Alzheimer's disease, a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by a progressive decline in cognitive and everyday functioning, was one of the first disorders where acetylcholinesterase inhibitors were developed and are now approved and widely used specifically to improve the impaired cognitive function or to reduce the cognitive decline. In Alzheimer's disease and other dementias the most obvious symptoms from the beginning are cognitive deficits, one of the earliest impairments being in episodic memory. The current guidelines on pharmacological treatment in Alzheimer's dementia consistently recommend early assessment and treatment with cholinesterase inhibiting drugs such as donepezil, galantamine and rivastigmine beginning early and continuing as long as tolerated. The NMDA receptor antagonist memantine is also generally used in later stages of Alzheimer's disease. Evidence suggests that these drugs can also be effective even in severe disease states. There are currently 820 000 people with dementia in the UK, with one new case every 14 minutes in England and Wales, and the cost of dementia to the UK economy is £23 billion per year, which is more than cancer, heart disease and stroke. The number of people placed in institutions is expected to rise from 224 000 in 1998 to 365 000 in 2031. However, early assessment and early effective treatment with drugs aimed at improving cognitive function have been shown to reduce overall direct costs by more than £3600 per patient, with another £4150 in indirect cost savings, parallel to an improvement of quality of life for the patient and the carers.


Parkinson's disease

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative disorder typically characterized by motor deficits, but a majority of patients also suffer from non-motor symptoms that impact on their quality of life. Non-motor symptoms in PD include psychiatric symptoms such as mood and affect symptoms and psychosis, cognitive dysfunction, fatigue and dementia, and autonomic dysfunction. More than 125 000 people are affected by PD in the UK, causing total costs of about £1.9 billion per year. In parallel to the gradual loss of function, the need for care increases, placing a high burden on families and society as a whole. With the increasing age of the population, the number of persons affected by PD is expected to rise. The non-motor symptoms contribute considerably to the burden for carers and the reduced quality of life in PD patients, as well as nursing home placement. Cognitive enhancers have been investigated in order to treat cognitive dysfunction and fatigue, as well as other dementia symptoms. Studies have tried to improve fatigue using methylphenidate and modafinil, both with only weak effects. Impulsivity can on the one hand be a symptom of PD itself, and on the other hand be evoked by treatment with dopamine agonists in vulnerable patients (review:). One study using amantadine, an NMDA receptor antagonist with additional effects on dopamine, norepinephrine and acetylcholine, found weak effects on clinical measures of gambling in PD. Another study in our laboratory used a single dose of the noradrenergic reuptake inhibitor atomoxetine, which also has antagonistic effects on the NMDA receptor. In a double blind placebo-controlled crossover design, PD patients showed a trend to an improved reaction time and accuracy on the stop signal reaction test (SSRT), reduced risk-taking behaviour and increased deliberation time in the Cambridge Gamble Task. There was also a positive correlation between atomoxetine plasma concentration and planning performance on the One Touch Stockings of Cambridge task (www.camcog.com). On the neural level, this effect was associated with an increased activation in inhibition-related brain areas, including the right inferior frontal gyrus, and fronto-striatal connectivity. These promising proof-of-concept studies support further testing of atomoxetine treatment in impulsive–compulsive PD in clinical studies with longer-term treatment. Regarding dementia and other specific cognitive symptoms, anticholinergic drugs, such as donepezil and rivastigmine, are considered as efficacious but have rather weak effects, whereas the NMDA receptor antagonist memantine shows no clear positive effect (review). One study showed improved global cognition with atomoxetine in PD, parallel to another study that showed improved executive functioning on two clinical scales of executive function.


Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder is a highly heritable disorder (in children about 75% heritable; meta-analysis, review) with a 12-month prevalence of 5–6% in children and about 4% in adults. If ADHD is not treated effectively, the prognosis is complicated by psychiatric comorbidities such as anxiety, mood and substance-use disorders and impairments in basic, social and productive role functioning. Longitudinal studies indicate that ADHD is associated with poorer long-term outcomes, including increased educational dropout, job dismissal, criminal activities, substance abuse, other mental illnesses and increased accident rates, which can be reduced by treatment, but only partially when looking at academic or occupational outcome. While methylphenidate (Ritalin®) is an effective treatment for about 60–70% of people with ADHD, some people do not respond to treatment or cannot take the treatment owing to side effects. In addition, methylphenidate is a stimulant drug and therefore has some abuse potential. For these reasons, it is important that novel, effective and safe treatments for ADHD are developed. The annual excess cost of ADHD in the USA in 2000 was estimated to be $31.6 billion.

Working memory is one of the cognitive domains impaired in ADHD in childhood and adulthood. Methylphenidate, acting primarily by increasing the synaptic concentration of dopamine and noradrenaline by blocking their re-uptake, improves spatial working memory performance in adult patients with ADHD and in healthy volunteers. On the neural level, the main effect of methylphenidate is an increase in efficiency of the networks involved in working memory. The main locus of action in both patients with ADHD and in healthy volunteers is the striatum. However, this mechanism seems not to be different between patients with ADHD and healthy volunteers, who do not differ with respect to their dopamine D2/3 receptor capacity at baseline. Furthermore, methylphenidate improved and normalized the stop signal reaction time in boys with ADHD. A recent meta-analysis of methylphenidate effects in children and adolescents confirmed this positive effect on response inhibition, as well as on the increased reaction time variability. In parallel, modafinil improved response inhibition in ADHD. Atomoxetine also improved response inhibition in adult patients with ADHD, but did not affect sustained attention and spatial working memory.


Schizophrenia

Schizophrenia is a paradigmatic disorder where cognitive deficits on the one hand are a core domain and on the other hand are known to be an important determinant of functional outcome through their impact on the level of self-care and utilization of hospital services. Overall, summing-up direct and indirect costs, schizophrenia is estimated to cost £ 13.1 billion per year in total in the UK. However, even small improvements in cognitive functions could help patients make the transition to independent living and working and could therefore reduce direct and indirect costs markedly, besides improving the wellbeing and health of patients. Cognitive deficits are typically found in memory, cognitive flexibility and visuospatial learning. In patients with a first psychotic episode, modafinil improved working memory and also emotion recognition. In patients with manifest schizophrenia, modafinil improved cognitive flexibility, measured with the intra-extradimensional attentional set shifting task. Other studies showed improved motor activity and improved clinical condition and self-reported quality of life, as well as improved cognitive performance on a subtest of the Wechsler adult intelligence scale. On the neurobiological level, modafinil increased dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) activity, particularly in schizophrenia patients with cognitive dysfunction. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, such as donepezil and rivastigmine, have shown no or only weak effects in schizophrenia. Galantamine acts as cholinesterase inhibitor, but also on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors parallel to nicotinic agonists such as xanomeline and DMXB-A and nicotine. Galantamine improved certain cognitive functions in schizophrenia, but further research studies are required.

There is a great need to develop novel, more effective cognitive-enhancing drugs to improve cognition, functionality and wellbeing in patients. However, regrettably, many pharmaceutical companies have left the field of drug development in neuropsychiatric disorders, such as ADHD and schizophrenia, although some remain in pursuing neuroprotective treatments for neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's disease. For this and other reasons, including the explosion of technological advances underused in mental healthcare, there is an unmet need to develop cognitive enhancement techniques, such as CT, which can be used on a much larger scale. As an example of these possibilities that represent the futurescoping of cognitive enhancement, we present data on CT of memory using an iPad game in patients with schizophrenia. As apathy, anhedonia and negative symptoms are typical of chronic neuropsychiatric disorders, the game training has the added advantage of increasing motivation. This latter feature of CT games is particularly important as patients actively enjoy participating, in contrast to the traditional CT, which may seem tedious or boring.


A study on computer-game-based CT in schizophrenia

Cognitive remediation therapies for schizophrenia result in improvements in cognition, symptoms and psychosocial functioning, particularly when combined with neuropsychiatric rehabilitation (meta-analyses: e.g. adjunctive social skills training, vocational training). Of particular interest, recent computer-assisted cognitive rehabilitation and training studies have successfully shown improvements, not only in cognitive functioning, but also in negative symptoms, reality monitoring, social cognition and employment and functional outcomes in schizophrenia. We therefore conducted a study to test the promise of computer-based rehabilitation programmes for schizophrenia and further suggest their potential for helping patients achieve better functional outcomes (e.g. work, independent living), one critical component of rehabilitation. A recent systematic review of rehabilitation studies for schizophrenia concluded that a range of cognitive domains could be improved using computerized practice, suggesting that episodic memory difficulties may be one cognitive dysfunction amenable to computer-based CT. Therefore, we focused on episodic memory for training, because we had previously demonstrated that it was related to functional outcome in patients with first episode psychosis, and because we had a strong understanding of the underlying neurocircuitry involved. However, CT packages typically require supervision on standard psychological paradigms. Sessions are often long and repetitive; dropout rates can be high and cost efficiency is limited by the requirement for constant supervision. For example, Wykes et al. note that the dropout rate for 12 of the studies included in their meta-analysis of cognitive remediation for schizophrenia was higher than 15%. Recent neuroscience and mental health policy reports suggest that the use of neurotechnologies, such as video-game training, is a potential technique for enhancing cognitive performance in schizophrenia. Computer-based CT taking the form of a neurotechnology (i.e. ‘brain training’ software), for example, has already been shown to improve verbal learning/memory and cognitive control in individuals with schizophrenia. Importantly, improved cognition was associated with better functioning 6 months after completing the training intervention. Use of a computer game as a means of cognitive remediation has also been shown to improve negative symptoms and executive function in a small number of individuals with first episode psychosis. Furthermore, video game playing has been associated with structural neural changes, including a significant grey matter increase in the hippocampal formation in healthy individuals. Computer games that are custom-made to be enjoyable, attention-grabbing and easily accessible may thus comprise an appealing treatment option for patients and a cost effective option for health services.

In this study, we developed a novel memory game for delivering CT of episodic memory using a hand-held portable iPad. This game embedded a paired associative learning (PAL) task into a narrative, which allowed for the selection of characters, rewarded progress, provided feedback and used visually appealing displays and stimulating music to keep users engaged and motivated. The Cambridge neuropsychological test automated battery (CANTAB) PAL task is a sensitive measure of episodic memory that has been shown to engage the hippocampal formation. We aimed to test the effectiveness of 8 h of CT (i.e. gameplay) on memory and daily functioning in individuals with schizophrenia. We also measured participants' level of enjoyment and motivation to continue gameplay to determine whether a wider application to other patient groups would be feasible for future larger studies.


Methods

Twenty-two participants were recruited from public health services within the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Foundation Trust (CPFT), including the Cambridge Assessment and Management of Early Outcomes service (CAMEO; www.cameo.nhs.uk) and the Rehabilitation and Recovery Service, as well as analogous services in other parts of the UK (see for demographic information). Inclusion criteria were patients with a clinical diagnosis of schizophrenia as determined by the SCID-P16 or DSM-5 or a related condition (e.g. schizoaffective disorder, schizophreniform disorder). All patients were clinically stable and treated with anti-psychotic medication during the course of the study, except for five patients (one pregnant; four recently discharged from specialist clinical services). Participants were excluded from the study if they had a current or past neurological condition or disorder, including epilepsy or head trauma with loss of consciousness. Only adults (age > 16) were recruited. Participants were excluded if they did not have normal or corrected-to-normal vision (6/9 or better). This study received full ethical approval by the Cambridge Central Research Ethics Committee (12/EE/0018). All participants gave written consent prior to enrolling. To reduce placebo effects, participants were not informed at the time of testing that the study concerned CT of episodic memory, but rather were told that the aim was to investigate the effect of iPad use on psychological processes. Participants were randomly assigned to either the CT or treatment as usual (TAU) groups. All participants first completed the National Adult Reading Test (NART) and the Brief Psychiatric Ratings Scale (BPRS) as measures of intelligence and psychiatric symptoms, respectively. Participants in the CT group played the memory game for a total of 8 h over a 4-week period; participants in the TAU group continued their TAU. All participants completed the CANTAB PAL and the Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) at both baseline and outcome time points. The outcome testing session took place exactly 4 weeks after the baseline testing session. The CANTAB PAL is an episodic memory task comprised of one-pattern, two-patterns, three-patterns, six-patterns and eight-patterns stages. The GAF was used to numerically rate participants' social, occupational and psychological function. The BPRS results in a sum score, and we additionally calculated a negative symptom score by averaging the BPRS subscales Emotional Withdrawal, Motor Retardation and Blunted Affect. Statistical analyses were done using SPSS 20. We used t-tests, Mann–Whitney tests, ANCOVAs and bivariate correlations as appropriate, depending on the normality of the distribution of the data. As the PAL total errors and total trials were not normally distributed, the values were square root transformed for statistical analyses. However, for better comparison with other studies, reports the absolute scores.


Memory game development

To ensure that our training programme took the form of a memory game rather than a standard psychological test, we employed a professional game designer who was briefed to develop an entertaining game that incorporated a learning and episodic memory task into a narrative. Once a prototype had been developed—using six focus groups, each with two individuals with a diagnosis of schizophrenia—the game was further developed until focus group participants agreed that the game was fun, attention-grabbing, motivating and easy to understand. The game required the patient to remember correctly the location of patterns in space. The game started in an easy stage at the beginning but increased in difficulty as the participant succeeded, using a ‘three up one down’ adaptive staircase, with the highest level requiring participants to memorize the locations of 20 runes. The memory game employed a number of strategies to maintain a high level of motivation to continue gameplay: the episodic memory task was woven into a narrative with individualized aspects (choice and name of the character), appealing design and stimulating music; the game rewarded progress with additional in-game activities to provide the user a sense of progression independent of the CT process while minimizing failure. After each hour of gameplay (hours 1–8), participants in the CT group completed a visual analogue scale to rate their enjoyment and motivation to continue playing the game (scores ranged from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating enhanced enjoyment/willingness to continue).


Results

Twenty-two participants (11 male; 11 female) with a diagnosis of schizophrenia were randomly assigned to either the CT (n = 10) or TAU (n = 12) group and completed all tasks and questionnaires required of their condition. These groups showed no significant differences in intelligence, age, years of education and psychiatric symptoms (including negative symptoms) at baseline assessment. When analysing performance on the CANTAB PAL, we focused on the eight-pattern stage, the highest level of task difficulty. At outcome assessment, the CT group made significantly fewer errors and needed significantly fewer attempts to remember the location of different patterns (trial score) relative to the TAU group. The CT group also correctly located more patterns at the first attempt of the eight-pattern stage at outcome assessment. Furthermore, mean GAF scores improved significantly in the CT group from baseline to outcome assessment. When conducting ANCOVAs including covariates such as baseline measures, the pattern of results did not substantially change. During training, participants' levels of enjoyment and motivation to continue playing were monitored using visual analogue scales on an hourly basis. Participants in the CT group indicated that they enjoyed the game and were motivated to continue playing across the 8 h of CT (all ratings were higher than 65% across all hours of play; d). One-sample t-tests comparing participants' average enjoyment and motivation to continue playing across the 8 h demonstrated significantly higher means than 50% (i.e. the level of indifference on the visual analogue scales) for enjoyment (t(9) = 15.12, p < 0.001, mean enjoyment level = 71.59, s.d. = 4.03) and motivation (t(9) = 15.38, p < 0.001, mean motivation level = 72.32, s.d. = 4.10). Correlational analyses further demonstrated that iPad peak performance (i.e. the highest level attained out of a total of 20 levels on our memory game across 8 h of training) was positively associated with level of motivation (p = 0.03, Spearman's R = 0.68), confirming that high levels of performance were associated with task-related (i.e. game play) motivation.

As predicted, we found that individuals who completed 8 h of gameplay showed improved performance on the PAL task in terms of reduced errors, improved trial score and the correct number of patterns located (and a–c). Although further studies with larger sample sizes are required to confirm the clinical generalizability of our current findings (including the potential for transfer effects on other cognitive domains), our data suggest that those who completed training were able to achieve better performance as the difficulty of the task increased. It is possible that use of a computer game (rather than standard cognitive testing using a computer) helped maintain participants' motivation to perform well at a higher level of task difficulty. Non-significant group differences in the BPRS at baseline confirm that the effects of CT could not be attributed to baseline differences in psychiatric symptoms. Given the repetitive nature of most CT programmes, it is plausible that participants' level of enjoyment might decrease over time. In contrast, enjoyment levels associated with playing computer games might increase as players reach more difficult levels and can ‘unlock’ more of the game's potential. We observed that participants' enjoyment and motivation to continue playing were maintained throughout all hours of training, suggesting that our memory game had the same motivational engagement associated with typical computer games.

Enhanced performance at a higher level of the PAL task may represent strengthened competency in the specific network underlying episodic memory, yet importantly, we also found improved functional outcome in the CT group as measured by the GAF at outcome assessment. This suggests that the effectiveness of our memory game might not be limited to improved episodic memory, but it also has the potential to improve functioning in activities of daily living. This functional improvement could be driven by several possible mechanisms. For example, improvements in memory may have had a direct impact on global functions. An alternative explanation is that CT may have had an indirect impact on functionality by improving low self-esteem. Or indeed, both of these explanations may have played a role in terms of the impact of training on functional outcome. The main limitations of this study are the lack of an active comparison group, such as iPad use without a training game, and the relatively small sample size. Nevertheless, the patients were relatively severely ill and well matched such that they are still representative of patients suffering from schizophrenia.

Further research with larger sample sizes and active control conditions is required to elucidate the psychological mechanisms underpinning the global functioning improvements observed here. These results add to a growing body of literature that attests to the efficacy of CT programmes in schizophrenia. Despite support for its therapeutic benefits, CT remains an underused therapeutic option. Potential explanatory factors for this include the long periods of supervised training that are typically required, the need to attend a clinic or hospital setting and the lack of enjoyable, attention-grabbing tasks. This study overcame these limitations through development of a portable hand-held memory game that would be fun for patients to play and concurrently have the potential to provide therapeutic benefits. Here, the iPad game was the result of a 9-month collaboration between psychologists, neuroscientists, a professional game-developer and service users. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to have developed a neurotechnology using feedback directly from individuals with schizophrenia to ensure that the narrative was understandable and that playing the game was highly enjoyable. We also used a neurobiological approach to CT based on previous neuropsychological and neuroimaging published findings. These data suggest that use of neurotechnologies may serve to complement current psychological therapies and/or psychopharmacological treatments for schizophrenia. Neurotechnologies may also have potential as treatment applications in other groups, such as healthy elderly individuals or patients groups with memory-related difficulties (e.g. mild cognitive impairment; traumatic brain injury). Using modern technology in mental health may be one method for improving patients' active engagement in treatments.


Summary: cognitive enhancers in neuropsychiatric disorders

In summary, there is a demand for improving and developing treatments for cognitive deficits in neuropsychiatric disorders. In some disorders, such as ADHD and Alzheimer's disease, these symptoms are more obvious and research has focused on treating them, resulting in a sufficient basis for clinical decisions. However, in many other neuropsychiatric disorders, cognitive symptoms have not been fully defined, nor have they been regarded as targets for treatment. Therefore, studies on the function and dysfunction of cognitive domains in neuropsychiatric disorders and their manipulation by pharmacological agents in healthy states and in neuropsychiatric disorders as well as the development of novel cognition-modifying drugs are necessary. In addition, it is important to harness the potential of novel devices and technologies for improving functioning, quality of life and wellbeing in healthcare in general, and in particular in neuropsychiatric disorders. Although experts realize the potential of these inventions and technologies in the treatment of disorders, we have not yet capitalized on them to improve brain health.

Furthermore, studies on the combination of different treatment strategies, including for example, combinations of cognitive enhancing drugs and/or CT with anti-psychotics, antidepressants, psychotherapy and the optimal time point in the course of a disorder (acute episode versus early remission versus relapse prevention), are urgently needed.

From an ethical perspective, there can be few doubts about research, development and use of cognition-enhancing drugs in neuropsychiatric disorders, as in these disorders the suffering of the affected individuals, their families and the burden for society are clearly significant and any successful treatment will have widely accepted benefits. In a clinical setting, the neuropsychiatric patients will be monitored by a healthcare professional in regard to drug–drug interactions, counterindications and side effects. Therefore, the evidence base on safety will increase with increasing use, such that in future, benefits and risk can be better evaluated.

In §2, we discuss the increasing lifestyle use of cognitive enhancers by healthy people.


Cognitive enhancers in healthy people

The drugs used in patients are all prescription drugs. From a legal perspective, amphetamine and methylphenidate are classified as schedule II drugs, and therefore not legally obtainable without medical prescription. The reason for these limitations is the abuse potential of these drugs. Owing to the lower abuse risk, modafinil is a prescription-only drug, but not scheduled in countries such as UK, USA, Canada, Germany and Australia. However, owing to their performance-modulating effects, all these drugs are banned as doping substances in sports competitions.


Effects of amphetamine, methylphenidate and modafinil in healthy people

The Care Quality Commission reported that over a six year period from 2007 to 2013, there had been a 56% rise in prescriptions for methylphenidate in the UK. They attributed this increase to its use in the management of childhood and adult ADHD, but importantly, also, to its potential for diversion and misuse. Recent reviews summarizing the effects of amphetamine and methylphenidate on cognitive performance in healthy participants showed a couple of consistent effects in the following domains.

Learning is positively affected by both drugs, but primarily when testing delayed recall and recognition, pointing to an effect on memory consolidation. When testing the effects on prefrontal functions such as attention, working memory, inhibition and planning, the biggest effects were found in participants with lower than optimal performance. In studies of inhibitory control in healthy volunteers, positive effects were found with modafinil. In working memory tasks, the findings were more mixed, with some studies with modafinil finding improvements in working memory with reduced errors or reduced reaction time and others reporting no effect. The reason for these mixed findings might also be influenced by baseline effects (reduced effect in high-performing participants). For example, Muller et al. used a difficult version of the CANTAB spatial working memory test, thus avoiding ceiling effects, and found that modafinil improved the performance of healthy volunteers. Inhibitory cognitive control processes are significantly improved by amphetamine and methylphenidate. Other executive functions such as planning (Tower of London, strategic choice task, sequence forming) and fluency have also been investigated. Planning performance on the Tower of London test was improved with modafinil. All these effects were investigated with single doses. Only a few studies investigated the effects of repeated intakes, reporting primarily subjective feelings of increased energy and wakefulness. In the few studies in sleep-deprived individuals, methylphenidate seemed primarily to improve subjective feelings of energy and wakefulness, but had relatively small effects on cognitive performance. However, modafinil improved working memory, planning, decision making and flexibility in sleep-deprived doctors without showing the typical side effects of caffeine, such as tremor and anxiety. In the case of atomoxetine, research into cognitive effects is still ongoing. The most consistent finding is an improvement in response inhibition.


Non-pharmacological cognitive enhancement in healthy people

Non-pharmacological methods, such as tDCS and TMS, have been investigated regarding their cognition modulating and enhancing functions. These methods apply magnetic fields (TMS) or electrical currents (tDCS) to influence either the activity and/or excitability of certain brain areas. Specifically, tDCS is thought to have rather lasting, neuroplastic effects. One recent review summarized studies applying TMS in patients with neuropsychiatric disorders, such as depression. Verbal learning improved in two studies, as did executive function. However, 8 of 13 studies found no effect on cognition. One of five studies found positive effects on verbal learning in patients with schizophrenia, and in patients with Alzheimer's disease, there were two positive studies. However, the few studies that exist are unfortunately underpowered and only some are sham-controlled. Therefore, this field requires more rigorous research on stimulation location, dosage and target symptoms. While the evidence of an antidepressant effect of TMS is established (Hedge's g = 0.55 in a meta-analysis) and indeed approved for treatment-resistant depression by the Food and Drug Administration, the evidence for clinical therapeutic effects in other neuropsychiatric disorders and also the effects on specific cognitive functions are still not very strong, requiring more research. The safety profile of TMS is well characterized. TDCS, however, has until now been much less investigated in treatment studies (e.g. meta-analyses in depression based on six to seven studies, only three double-blind placebo-controlled studies on tDCS in tinnitus), and only a few studies have examined the effects of tDCS on cognition in neuropsychiatric disorders (e.g. improved working memory and verbal fluency in schizophrenia). The number of studies on cognitive effects in healthy volunteers is somewhat larger, and they point to improvements in a range of cognitive functions, including memory and attention. For instance, a recent study compared the effect of prefrontal tDCS in sleep-deprived healthy volunteers with those of caffeine and found similar to even stronger improvements of vigilance/sustained attention and working memory. However, tDCS requires further research on safety and long-term effects, particularly when considering the uncontrolled purchasing over the internet and uncontrolled use of these devices.


Summary and conclusion

In summary, these studies suggest that cognitive enhancers such as smart drugs and devices have the potential to provide benefits in healthy people, although the extent and specificity (which intervention affects which function and is best applied in which situation) are still under investigation. Other questions such as the safety of regular use in healthy people and, even more importantly, the potential effects on still-developing brains when used in healthy children and adolescents require more research.

In addition to safety issues, there are also ethical concerns. The exact numbers of healthy users of prescription drugs with the intention to enhance cognition are unknown, with estimates in the general population of less than 5%, although in some studies in students, between 10% and 20% of the students reported to have used prescription drugs within the past year, without strong differences between the US and Europe. One study in a small competitive college reported use within the last year in more than 30% of the students. However, the prescription rates of stimulants in England have been rising steadily from 220 000 in 1998 to 418 300 in 2004. The global market share of modafinil, licensed in the UK for narcolepsy and excessive fatigue and sleepiness in certain chronic medical conditions, was more than $700 million per year, with an estimated ‘off-label’ use of around 90%. In the lay press, modafinil has also gained a lot of attention as a pill that can boost brain power, which reflects the interest of the public in pharmacological enhancement of cognitive abilities such as planning and problem solving. These numbers raise the question as to why healthy people are using cognitive enhancing drugs. Some studies in college students in the USA have asked this question, and most students gave ‘improving intellectual performance’, ‘being more efficient on academic assignments', ‘improving concentration’ and ‘being able to study longer’ as motives, with only a few reporting recreational ones. This matches a report of the Academy of Medical Sciences that a small percentage increment in performance can lead to significant improvements in functional outcome; it is conceivable that a 10% improvement in memory score could lead to an improvement in an A-level grade or degree class. Therefore, many students are using cognitive enhancing drugs to ‘get the competitive edge’ over other students in exam situations. It might have been this consideration that made Duke University prohibit the use of prescription drugs by students without an authorized prescription. Duke University's website specifies the ‘unauthorized use of prescription medication to enhance academic performance’ as cheating in the category ‘academic dishonesty’ of their academic conduct policy.

Furthermore, particularly modafinil seems to affect motivation in a manner that makes unappealing tasks more appealing and therefore they can be undertaken and completed more easily. In other words, overall task-related pleasure is increased by modafinil. This increase in motivation is task-specific, and not a general stimulating effect. A third reason reported is reducing the effects of jet-lag and staying awake and alert for longer periods of time.


Further considerations

As responsible scientists and clinicians in the field of neuroscience and mental health, we need to consider how our discoveries and inventions will affect society. In the case of pharmacological cognitive enhancement, there are many people with neuropsychiatric disorders who could benefit greatly from these drugs. In the development of the field of novel pharmacological cognitive enhancers, we must gain maximum benefits with minimum harm to the individual and to society as a whole. However, ethical considerations of cognitive enhancement in healthy people are more complex, ranging from potential benefits in surgeons, shift workers, military, air traffic controllers and other fields where constant high performance is essential, to fears of coercion and competitive pressure by peers, as well as increasing inequality with access depending on wealth and also cheating (see above, academic dishonesty). These ‘smart drugs' may alter the future of work as we know it, particularly where shift work, jet lag and high-risk decisions may compromise performance. On the other hand, as detailed above, scientific knowledge about the specific effects and side effects in the healthy population, particularly with long-term use, is still limited. Therefore, we need collaboration between scientists, pharmaceutical companies and governmental regulators to develop improved substances, get them trialled, tested and licensed. With this knowledge, neuroscientists together with social scientists, philosophers, ethicists and society should actively discuss the ethical and moral consequences of cognitive enhancement.


Ethics

The study described here received full ethical approval from the Cambridge Central Research Ethics Committee (12/EE/0018). It was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.


Authors' contributions

B.J.S., J.C. and C.K. designed the study, recruited and tested participants, and analysed and interpreted data; G.S. analysed and interpreted data; B.J.S. and T.P. designed and T.P. programmed the memory game; E.F.-E. designed the study, assisted with interpretation of data analysis, facilitated recruitment and conducted clinical aspects of participant testing; J.P., S.H., J.S. and P.B.J. designed the study and facilitated recruitment of participants; B.J.S. also conceived the study, managed the overall conduct of the study and interpreted data. B.J.S. and A.B.B. wrote the manuscript and A.B.B. also analysed data, J.C., C.K. and G.S. additionally edited the manuscript. All authors have revised this article critically and have approved the final version of the article.


Brain evolution by brain pathway duplication

Mukta Chakraborty, Erich D Jarvis — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. PMC4650129, CC BY 4.0.

Understanding the mechanisms of evolution of brain pathways for complex behaviours is still in its infancy. Making further advances requires a deeper understanding of brain homologies, novelties and analogies. It also requires an understanding of how adaptive genetic modifications lead to restructuring of the brain. Recent advances in genomic and molecular biology techniques applied to brain research have provided exciting insights into how complex behaviours are shaped by selection of novel brain pathways and functions of the nervous system. Here, we review and further develop some insights to a new hypothesis on one mechanism that may contribute to nervous system evolution, in particular by brain pathway duplication. Like gene duplication, we propose that whole brain pathways can duplicate and the duplicated pathway diverge to take on new functions. We suggest that one mechanism of brain pathway duplication could be through gene duplication, although other mechanisms are possible. We focus on brain pathways for vocal learning and spoken language in song-learning birds and humans as example systems. This view presents a new framework for future research in our understanding of brain evolution and novel behavioural traits.

Keywords: brain pathway, duplication, parrots, song systems, brain evolution, speech


Introduction

The evolution of brain pathways for generation of complex behavioural traits remains an enigmatic and fundamental question in biology. Therefore, examining the proximate and ultimate mechanisms driving changes in brain structure and function provides an exciting opportunity to understand the evolution of complex behavioural traits. In this regard, various hypotheses have been proposed to explain evolution of complex behavioural traits, including increases in brain or brain region size relative to body size, increases in total number of neurons or neuron density, and presence versus absence of particular neural networks that control a specific type of behaviour. Some such changes may have occurred with the emergence of the telencephalon during the invertebrate to vertebrate transition, indicating that the central nervous system has been an important target of selection. However, current empirical evidence for such models and theories are few and wanting.

Another fundamental problem in explaining the evolution of complex behaviours and brain pathways is understanding the contributing cellular and molecular mechanisms. One overall hypothesis is that significant changes in the brain can be generated by novel gene functions owing to gene duplications or expansion of gene regulatory networks. One of the duplicated genes may then acquire a mutation in coding or regulatory sequences, which enables it to acquire a new function that then undergoes selection, a process known as neofunctionalization. Other hypotheses posit that existing genes are modified, including changes in coding sequence, cis-regulatory motifs or new alternative mRNA splice variants, a process known as subfunctionalization. However, the origin and evolution of such molecular changes in the evolution of the nervous system and behavioural complexity are not well understood.

Here, we review and expand upon an underappreciated theory of evolution of brain complexity, namely by brain region or whole brain pathway duplication from pre-existing brain circuits. We propose hypotheses on cellular and molecular mechanisms for brain region and pathway duplication, including by gene duplication. We believe that such mechanisms may form a cornerstone of evolution of brain and behaviour complexity, which enable adaptations to new environments and social situations.


Theories on brain region and brain pathway evolution for brain complexity

Comparative neurobiology studies indicate that many primitive features of brain organization have been preserved to varying degrees in extant species. The brain also has evolved in a mosaic pattern, with some regions changing dramatically, while others have remained little changed through the course of evolution. While it is still unclear how brains evolve, past theories posit that brain evolution could be understood by examining how brains develop embryonically and how such development can be modified. It is thought that the early embryonic state of the brain across species represents a more similar and thus ancestral state, and that during development, brain cells, regions and pathways diverge towards lineage- or species-specific states. This is one way in which homologous brain regions can become diverse in adults across species. Based on this view, the vertebrate brain is proposed to consist of three basic divisions, with the spinal cord and brainstem (hindbrain, midbrain and thalamus) having more conserved organization, and the telencephalon more divergent organization. In turn, the telencephalon consists of three major subdivisions, with the pallidum and striatum having more conserved organization and the pallium or cortex a more divergent organization. The pallium is largely layered in mammals, and mostly nuclear in birds, reptiles and other vertebrates, but with divergences among them.

With these fundamental principles, one can argue that divergences may occur in many forms leading to more behavioural complexity, including: (i) larger brain-to-body size ratios endowing those animals with more advanced abilities; (ii) novel connectivity within a pre-existing brain circuit that enhances that particular circuit's function for complex behaviours; and (iii) the de novo presence of a specific brain region or circuit that controls a newly evolved behaviour, as has been proposed for the evolution of brain pathways for vocal learning and spoken language. It is this latter theory that requires greater explanation.

A long proposed explanation for generating increased cortical complexity is that a single region gradually differentiates into two or more areas. This could occur by expansion of an existing region and then selectively partitioning part of the older region to the new function, while the other part maintains the old function. Allman and Kaas also proposed that development of the brain could be altered owing to a gene mutation so that a given area is duplicated. The duplication event would modify the function of either one or both of the ancestral and duplicated areas to take on a new function. Duplication itself may modify the selection pressure on both structures, thereby allowing the individual structures to use the once single functional space in a mechanism reminiscent of adaptive radiation. More recently, Feenders et al. suggested that whole brain pathways could duplicate, followed by divergence of one of the duplicated copies. This idea was proposed as a mechanism to explain what they called the Motor Theory of Vocal Learning Origin, which we review next.


The motor theory of vocal learning origin and brain pathway duplication

Vocal learning, a critical component of spoken language acquisition, is the ability to modify acoustic and/or syntactic features of sounds produced, including vocal imitation and improvization. Vocal learning is a rare trait, so far discovered in five distantly related groups of mammals (humans, bats, elephants, cetaceans (dolphins and whales) and pinnipeds (seals and sea lions)) and three distantly related groups of birds (parrots, songbirds and hummingbirds). In the past few decades, significant advances have been made in guiding our understanding of the evolution and mechanisms of brain pathways for vocal learning in birds and humans.

The independently evolved lineages of vocal learning birds and humans share distinct forebrain pathways that control the acquisition and production of learned vocalizations. Within these pathways, all three avian lineages contain seven cerebral (telencephalic) vocal nuclei and several thalamic nuclei. These nuclei, best characterized in songbirds and parrots, are distributed between two subpathways (a): (i) the vocal production, or posterior, pathway that influences the production of learned song—which includes an arcopallium nucleus (songbird RA (robust nucleus of the arcopallium), parrot AAC (central nucleus of the anterior arcopallium), hummingbird VA (vocal nucleus of the arcopallium)), analogous to the laryngeal motor cortex (LMC) in humans (b) that makes a specialized direct projection to brainstem vocal motor neurons (MN), which in turn controls the vocal organs, the syrinx (birds) and larynx (humans); and (ii) the vocal learning, or anterior, pathway that is primarily responsible for vocal imitation and plasticity, which forms a pallial–basal ganglia–thalamic loop, analogous to such loops in the mammalian brain that presumably include Broca's speech area in humans. The song and speech regions in both these pathways are embedded in or adjacent to non-vocal motor brain areas. These non-vocal motor regions are present in other vertebrate species examined thus far, and are thought to be involved in the production and learning of non-vocal motor behaviours. Based on these findings, Feenders et al. proposed a motor theory of vocal learning origin, which stated that ‘cerebral brain pathways for vocal learning in distantly related animals evolved independently as specializations of a pre-existing motor system inherited from their common ancestor’ (p.1). This was a more general theory of the motor theory of language origin, but with specific brain regions identified and a proposed mechanism. The motor theory of vocal learning origin suggested that the last common ancestor of birds and mammals had a motor forebrain pathway, including a motor cortex or pallium region. This is because although the motor pallial domain in mammals consists of six layers of cells (layered) and nuclear subdivisions in birds and reptiles (clustered), they function similarly and developed from the same embryonic primordium. This is supported by results obtained from activity-dependent gene expression and differential gene expression experiments, which show that the avian pallium has a functional columnar organization similar to the mammalian pallial domain. Further, the mammalian non-vocal motor descending pathway and the pre-motor pathway share similar connectivity patterns in avian posterior and anterior motor pathways, respectively, suggesting the presence of a pre-existing motor system shared by both groups and their most recent ancestor.

The proposed mechanism of evolution of vocal learning pathways was by brain pathway duplication. In this regard, it was hypothesized that parallel forebrain motor learning pathways with auditory, somatosensory or other sensory input, normally replicate multiple times during embryonic development and connect to different brainstem and spinal cord neurons to control different muscle groups. In vocal learners, this forebrain pathway is hypothesized to replicate one more time and then connect to the brainstem circuits that control vocalizations and respiration. Then the new vocal learning pathway would diverge to form novel connections and functions relative to the adjacent non-vocal motor pathways. Under this duplication hypothesis, the vocal learning pathways share a deep homology with the surrounding motor pathways, but convergence in the independent lineages of vocal learners.

Several alternative hypotheses have been proposed for evolution of vocal learning pathways, including that the pathways in humans and song-learning birds originated out of either a pre-existing auditory pathway, a non-motor cognitive region, a combined auditory–motor pathway, or completely de novo. In support of an auditory origin hypothesis, the songbird posterior vocal motor pathway is also partly adjacent to the auditory pathway and has some parallel connections with the descending auditory system. However, such an anatomical position is not present in hummingbirds, parrots, or humans. With the exception of the completely de novo hypothesis, even if the vocal learning pathway arose from a non-motor pathway, the hypothesis of pathway duplication could still apply.

If the duplication hypothesis were true, then one would expect to find most genes expressed in vocal learning pathways to be similar to the pathway from which they were duplicated. Further, one would expect to find divergent molecular changes in neural connectivity genes associated with the unique connections found in vocal learning pathways. These ideas were recently tested in a high-throughput gene expression study using a novel computational approach that determines homologous and convergent specialized anatomical gene expression profiles from thousands of samples and genes from multiple species. Using comparative microarray gene expression profiling of approximately 3000–7000 genes in vocal learning and vocal non-learning avian and primate species, Pfenning et al. found that the song and speech brain pathway regions of vocal learning birds and humans have gene expression profiles that more closely match motor and premotor cortex and striatal pathway regions adjacent to them than they do to auditory, somatosensory or other brain regions. These results corroborated some earlier single gene expression, developmental, functional, and connectivity studies. Combined, the findings support the idea that the similarities are owing to homology and not convergence. Further, Pfenning et al. found divergent changes in expression of genes that control neural connectivity in the avian song and the human speech regions from the surrounding motor areas, but that were convergent among the vocal learning birds and humans. There were also convergent changes in some genes involved in neural development, neuroprotection and synaptic communication functions. The brain expression characterization of these genes led to the discovery of a further apparent duplication in the parrot brain, as described next.


Parrots contain a song system within a song system

Parrots surpass other vocal learning avian species in their ability to imitate human speech and also rival non-human primates in their display of advanced cognitive skills and ability for tool use. From 1981 until recently in 2015 (approx. 34 years), the neural pathways for vocal learning had been studied in only one parrot species, the budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus). From these studies, it was apparent that the budgerigar song system shows some differences from the songbird and hummingbird song systems. The posterior song system of songbirds and parrots (and presumably hummingbirds) receives auditory input from the posterior auditory pathway (e.g. auditory Field L), but in parrots it receives additional auditory input from a small part of the nucleus basorostralis (B), the remainder of which is somatosensory. Neural tracing and singing-regulated immediate early gene studies revealed some differences in connectivity and position or shape of song nuclei in parrots, but no clear differences were noted in the presence or absence of song system structures.

Recently, partly based on the high-throughput gene expression and other findings, we led a study characterizing gene expression profiles that are specialized in avian and/or human song/speech vocal learning circuits (e.g. PVALB, SLIT1, FOXP1, NR2A, GLUR1, NADPH-d, AR, mENK, TH, CGRP-LI) to understand the organization of the song system in diverse groups of parrots representing all the three superfamilies, Strigopoidea, Cacatuoidea and Psittacoidea. We found that the parrot pallial (cortical) song nuclei had core regions that differed in gene expression from surrounding shell regions, and both in turn differed from the surrounding cortical motor areas. Surprisingly, a subset of the genes (including PVALB) had moderate specialized expression in the immediate surrounding non-vocal motor areas. Both the core and shell song regions were functionally active in the production of learned vocalizations, as revealed by vocalizing-driven immediate early gene expression (EGR-1, C-FOS and DUSP-1), whereas the surrounding brain regions were active in production of non-singing motor behaviour, as revealed by rhythmic controlled hopping-driven gene expression.

The connectivity of the core and shell systems were similar to each other, but with some significant differences. One fundamental difference was that the core system made the rare direct projection to brainstem vocal MN (via the AAC core nucleus), whereas the parallel shell song system made mostly intra-cortical projections (via AAC shell; b,c). The direct projection to the brainstem vocal MN is considered critical for the evolution of vocal learning and spoken language, as it is either absent or very sparse in vocal non-learners. There were sparse connections between the parrot cores and shells within and among each song nucleus.

The presence of these song nuclei in the kea, the most distantly related to the other extant parrot species, indicates that parrots evolved the core and shell song systems over 29 Ma before the kea split from the other parrot lineages. The kea shell system, however, was less well differentiated in terms of its gene expression specializations. There were also large species differences in relative sizes of the core and shell regions, where the shell had a significant log-linear relationship with their brain section size, but the core did not. This meant that shell regions were relatively larger in species with bigger brains such as the gold and blue macaw, and the African Grey and Amazon parrots that are considered to have more advanced communication and cognitive capacities.

The fact that the shell system AAC nucleus does not have the direct projection to the vocal MN (which is restricted to the core region of AAC), but may be correlated with more complex vocal learning behaviour, indicates that such direct projections may not be the only means to increase learned motor behavioural complexity over innate motor behaviours. We speculate that it is possible that the direct projection may not be required for the ability to imitate complex vocalizations, but strictly for the production of those learned vocalizations. Clearly, further studies will be required to explicitly test this hypothesis in parrots.

The gene expression specializations and neural connectivity of the parrot core song nuclei were most similar to the song nuclei of songbirds and hummingbirds, whereas the shells were unique to parrots. The shell specializations appear to be restricted to the cortical parrot song nuclei, as no shells have yet been found for the striatal or thalamic song nuclei. The songbird and hummingbird species examined to date do not have parallel vocal motor shell regions for any of their nuclei.

These findings indicate that the core and shell are two parallel, partially independent systems, performing similar and some unique functions for vocalizations. They support a partial brain pathway duplication hypothesis of brain evolution. In particular, we suggest that the core song system evolved convergently in parrots, songbirds and hummingbirds as a duplication event in each lineage from the surrounding motor areas (a,b). Thereafter, the parrot core cortical song nuclei underwent a further partial duplication event to evolve the shell song system (c). The shell song system went on to evolve specializations that allow more complex vocal communication abilities in parrots compared to other avian vocal learners. This dual system evolved early in the parrot lineage, and has lasted and expanded for millions of years in different species. In addition, changes in the regulation of some genes that may allow greater vocal–motor–auditory integration in vocal learning systems could have influenced changes in the surrounding motor areas to allow greater auditory–motor entrainment and synchronizing of body movements to the rhythm of music for dance in parrots.

It would be exciting to determine if similar duplications of brain pathways have occurred in humans, not only in the speech pathways but also for other advanced motor movements such as dancing. In the human brain, areas 44 and 45 constitute Broca's area, the ventrolatreal frontal region critical for spoken language acquisition and production. Petrides et al. showed that there is a comparable area 44-like region involved in orofacial musculature functions in macaque monkeys. What is still unknown is whether area 44 in the human and the macaque brain share common ancestry since there is lack of an outgroup comparison so far. It is tempting to speculate that Broca's area could constitute one or more duplications of a more ancestral area 44, with divergent specializations for learned vocalizations and thus spoken language.


Some alternative hypotheses to the motor theory and brain pathway duplications

Expanding upon the alternative hypotheses, it is possible that the core and shell systems in parrots arose simultaneously, in which case the shell would not be a duplication of the core. However, for this alternative, it would be difficult to explain why the parrot core pathway is more similar to the songbird and hummingbird song systems, than an apparently evolutionary older state (i.e. appearing first). The shell song system of parrots does not appear to be a functionally differentiated region of the core system, since the core system still exists in them and other vocal learners.

A second alternative is that the shell is an independent duplication of the adjacent motor pathway, as the shell has a more similar gene expression profile to the adjacent motor pathway than the core. However, if this were the case, it would be hard to explain how evolution of the shell is more independent of the core, considering that the shell song nuclei surround the cores and are not located elsewhere in the motor pathway and that both core and shell are interconnected without notable major connections to the surrounding motor areas.

A third alternative is that the parrot shell and core song nuclei, as well as the songbird, hummingbird and human song/speech region analogues, are all specialized transformations of an existing motor pathway, i.e. subfunctionalizations, rather than duplications from it, i.e. neofunctionalizations. This would mean that the vocal learning species lost non-vocal motor learning pathway neurons to gain vocal motor pathway neurons. However, there is as yet no evidence for loss of non-vocal motor or other functions in vocal learning species, but rather gain of functions even beyond vocal learning (such as learning how to dance) and increases in relative brain-to-body sizes.

A fourth alternative is that vocal learning pathway neurons migrate into their adult locations from developing non-adjacent and even non-motor brain areas, and then by adjacent association they adopt some of the motor learning pathway phenotypes. Although this alternative is theoretically possible, one would expect that the vocal learning pathway cells would have some vestigial properties of their non-motor origin. Thus far, the evidence has not revealed such an alternative origin, although only in songbirds does the HVC (a letter-based name) motor pathway nucleus share some secondary profiles in gene expression with the human secondary auditory cortex.

A bigger challenge to the motor theory and duplication hypotheses might at first glance be derived from a recently proposed ‘continuum hypothesis' of vocal learning. Based on findings that mice have a rudimentary forebrain circuit involved in modulating vocalizations but with a very sparse direct projection to brainstem vocal MN, buried within a motor region that also controls other behaviours, and that mice and non-human primates have at least a very limited ability to modify their vocalizations based on auditory experience, Arriaga & Jarvis and Petkov & Jarvis proposed a continuum hypothesis of vocal learning. In this hypothesis, vocal learning is considered to range from complex (e.g. humans and parrots), moderate (some songbirds), to limited or none (mice and non-human primates). In this model, there would be a rudimentary pre-existing forebrain vocal pathway within the vertebrate motor learning pathway, but in the more complex vocal learners these vocal pathway neurons independently expanded and segregated out of the motor learning pathway. However, it is also possible that initially the motor learning pathway duplicates within the non-vocal motor learning circuits to form a limited vocal learning circuit, which subsequently evolves enhanced functions and moves outside of to become adjacent to the motor learning circuit.

Resolving these hypotheses will require more comparative research. The nuances for limited vocal plasticity and an associated neural circuit in mice and non-human primates are also still an ongoing debate that requires further investigation. Thus far, of all the hypotheses proposed, we believe the existing data most support the motor origin and duplication hypothesis for vocal learning pathways.


Other examples of duplicated morphological structures and structural subdivisions in the evolution of functional complexity

If brain pathway evolution by duplication were possible for vocal learning circuits, then it could be one broad mechanism of brain evolution. The presence of the well-known parallel cortical–basal ganglia–thalamic–cortical loops through the anterior forebrain of mammals and birds is consistent with such an idea. These parallel loops could be replicates of a basic motor learning pathway design. Since all of the cortex is connected with all of the basal ganglia and thalamus, when a cortex region is duplicated, one would expect to see a concomitant duplication in the connected basal ganglia and thalamic regions. However, our finding of only cortical shell song nuclei duplications thus far in parrots indicates that it could be possible that the duplicated cortical regions co-innervate the non-duplicated striatal and thalamic regions (c). Such flexibility would allow for greater diversity in neural circuit evolution balanced with the constraint of limited cranial space to accommodate increases in brain size owing to duplications.

Studies of non-human primate motor cortex are consistent with the idea of duplicated brain components. For example, studies using retrograde transneuronal transport of the rabies virus from single muscles of rhesus macaque monkeys to identify layer 5 cortico-motoneuronal (CM) cells in the primary motor cortex (M1) have shown that the M1 region has two subdivisions. The rostral subdivision of macaque M1 has been proposed to be an ‘older’ region as it contains fewer CM cells that make indirect projections to spinal cord MN and is present in most mammals requiring the indirect use of the spinal cord to influence motor output. The caudal subdivision of macaque M1 is proposed to be ‘newer’ as it contains the more rarely found CM cells that make direct projections to MN in the spinal cord and brainstem, including controlling shoulder, elbow and finger muscles to produce highly skilled motor actions. Based on these and other findings, it is generally proposed that the direct CM system of M1 is a recently evolved brain structure that conferred evolutionarily novel functions in the motor system in primates, including independent voluntary control of finger movements, which are more advanced in primates compared with non-primates. Assuming that the evidence continues to support differences between species, one hypothesis, like the one we propose for vocal learning pathways, is that the newer caudal M1 region is a duplication of the older rostral M1 region, but with a divergent connection of the CM cells from cortical layer 5.

Examples of morphological duplications or subdivisions to enhance complexity also exist outside of the nervous system. Many animals, such as annelids, have repeated parallel body segments or specialized limb types among species, where the replicated parts are thought to be owing to a repeating developmental genomic programme. A striking example of independently evolved morphological duplications is the diversification of the adductor mandibular muscles in teleost fish jaws, which have independently subdivided several times during tetraodontiform evolution. Most of these divisions have been incomplete, which suggests that some parts were subfunctionalized instead of duplicated. The duplicated adductor mandibulae muscles continue to maintain similar morphological characteristics, but with increased morphological complexity associated with their functional complexity resulting in finer motor control for feeding. Overall, structural duplications have been proposed to be one mechanism that allows for morphological decoupling. Making structures, such as brain circuits, functionally independent of one another may provide increased complexity and opportunity for modification and diversification. In this regard, brain evolution by brain region duplication, brain pathway duplication or structure subdivision may follow a general mechanism of morphological evolution to enhance functional complexity. Testing these hypotheses will be best informed by deciphering the cellular and molecular mechanisms for the development of additional, parallel circuits in the brain.


Proposed cellular and molecular mechanisms for evolution of brain pathway duplications

During development, neural stem cell/progenitor cells that give rise to forebrain circuits derive mainly from stem cells in the ventricular zone. The daughter cells travel to their positions either by radial migration perpendicularly away from the ventricle (such as excitatory neurons within layers of the mammalian cortex), and/or by tangential migration parallel to the ventricle (such as inhibitory neurons that migrate from the basal ganglia into the cortex). Their local brain region identity is thought to be controlled by patterning transcription factors, such as the homeobox (Hox) genes. Once daughter cells reach their target location in the brain, they find their connecting partners in a process that requires cell adhesion and axon guidance genes. Given these principles, we propose that one possible mechanism for the evolution and development of duplicated segmented brain circuits is that there is a set of transcription factors that not only control the position of such circuits, but also the number of replicates of that circuit. A genetic change in such transcription factors could result in a new parallel circuit, such as that for vocal learning. Thereafter, changes in axon guidance genes in the new circuit would control divergence in connectivity relative to the older circuit. This begs the question of what kind of genetic change would this be?

We propose that gene duplication could be one such mechanism. Gene duplications have been found to influence the development and function of many organs and tissues, including brains, eyes and wings. As proposed originally by Ohno, many consider gene duplication to be one of the most important factors in evolution, including neofunctionalization, subfunctionalization and evolutionary innovations. Gene duplication allows the old gene copy to maintain its function and the new copy to evolve new functions. Even theories on gene evolution through gene duplication have influenced the theories on brain evolution by morphological duplication. The concept of neofunctionalization of genes and subfunctionalization of genes match those proposed for structural duplications.

One of the most well-studied and significant examples of duplicated genes controlling duplicated, repeated or segmented morphological structures are the Hox genes. These are transcription factors that control the anterior–posterior body plan axis and are situated in the genome in the same order as the body plan they control. They are duplicated to different degrees in different animal lineages, with greater complexity and more anatomical segments correlated with more duplications. Many invertebrates and Amphioxus possess one Hox gene cluster, whereas the remaining vertebrates have four Hox gene clusters, in part owing to two whole-genome duplication events that occurred early in vertebrate evolution. Within the brain, the Hox genes and the greater Hox gene transcription factor superfamily (including OTX, EMX, DMBX, GBX and EN) are involved in brain division and subdivision segmentation. They do so by controlling regional neuronal identity, stem cell progenitors, cell migration and cell death.

We propose that one possible mechanism for brain pathway duplication could be a local duplication of Hox superfamily genes in the genome segments that control forebrain development. One prediction of this hypothesis is that one should find such genes uniquely duplicated in vocal learning species that control brain development. Recently, based on comparative genomic analyses across the bird family tree, unique gene duplications were found in the songbird lineage and some of these genes had enriched or nearly exclusive expression in the song learning nuclei. It remains to be determined, however, if any of these transcription factors belong to the Hox gene family.

We caution that we are not suggesting a one-to-one relationship of gene duplication with morphological duplication. There are many examples of gene duplications resulting in modifications of existing structures and functions. An example relevant to the topic of vocal learning and cognition is the Slit-Robo GTPase 2 gene (SRGAP2), which has undergone two partial duplications (SRGAP2B and SRGAP2C) uniquely in humans relative to other mammals. The duplicated copies act as competitive inhibitors to slow cortical dendritic development of already existing brain pathways, which in turn allow greater neural plasticity into adulthood. SRGAP2 modulates activity of the ROBO axon guidance receptors, which are in turn activated by the SLIT family of protein ligands to modulate axonal/dendritic migration and branching in various brain regions. Intriguingly, the SLIT1 ligand is uniquely downregulated in the song production nucleus RA analogue of vocal learning birds (songbird RA, parrot AAC and hummingbird VA) and the analogous human LMC, which would mean that there could be a synergistic effect of the duplicated SRGAP2 GTPase and lower SLIT1 levels in the duplicated vocal motor pathways in humans. Another recent example of partial duplication includes another GTPase, the ARHGAP11B gene, which arose from ARHGAP11A in humans after separation from the chimpanzee lineage. The duplicated copy of the ARHGAP11A gene causes cortical area expansion, and this expansion causes folding, which we surmise could be owing to the duplication.

Advances in genetic technologies have also allowed scientists to test some hypotheses on duplicating or eliminating neural structures genetically. For example, ectopic visual responsive eyes were induced in Drosophila with the addition of an extra copy of one transcription factor, Pax6, expressed during development in another part of the body. Another study showed that electroporating an extra copy of the fibroblast growth factor 8 (FGF8) gene locally in the posterior cortical primordium of mouse embryos causes a partial duplication of the primary somatosensory cortex, with concomitant input from the thalamus to its layer 4 cortical cells, as shown by the presence of ectopic somatosensory barrel fields. In vertebrates, the expression of the Hox1a gene marks the earliest stages of regionalization of the developing hindbrain. Mice mutant for the Hoxa1 gene lack the developing rhombomere 2 (r2) brain region, but the r2 neurons escape apoptosis and develop within r3 and r4, to still incorporate into appropriate circuits to drive the rhythm of breathing. This suggests to us that Hox1a is needed for development of a separate, repeated rhombomere region, but that other factors are sufficient to develop the associated circuit within another circuit. An example of loss of gene function and functional redundancy leading to duplication of structure is the Mauthner (M) cells, a pair of reticulospinal neurons that control escape behaviour in zebra fishes. During the escape response, if the threatening stimulus arrives from the left side, the left M cell fires, and its action potential travels to the right side so that the fish swerves to the right side owing to the contraction of the muscles on the right side to avoid the threat. Mutation of the notch1a/deadly seven (des) in zebra fish results in the development of extra M cells in r4. All extra copies of the M cells are responsive to the escape stimuli, suggesting that when duplication of the cells takes place, they receive the appropriate sensory information and respond in a normal way indicating adaptive plasticity of the escape-response circuit.

Other plausible hypotheses of molecular mechanisms that could lead to brain pathway duplication include: (i) changes in splice variants of a gene, which we propose could switch on and off at different developmental times to control the generation of parallel circuits; (ii) changes in the cis-regulatory elements of genes, which we propose again would change the reiterative use of a gene network in parallel developing circuits; and (iii) loss of function in a gene that may normally inhibit development of some circuits.

Overall, the various hypotheses may be tested with recent advances in genomics, transcriptomics and gene manipulations, using complete genome sequences from multiple species with and without the brain pathways of interest. Until then, the existing evidence supports the possibility that brain pathway evolution through brain pathway duplication could be one mechanism to generate higher-order complexity in highly evolved animals.


Conclusion

In this review, we discussed new evidence from studies in birds, primates and other species that suggests that brain pathways for a novel convergent trait, vocal learning, possibly evolved by duplication from adjacent motor learning pathways. The continuum hypothesis of a pre-existing vocal learning pathway that was independently enhanced in vocal learners is an alternative, but could be compatible with the duplication hypothesis if the duplication occurs within an existing pathway, as seen with Hox1a r2 manipulations. Whether by duplication or enhancement, the pathways have diverged from their adjacent brain regions by specializations of genes involved in neural connectivity. These divergences may have been heavily selected upon for immediate and substantial phenotypic benefits. Despite these divergences, the vocal learning circuits share many properties with the adjacent motor pathways. The findings of the parrot core and shell song system lead us to wonder if humans evolved consecutive or simultaneous multiple duplications of a vocal learning pathway leading to more advanced spoken language abilities. Moreover, findings from studies outside of the vocal learning systems indicate that brain region or pathway duplication could be a general mechanism of brain evolution.

Answers to these questions can now be determined through comparative neurobiology and comparative genomics research. With the recent availability of genomes across the avian and eventually primate family trees, it becomes possible to discover candidate genes. They can then be studied with advanced technologies, such as transcriptomics and genome editing tools, including CRISPR-Cas9, RNAi, TALENs, Cre-Lox systems and more. The theoretical framework presented here will help guide use of these technologies.


Authors' contributions

E.D.J. and M.C. conceived and wrote the paper.


Neural population coding: combining insights from microscopic and mass signals

Stefano Panzeri, Jakob H Macke, Joachim Gross, Christoph Kayser — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2015. PMC4379382, CC BY 4.0.

Behavior relies on the distributed and coordinated activity of neural populations. Population activity can be measured using multi-neuron recordings and neuroimaging. Neural recordings reveal how the heterogeneity, sparseness, timing, and correlation of population activity shape information processing in local networks, whereas neuroimaging shows how long-range coupling and brain states impact on local activity and perception. To obtain an integrated perspective on neural information processing we need to combine knowledge from both levels of investigation. We review recent progress of how neural recordings, neuroimaging, and computational approaches begin to elucidate how interactions between local neural population activity and large-scale dynamics shape the structure and coding capacity of local information representations, make them state-dependent, and control distributed populations that collectively shape behavior.


Neural population codes at multiple scales

In complex animals, information about behaviorally important variables such as sensory signals or motor actions is carried by the activity of populations of neurons. Our understanding of neural information processing is founded on the conceptual assumption that, if two or more sensory stimuli can be discriminated, or two or more behavioral responses are different, their associated patterns of neural activity must be readily discriminable. Several key ingredients shape the capacity of a neural population code to form such discriminable representations: the diversity of neural response properties, their spatial and temporal response profiles, the cross-neural correlations, and the state-dependence of cortical activity.


Neural response features contributing to a population code

Understanding a population code requires investigating its statistical properties along all relevant dimensions and linking them to the external events that are encoded (for example, sensory inputs). Informative response features can spread across the dimension of time (temporal variations in the responses of individual neurons or of the population), space (stimulus tuning differences in the firing of different neurons), or along non-separable combinations of both dimensions.

Current experimental methods emphasize different dimensions. Multi-neuron recordings resolving individual neurons at high temporal resolution provide information about both spatial and temporal dimensions and their non-separable intersection. Imaging techniques such as two-photon imaging resolve individual neurons in space but often lack the fine temporal resolution to inform about spike timing. Measures of mass activity at high temporal resolution (LFP, ECoG, EEG, MEG) cannot resolve individual neurons (and sometimes even brain regions), but capture temporal activity patterns that are coordinated across multiple neurons.

Diversity of single-neuron firing rates. Neurons with heterogeneous stimulus preferences can each add complementary stimulus information as they each differ in terms of stimulus preference or tuning width. In the example, neuron A has narrow tuning (it responds only to the diamond), whereas neurons B and C prefer other stimuli and have a wider tuning than neuron A. Neuron D is uninformative and responds equally to all stimuli.

Relative timing. In a population, informative response patterns can include the relative timing between neurons. For example, the star and square can be distinguished by the relative timing between neurons B and C (emphasized by the dashed line connecting their spikes), while both neurons elicit the same number of spikes for these stimuli.

Network state modulation. Neural responses depend not only on sensory inputs but also on large-scale brain states that vary on timescales slower than the transient responses to individual stimuli. In the example, these are represented by a slow wave of a mass signal (e.g., an LFP filtered into a low-frequency component; the bottom row). In this cartoon, firing rates during one state (reflected by the peak of the cycle) are stronger than during another state (around the trough of the cycle), but the individual stimulus preferences or relative timing are preserved. Such state variables likely play a key – though not yet fully understood – role in population coding.

Periods of silence. Neural populations also encode information by the silence (i.e., absence of firing) of some neurons. In the schematic of, when neuron A is silent, it is reporting information about the absence of the diamond.

Recent progress in understanding the contribution and the interplay of each of these key ingredients arises from both technical and conceptual developments. Experimental methods now allow measuring and manipulating up to hundreds of neurons simultaneously in behaving animals and permit a direct link between population codes and behavior. Multi-scale studies combining invasive recordings with measurements of neuroimaging signals are becoming more frequent, allowing us to combine insights across methodologies. Finally, advances in computational methods for single-trial analysis of multivariate data allow us to fully exploit the avenues opened by high-density brain measurements.

We review here how these developments facilitate the convergence of knowledge gained from invasive multi-neuron recordings, neuroimaging data, and mathematical modeling, and begin to reveal the organization and computations of neural population codes at multiple scales of organization. For simplicity, we mostly focus on the encoding of sensory variables, but the concepts are relevant for the generic encoding of any variable (for example, motor variables).


The diverse response selectivity of sensory neurons

The computational properties of population codes are usually quantified using measures of the information they carry about sensory stimuli. The most widely used quantifications of neural information are based upon Shannon information (quantifying the accuracy of discrimination among different stimuli in a set) or Fisher information (quantifying discrimination of small stimulus changes, or the accuracy of decoding an individual stimulus). Because most concepts reviewed here apply to both types of information, we only distinguish between them when necessary.

How a neural population represents information is partly determined by the diverse selectivity of individual neurons. Individual neurons can carry information about sensory stimuli using a firing-rate code, for example by elevating their firing rate when presented with ‘preferred’ stimuli, and decreasing their rate when presented with other stimuli. Nevertheless, even neighboring neurons may have heterogeneous stimulus selectivity. For example, different neurons may have different stimulus tuning curves exhibiting a preference for different stimulus features or exhibiting different stimulus tuning widths. The heterogeneity of stimulus tuning generally implies that individual neurons may carry complementary information to that provided by others. As a result, the ability of a heterogeneous population to discriminate among stimuli in a set should, under most conditions, increase with population size. If individual neurons in a population each prefer well-separated stimulus features (such that their tuning curves do not overlap), the range of stimulus features encoded by that population would increase with population size. If, instead, neurons in a population have diverse but partly overlapping tuning curves, the complementary information carried by different neurons would lead to a better discrimination of stimulus features in the regions where the tuning curves overlap.

The scaling of information with population size depends on the structure of tuning preferences and of trial-to-trial response correlations, and its investigation can provide important insights. It can indicate how many neurons would be sufficient to achieve a desired level of sensory accuracy (assuming that the decoding mechanisms or later processing stages do not discard any of this information). Its extrapolation to infinite population size sets an upper bound on the information that can be achieved by a population with the considered response properties.

The scaling of information with population size is often studied by averaging information over subpopulations that are randomly sampled from the recorded neurons. This approach typically reveals a steady increase of information with population size (A), and led to the hypothesis that increasing population size allows the encoding of arbitrarily high amounts of information. However, recent work has shown that this steady increase may actually be an artifact resulting from random subsampling. This artifact arises because of an often neglected aspect of neural heterogeneity: only a small fraction of neurons in a given population carry significant sensory information in a specific context (B). As a result of this heterogeneity in single-neuron properties, a small but highly informative subset of neurons is sufficient to carry essentially all the information present in the entire observed population (A).

The above results are part of an emerging picture that a small-dimensional subspace of the experimentally measured activity suffices to explain the population dynamics underling sensory processing and motor behavior. This picture is consistent with the observed sparseness of cortical activity (at any moment only a small fraction of neurons are active) and is compatible with studies showing that perception and actions can be driven by small groups of neurons. A sparse population code may be advantageous for metabolic efficiency and may facilitate dendritic computations requiring the separation of individual synaptic afferents.

Studies on the auditory system suggest that those neurons contributing the most to a population code are those that respond sparsely over time, and do so with precisely timed temporal spike patterns. Importantly, the information carried by these precise spike patterns cannot be replaced by the information in the coarse-scale firing rates of other neurons in the population (C), because information in spike patterns is complementary to that in firing rates and because the fraction of neurons carrying information by rates is limited. This implies that spike timing remains crucial even for population codes. The complementary nature of millisecond-scale spike patterns and firing rates has similarly been observed in the somatosensory and visual system. Thus, both the spatial and temporal dimensions are important for understanding neural population codes, raising questions as to how such precise timing or population sparseness can be assessed using neuroimaging.


Benefits of mixed selectivity for population coding

In higher association regions the heterogeneity of cortical neurons expresses itself as patterns of selectivity to multiple sensory and task-related variables, which can be mixed in complex, sometimes nonlinear ways. A pioneering study unveiled the advantages of nonlinear mixed selectivity. If responses were selective only to individual task or stimulus aspects, or to their linear combinations (linear mixed selectivity; D), the dimensionality of the neural representation would be lower than the number of neurons in the population. In the example in D–F, the neural representation of a set of stimuli of two linearly mixed neurons lies on a line. This implies that complex nonlinear operations are required for decoding the information content (F). By contrast, a heterogeneous nonlinear mixed representation (E) leads to a richer population representation that has higher dimensionality than its linear counterpart and that can be more easily decoded by downstream areas using linear combinations of neural activity (F). In sum, heterogeneous nonlinear mixtures of selectivity increase the effective dimensionality of a population code and help to extract diverse information using simple linear decoding.

This high-dimensional population representation by mixed selectivity may seem at odds with reports of small subpopulations effectively encoding primary sensory information. However, sparseness and high dimensionality of mixed nonlinear selectivity can coexist and may even combine optimally under appropriate conditions. In fact, when nonlinearly mixed neural representations are also sparse, they naturally achieve an optimal trade-off between the need to maximize the diversity of responses to different stimuli (increasing the stimulus discrimination properties of population responses), and the need to maintain high response reliability (i.e., achieving consistent responses for noisy variations of the input). Nonetheless, systematic studies comparing the sparseness of neural responses across brain regions will be necessary to clarify the extent to which neural populations take advantage of the potential benefits offered by sparse representations. Neuroimaging appears suited for this goal because it allows comparing neural representation spaces across species and sensory systems, and tracing these over time during task performance.


Correlations of spike rates between neurons

The computational properties of a population code depend also on the pattern of response correlations between neurons. Traditionally, a distinction is made between signal correlations (quantifying the correlation of the trial-averaged neural responses across the different stimuli, and thus quantifying the similarity of stimulus tuning) and noise correlations (quantifying the correlation of trial-by-trial variations of response at fixed stimulus attributes). Much work on population codes has focused on correlations between the firing rates of pairs of neurons.

When tools for simultaneous multi-neuron recordings became widely available in the 1990s, two divergent views were proposed about the impact of noise correlations between firing rates. The first holds that noise correlations of firing rates – if modulated by the stimulus – may act as a separate coding mechanism complementary to firing rates. For example, it has been proposed that the dynamic stimulus-dependence of noise correlations among visual neurons (originating from changes in gamma-band synchronization among populations) carries information about whether individual neurons respond to the same or separate objects. This view has deeply influenced the interpretation of neural mass signals measured by neuroimaging because it suggests that changes in correlation (or coherence) between the activities of distinct populations may reflect how these populations encode information. The second view is that noise correlations of firing rates may impose limits on the growth of information with population size. For example, for neurons with identical tuning curves, the presence even of weak positive noise correlations precludes the possibility to improve the accuracy of sensory information encoding by simply averaging the rate of many neurons (correlated noise can only be removed to a limited extent by averaging). This second view influenced studies on neural population codes, and motivated recent work on how neuronal networks may dynamically decrease noise correlations to reduce their potentially limiting effect on information encoding. It has also been argued that the limiting effect of correlation may partially be overcome in populations with heterogeneous tuning and correlation properties.

The potential impact of correlations on population coding has been studied extensively using model-based approaches that quantify stimulus information under various assumptions about correlation structures or readout mechanisms. This approach has shown that correlations can influence neural population coding in more complex way than described above: depending on the precise pattern of signal and noise correlations, and the choice of readout mechanisms, correlations can increase, decrease, or leave unaffected the information carried by a population. An important insight of these theoretical studies is that the precise pattern of noise correlation matters more than noise correlation strength or population size. For example, a recent study considered the ability (quantified using Fisher information) to estimate small changes in a stimulus from population activity, and found that the type of noise correlations that limit the increase of information with population size are so-called differential correlations. Intuitively, such differential correlations correspond to correlated trial-to-trial variability of neural responses that shift the profile of population activity such that it looks like the population activity that would have been elicited by a slightly different stimulus. Thus, this correlated variability makes a noisy fluctuation of population activity look like the signal representing a different stimulus value, and thus acts as a source of noise that cannot be eliminated even by increasing the number of neurons. Whether these information-limiting correlations actually occur can be empirically investigated by computing information versus the number of neurons and investigating whether information saturates with population size. Because information depends crucially on the structure of correlations, extrapolation of its dependence on population size from real data should be performed using decoding approaches rather than making strong but difficult-to-validate assumptions about the structure and shape of correlations.

Besides determining the amount of information carried by neural populations, noise correlations in firing rates may also be indicative of important computational functions. Noise-correlations may have a role in probabilistic codes representing sensory uncertainty by reflecting correlations in the uncertainty associated with individual stimulus variables. For example, for an ambiguous input consistent with one of two possible stimuli, the neurons representing these two stimuli would be negatively correlated because evidence for one stimulus speaks against the other. It has also been argued that positive correlations within larger populations make the code sparser by increasing periods of population quiescence, and hence concentrate information into rare periods of common activity. This latter property may strongly shape how cortical activity is seen through neuroimaging.


Correlations of spike timing between neurons

Correlations between spike times can also contribute to population codes, for example by facilitating the readout of temporal response patterns in a relative latency code. Individual neurons can encode stimuli by their response latency (that is, the delay between stimulus onset and neural firing). Although information in the latency of an individual neuron may not be directly accessible to a downstream decoder (because measuring latency requires information about the precise time of stimulus onset), information in the relative latency between neurons may be robustly extracted by exploiting the fact that trial-by-trial shifts of latency are often correlated across a population. For example, latencies of different neurons may tend to be all-late or all-early because of global fluctuations in network excitability. Correlated latency shifts preserve the relative order of firing or latency differences across neurons, whereas uncorrelated shifts do not. In auditory cortex, the readout of such relative timing may be further supported by time-reference events, in other words, population response patterns that encode the stimulus time with an early, stimulus-invariant latency. Stimulus-selective neurons can then encode the stimulus identity by the time of their spikes relative to these reference events. Although these relative-latency codes are often studied at the pairwise level, recent work suggests that they may reflect a more general larger-scale organization of population activity: groups of neurons may be co-active in stereotyped sequences (termed packets), and the relative timing and strength of each neuron within this sequence may encode specific stimulus attributes.

Finally, correlations between spike times may also ensure the transmission of information across areas, for example by facilitating the impact on post-synaptic targets or by facilitating the selective read-out of specific combinations of afferents. All in all, this suggests that the relative timing between neurons contributes both to representing sensory information and to transmitting this information between areas.


State-dependence of population codes

Local neural activity not only depends on the current sensory input but also on the current brain state. Although feed-forward inputs to local circuits provide sensory afferents, the abundance of recurrent and feedback connections, and of neuromodulatory inputs, shapes the background activity on which this sensory information is processed. For example, neuromodulatory inputs that are not directly stimulus-related (such as cholinergic or noradrenergic signals that are an essential component of the control of the animal's behavioral state) can profoundly change the excitability of sensory cortical circuits, the degree of correlation among neurons, and the gain and reliability of individual neurons. Variations in brain state account for a significant fraction of the trial-to-trial variability of population activity.

This state-dependence must have profound – but largely unexplored – implications for how population codes operate. State-dependence may imply that populations transmit information only using codes that are robust to state fluctuations (e.g., relative latencies or relative firing-rates). Alternatively, downstream areas may extract variables indicating the current state from network activity (similarly to procedures used in data analysis) and then use state-dependent decoders to interpret population activity. Progress in understanding state-dependent coding requires better statistical methods for single-trial analysis that can be applied to different measurements of brain activity to disentangle state-dependent and -independent aspects of a code.


Insights on population coding from mass activity

Although a complete description of population codes may require recording all neurons involved in the considered task, important empirical knowledge about population codes can be gained from measurements of neural mass signals with high temporal resolution (LFP, ECOG, EEG, MEG). These measurements lack cellular-level resolution but can be easily applied to multiple brain areas and complex tasks, and are sensitive to both supra- and sub-threshold activity. Importantly, they have the potential to capture indicators of cortical state that cannot be easily extracted from the spiking activity of a few neurons alone.

Advances in single-trial data analysis have expanded the use of mass signals to study sensory transformations, permitting researchers to study the same questions using neuroimaging, multi-neuron recordings, and computational models. For example, recent neuroimaging studies extracted features of population activity influencing the variability of single-trial percepts, and demonstrated that visual object categories or fine details of auditory signals can be recovered using stimulus reconstruction or decoding methods.

Additional insights can be gained from mass signals by decomposing them into specific frequency bands and separating the sensory information carried by power and phase of individual bands. Recent work, based on both invasive (LFP) and non-invasive (EEG and MEG) recordings, has individuated the phase of low-frequency activity as a particularly informative feature of mass activity. In the visual system, detailed sensory features are reflected more in the phase of low-frequency (below 12 Hz) activity than in the power (A). Related findings were made in the auditory system, where the phase of low-frequency activity encodes speech or complex sounds (B,C). Stepping beyond single-site analysis, some studies found that the relative timing of neural responses across different sites carries more sensory information than the activation of individual sites. These results hence suggest that the relative timing of population activity could at least be as important for sensory coding as the strength of activity of an individual population, in line with insights from studies on spiking activity that highlight the role of relative response timing.

An important population coding principle emerging from the analysis of mass signals (both using MEG and EEG or intracranial recordings) is that of multiplexing of sensory information: different frequency bands of population activity each carry complementary information about stimulus features. For example, nested patterns of slower (e.g., delta or theta) and faster (e.g., gamma) auditory cortical rhythmic activity encode complementary aspects of speech (B). These results illustrate the multiple coding dimensions of population signals, and highlight the importance of understanding how specific aspects of coding in spiking activity map onto phase and power of rhythmic mass signals. Specific challenges for understanding the link between non-invasive neuroimaging and neural population codes are outlined in and in the outstanding questions.


Comparisons of stimulus selectivity in mass signals and spiking activity

Measurements of neural mass activity with high temporal resolution (LFP, MEG, EEG, ECoG) provide rich signals varying on multiple timescales and exhibiting reasonable spatial specificity. Nevertheless, owing to the multiple neural phenomena they capture, and because of uncertainties in source localization and to cancellation of local signals, they are difficult to interpret in terms of the underlying neural processes. However, some relations between mass signals, spiking activity, and sensory encoding are emerging from recent work.

Specific frequency components extracted from MEG and EEG signals seem to be particularly predictive of neural firing rates. Combined neural and EEG recordings from visual cortex show that the phase of low frequency (<10 Hz) and the amplitude of high-frequency (gamma, 40–100 Hz) rhythms carry the most information about the strength of local firing, and each offer complementary information about the firing rate. An indirect comparison of auditory stimulus selectivity in firing rates and EEGs revealed the strongest association with the phase (but not power) of low-frequency components. How do the phase of low-frequency components, and the amplitude of faster components, relate to sensory encoding?

The phase of low-frequency (<12 Hz) rhythms likely reflects changes in local network excitability that shape both stimulus responses and spontaneous background activity. Evidence for this comes from neural recordings and from neuroimaging studies demonstrating a causal relation between the phase of low-frequency activity and single-trial stimulus detection. Hence, the phase of low-frequency network activity may indicate whether or not local networks are in a state facilitating the encoding of sensory information and driving perception. Some theories suggest that the excitability fluctuations marked by the low-frequency phase help to prioritize the encoding of salient features.

Does this phase also indicate what is encoded? Recent work suggests this is the case: low-frequency phase can reflect the slow temporal structure of dynamic sensory stimuli. Experimental data and network models show that slow brain rhythms entrain to low-frequency variations of natural stimuli such as speech, directly inducing sensory information in the phase of these signals.

In visual cortices the amplitude of gamma rhythms is the signal component carrying the most sensory information. Models of gamma generation suggest that its amplitude reflects the instantaneous strength of local interactions between inhibitory and excitatory neurons, which is roughly proportional to the stimulus input – if excitation and inhibition are balanced. Thus, gamma amplitude is expected to encode aspects of current stimulus features rather than the slow stimulus dynamics (which is reflected by slower signal components). The validity of this hypothesis requires further experimental tests, as does the causal role of such rhythms for behavior.


Insights from the combined observations of single neurons and mass signals

Important insights about population codes further arise from studies that simultaneously measure spiking responses and mass signals, or that perform comparative analysis on such data obtained in separate experiments.

One key opportunity of the joint measurements arises from the complementary nature of single-neuron firing and of mass signals: mass signals capture aspects of sub-threshold activity and of intrinsically driven state-changes that cannot be measured by observing the spiking activity of a few neurons alone. Thus, low-frequency mass activity can be seen as a measure of the background state fluctuations constituting the ‘context’ that affects processing of the ‘content’ carried by sensory inputs. Examining the responses of individual neurons relative to the phase of low-frequency network rhythms can shed light on how the local circuit context affects the specific sensory content encoded in spiking activity.

Converging studies suggest that single-neuron spike timing depends on the frequency-specific oscillatory LFP phase (A), and that the sensory information carried by spiking activity can be better interpreted when the network context during which spikes were emitted is known (A). A recent study in the human medial temporal lobe showed that perception-related spiking activity is locked to an early stereotyped increase in theta LFP signals, suggesting that specific interactions between network rhythms and firing of individual neurons may define temporal windows facilitating conscious perception. Complementing measurements of spiking activity with LFP recordings may allow differentiating otherwise ambiguous population states and provides a means to disentangle context-related activity fluctuations from those induced by sensory noise or other causes.

Joint measurements of single-neuron spikes and mass signals also facilitate our understanding of the coordination of population codes across brain structures. Recent concurrent multi-site recordings of spiking activity and LFPs have shown that the spiking activity of a single neuron depends not only on the phase of the LFP oscillation at the same site but also on the dynamic patterns of the relationships (or ‘phase coupling’) between the phases of neural oscillations measured by LFP at multiple distant sites (B). The similarity of preferences in LFP phase coupling between neurons also predicts the similarity of their firing-rate variations: neurons that prefer similar patterns of phase coupling exhibit similar changes in firing rates with time or task, whereas neurons with different phase preferences show divergent firing-rate dynamics. This provides direct evidence that large-scale functional connectivity shapes local activation patterns and controls the co-activation and coordination of anatomically dispersed but functionally integrated ensembles of neurons, thus breaking new ground in the understanding of the large-scale organization of neural population codes.

Another approach to clarify the neural basis of the sensory information carried by different components of MEG/EEG signals is based on the use of information theoretic or stimulus-decoding methods to compare quantitatively the similarities of stimulus encoding in mass signals and multi-neuron recordings. This approach revealed (C) that the phase (and to a much lesser extent the power) of low-frequency mass activity captures some aspects of the sensory information carried by population spiking activity. Such comparative approaches will be crucial for understanding what mass signals can tell us about the underlying neural information processing and open the possibility to study emerging principles such as multiplexing, mixed selectivity, or of state-dependence across scales of brain measurements.


Concluding remarks

Understanding the properties and principles of cortical population codes requires identifying the most informative patterns within the spatio-temporal complexity of multi-neuron activity and understanding how coding properties are affected by large-scale state changes. Invasive recordings provide detailed access to the heterogeneity, temporal precision, and correlation structure of multi-neuron activity, properties which recent computational studies highlight as being crucial for shaping the information-coding properties of a population. Mass signals, on the other hand, provide more direct access to large-scale changes in network state and connectivity, other crucial properties that shape information coding and which can account for trial-by-trial variations in cognitive tasks. Combining insights from both mass signals and multi-neuron recordings is a key challenge for the future.

In light of the reviewed properties of population codes several questions emerge about the integration of microscopic and macroscopic structure of population codes. For example, can the mechanisms that seem crucial at the microscopic scale (such as neuronal heterogeneity, sparseness, or correlations or mixed selectivity) be observed from mass signals? In turn, how do specific patterns of activity observed at the macroscopic scale (such as patterns of phase coupling across multiple areas or global state changes) relate to the coding properties that are crucial at the microscopic scale? For sure, much is to be learned by methods, such as single-trial stimulus decoding or reconstruction methods, that allow a comparative and detailed assessment of similarity and complementarity of activity at each spatial and temporal scale.

To enhance our understanding of population coding, future developments of methods for high-dimensional data analysis and neural modeling will be necessary as well. Recent work has provided improvements in analytical techniques for reducing high-dimensional datasets and extracting the relevant sensory representations. In addition, biophysical models of sensory representations in cortical microcircuits allow a principled and rigorous direct link between neural signals and computing architectures, facilitating our understanding of how coding principles are implemented in the neural circuits. Being able to subject different neural signals to the same scientific question and analysis routine, and being able to compute both spiking and mass signals from the same plausible neural network models, are two crucial features to further improve our understanding of neural population coding in the future.


‘Activity-silent’ working memory in prefrontal cortex: a dynamic coding framework

Mark G. Stokes — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2015. PMC4509720, CC BY 4.0.

Working memory (WM) provides the functional backbone to high-level cognition. Maintenance in WM is often assumed to depend on the stationary persistence of neural activity patterns that represent memory content. However, accumulating evidence suggests that persistent delay activity does not always accompany WM maintenance but instead seems to wax and wane as a function of the current task relevance of memoranda. Furthermore, new methods for measuring and analysing population-level patterns show that activity states are highly dynamic. At first glance, these dynamics seem at odds with the very nature of WM. How can we keep a stable thought in mind while brain activity is constantly changing? This review considers how neural dynamics might be functionally important for WM maintenance.


Searching for the WM engram in the prefrontal cortex (PFC)

There is little doubt that the PFC is important for WM. Some of the earliest studies in nonhuman primates demonstrated that the structural and functional integrity of the PFC is necessary for successful maintenance of information over short delays. Although other brain areas presumably contribute some aspects of WM, especially modality-specific sensory areas, the lesion evidence clearly implicates the PFC as a crucial hub necessary for successful maintenance (cf. visual cortex for encoding visual memoranda). This review focuses on neurophysiological recordings in nonhuman primates to disentangle the functional principles of the PFC that mediate WM.

Early recordings around the principal sulcus in the monkey PFC discovered an apparent neurophysiological correlate of the WM engram: task-specific delay activity. For example, in a delayed reaching task some prefrontal cells increased firing during the delay period, indeed remained active for the duration that response-related information needed to be held in mind, and returned to baseline after the response was executed. A similar sustained firing pattern is observed in a memory-guided saccade (MGS) task. In this now-classic WM task, the subject is presented with a spatial cue at the beginning of the trial that indicates the target for a saccade that can be executed only after a memory delay of a few seconds (A). Activity in this memory delay is selective for the specific saccade location, corresponding to the contents of WM (B).

Prefrontal delay activity is not limited to motor preparation, but also responds selectively to visual memoranda. Similar to the delayed response tasks, PFC activity during visual delay match-to-sample tasks also covaries with the duration of maintenance in WM. Moreover, some cells even maintain their mnemonic role after the presentation of distracting items, indicating a potential correlate of distracter-resistant WM. Evidence for persistent content-specific delay activity has motivated numerous theoretical and computational models based on the idea that representations are kept ‘online’ after stimulus offset in a stable activity state.


‘Activity-silent’ WM

However, maintenance in WM is not always accompanied by an unbroken chain of persistent delay activity in the PFC. For example, when the duration of the maintenance period is fixed from trial to trial, robust delay activity sometimes emerges only late during the delay period (B). It seems that when the temporal structure of the task can be predicted, neural activity is reserved for the most relevant time point: that is, preparation for the expected memory probe. So-called ramp-up activity implies that delay activity could optimise WM-guided behaviour by preparing for the processing demands of the behavioural response (e.g., temporal orienting of attention). However, the relatively silent moments between encoding and response preparation additionally suggest that the continuity of vigorous delay activity is not always necessary for the continuity of the mental representation.

A recent neurophysiological study reported further evidence suggesting that persistent delay activity might not be necessary for accurate WM-guided behaviour. Critically, this study added a dual task demand to the classic MGS task. As in the standard variant, monkeys were required to encode and maintain the location of a saccade target for execution at the end of the trial. However, they were additionally required to attend to a specific spatial location until part way through the WM delay period (C). This cognitive manipulation effectively abolished WM-specific delay activity during the dual task period, even on trials in which WM performance was preserved (WM-correct trials). Moreover, when the competing task demands were completed, content-specific delay activity was ‘reawakened’, presumably in time for WM-guided behaviour. Consistent with the evidence from ramp up, these findings suggest that mnemonic delay activity in the PFC is not always critical for maintaining the continuity of WM but can be dynamically re-established when attention is refocused to the task-relevant content. WM does not seem to depend on delay activity but might be maintained in an ‘activity-silent’ format such as functional connectivity.


Activity-silent WM stored in functional connectivity

According to a synaptic model of WM, information can be maintained during such activity-silent periods as a pattern of synaptic weights, analogous to long-term memory. In this computational model (A), activity during encoding temporarily changes synaptic efficacy within the neural network, leaving behind a temporary synaptic memory trace via activity-dependent short-term synaptic plasticity (STSP). More specifically, calcium kinetics provide a window of approximately 2 s for STSP in the PFC; however, presumably different time constants could underlie the diversity of mnemonic timescales observed in the PFC. The essential point is that STSP changes the functional connectivity of the network to construct a temporary task-relevant circuit for WM-guided behaviour.

According to the original computational model, an activity-silent coding scheme is more efficient than persistent firing models. Persistent firing could be energetically expensive, especially if WM is in near-constant use constructing and maintaining an up-to-date world model of the contents of the environment and the rules that govern them. The brain consumes about 20% of total energy and it is estimated that action potentials and postsynaptic effects of glutamate account for much of this expenditure (47% and 34%, respectively). Therefore, neural economy places important constraints on ecologically optimal coding strategies. For example, it has been estimated that less than 1% of neurons can be activated simultaneously. It is difficult to rule out energy-efficient variants of persistent activity models of WM (e.g., WM codes could be sparsified across a cell population). Nevertheless, a coding format that does not depend on an unbroken chain for persistent firing would have a clear cost advantage (i.e., sparsification in time).

WM coded in patterns of functional connectivity might also provide a neurobiologically plausible mechanistic account for WM-guided behaviour as a generalised state-dependent processing. Memories are not stored as an active representation but rather change the functional architecture of the neural network for future processing. As in long-term memory, WM is expressed by the way the network responds to new input. State-dependent readout would avoid the need for explicit mechanisms for comparing the internal representation with a separate representation reflecting the new input. Moreover, because memories are stored in a format that is qualitatively different from perceptual representations, their informational content could be more resistant to interference from and/or confusion with other activity-based representations.

Despite considerable theoretical appeal, the synaptic model of WM is relatively difficult to test empirically. Extensive evidence confirms the prevalence of STSP but its functional role has not yet been fully established. Microelectrode neurophysiology can only indirectly infer connectivity via interactions between simultaneous recordings. The gold-standard evidence for a monosynaptic connection is correlated spiking between neurons. In practice, however, the probability of sampling any two neurons with a measurable monosynaptic connection is extremely low (∼1–2% of all recorded pairs in). Such a poor yield has been effectively prohibitive for testing synaptic plasticity within a standard primate neurophysiological study. Turning to the rodent model, researchers were able to collect sufficient samples of simultaneous recordings to show that the pattern of effective synaptic connections was dynamically modulated during a WM-dependent maze task (B). Large-scale studies in the primate PFC are required to provide more specific evidence for a synaptic theory of WM.

Synaptic plasticity is not the only candidate mechanism for a functional connectivity coding scheme for WM. For example, frequency-specific coherence could provide a complementary mechanism for rapid and temporary shifts in functional connectivity by phase aligning periods of excitability to maximise the opportunity for information transfer (and/or misaligning to suppress communication; communication through coherence). Interestingly, researchers have recently reported frequency-specific coherence that dynamically established rule-specific subnetworks within the PFC (B). A similar mechanism for the rapid configuration of content-specific network architectures could be used to keep other forms of task-relevant material in WM.


Dynamic coding for WM

Population decoding methods using a sliding temporal window on high-temporal-resolution data show that brain activity is highly dynamic (summarised in). Some of the most detailed studies of dynamic population coding have been performed in the olfactory system of the locust. For example, specific odours trigger a series of activity patterns within antennal-lobe projection neurons. This complex spatiotemporal activation pattern implies that population coding is time-specific: the same sensory information is represented over time, but in different spatial patterns that depend on the specific time point. Although the population eventually returned to a stable state, the most discriminative information for odour classification was observed along the most dynamic phase of the response. Downstream neurons that receive output signals from these projection neurons respond most vigorously during the most dynamic phase of the response. By contrast, activity is relatively mute in these putative readout neurons after the projection cells have returned to a relatively stable state.

Importantly, these dynamics are not specific to locust olfaction but are likely to constitute a general property of neural processing. Of particular relevance here, dynamic population coding has also been observed in the monkey parietal cortex and PFC and could be especially important for WM-based decision making. At the single-unit level, dynamic coding can be distinguished from transient or sustained firing by time-specific selectivity (A). A dynamic cell might be engaged in processing across numerous time points (cf. transient cell-firing pattern) but the coding qualitatively depends on time during the processing window (cf. sustained firing pattern). Although it might be helpful to conceptualise distinct forms of temporal profile, these temporal characteristics vary along a continuum in the PFC rather than forming very distinct categories. Such coding characteristics are best reflected in the full population response rather than focusing on a priori defined categories of cell type.

At the population level, time dependency can be expressed as a dynamic trajectory through activity state space (B), but this is difficult to visualise beyond three dimensions. Alternatively, time dependency can be expressed in a 2D cross-temporal pattern analysis (C), where discriminative patterns at each time point are statistically compared with discriminative patterns at every other time point. In this scheme, dynamic coding gives rise to a hallmark pattern of robust decoding along the within-time diagonal axis but little or no cross-generalisation between time points. Although the same information is decodable from the ensemble activity (e.g., WM content), the underlying patterns of activity differ qualitatively over time.

We previously observed hallmark features of dynamic coding in a delayed paired-associate task. The initial response to a to-be-remembered memory item triggered a dynamic trajectory through activity state space (A) resulting in strong time dependency (B). Yet despite the spatiotemporal complexity of this dynamic code, information decodability peaked during the most energetic and dynamic phase before settling into a low-energy stable state during the delay period. Memory content could still be decoded during the delay period but the discriminative pattern did not resemble a straightforward continuation of the initial encoding of the information during the cue period. This contrasts with a simple form of a persistent coding in which activity patterns elicited by the presentation of task-relevant information are just clamped down and maintained throughout a memory delay. The discriminative pattern was also distinct from the population code for the expected target, in contrast to a simple preactivation form of prospective coding. This pattern of dynamic coding is, however, consistent with a synaptic model of WM as outlined below.

Complex population dynamics can be predicted from the evolution of state-dependent processing in which the underlying response sensitivity of the network varies over time. The response sensitivity, or hidden state, of a neural network is determined by the various neurophysiological parameters that determine how the network will respond to input at any given time point, especially functional connectivity (e.g., activity-dependent STSP). This neural state is ‘hidden’ simply because our recording techniques typically measure activity states only; that is, the response of the hidden state to input (extrinsic or intrinsic). Importantly, the hidden state is not stationary but is influenced by past experience, including long-term synaptic plasticity but also temporary changes in functional connectivity. Temporal variability at the very shortest timescales means that the activity state is in constant flux due to a cascading interaction between hidden states and activity states. While input drives a specific response to a network according to the hidden state, the resultant activity state in turn reconfigures the hidden state. Therefore, the response to subsequent stimulation will trigger a unique response pattern according to the new hidden state. Moreover, this new pattern will further modulate the new hidden state of the system, thus determining the response to the next input, and so on. The reciprocal interaction between the activity state and the hidden state results in a complex spatiotemporal trajectory through state space observed throughout different animal models and brain areas. The full trajectory is reproducible across trials to the extent that the hidden state relaxes back to the baseline connective pattern after some time period. This baseline hidden state is determined by more stable connections established via long-term plasticity, whereas the time constants that influence temporary changes in the hidden state determine the duration of activity-silent WM. Maintenance for longer durations presumably requires periodic refreshing; for example, via intrinsic oscillations or more explicit attention-related rehearsal.


Revealing the ‘silent’ WMs

Although hidden states are effectively activity silent, their structure can be inferred from the input–output behaviour of the network (i.e., state-dependent response;). This is a basic readout mechanism proposed for synaptic WM but also predicts that any activity drive to the network should elicit a state-dependent response that reflects the content in WM. Consider an example of active sensing (e.g., sonar), where a simple impulse (e.g., ‘ping’) is used to probe the hidden contours of an unseen structure (A). In the same manner, the impulse response to a neural perturbation faithfully reflects the current connectivity architecture that determines input–output mapping of the neural network. If the impulse is held constant over trials within a WM condition, any WM-related difference in output can be attributed to a change in the state of the system, including hidden states. Consistent with this argument, we previously found that a task-irrelevant stimulus presented during a WM delay triggered a population-level response in the PFC that clearly differentiated between different content in WM (B).

In basic information terms, a content-specific shift in hidden state could be decoded from the resultant change in the network response profile. However, synaptic WM could also provide a more explicit context-dependent mapping for WM-guided behaviour. Previously, we found that population-level tuning profiles in the PFC rapidly adapt to accommodate changes in behavioural context. The transition from stimulus-specific representations to context-dependent coding could be visualised in 2D space using multidimensional scaling (C; see also). At this decision stage, perceptually distinct choice stimuli (colour coded) could be either a current target (filled circles) or a distractor (unfilled circles) depending on the trial context. The initial separation in state space at around 100–125 ms differentiated the neural response as a function of stimulus identity (stimulus specificity). However, by 150 ms there was already clear evidence for separation by decision value: target versus non-target. Importantly, context-dependent separation was not arbitrary, as a common decision boundary separated target from non-target irrespective of stimulus type. This implies systematic routing of stimulus-specific patterns to task-appropriate positions in state space (D, upper panel), enabling evidence accumulation according to a flexible decision rule (D, lower panel).


Implications for cognitive models

Cognitive studies demonstrate that multiple items held concurrently in WM are not all necessarily represented in the same way. For example, a recent multistate model proposes that only a single item within WM is held in a prioritised active state. This ‘priority item’ is also the current focus of attention and automatically biases processing in favour of matching input. This is equivalent to the search template in the biased competition model of attention, but also allows other, less-relevant items to remain effectively dormant (e.g., activity silent). Importantly, prioritisation is flexible: as items become more or less relevant to behaviour, they can become more or less active accordingly. Retrospective cueing studies provide empirical evidence for shifting priorities within WM, with specific benefits on WM readout. Brain-imaging studies of retro-cueing provide evidence that attended items in WM are associated with discriminable patterns of neural activity, whereas unattended items are effectively activity silent although they can be accurately recalled at the end of the delay period.

Recent evidence from human electroencephalography (EEG) suggests that an active form of WM is especially important for flexible moment-to-moment shifts in attentional set. For example, contralateral delay activity (a putative EEG marker of WM) is evident when WM is first used to maintain a search template but diminishes when the same attentional template is used for several consecutive trials. This could reflect a transfer to silent WM as a function of learning. Similar to the monkey neurophysiology, these studies imply that although activity during memory delays might serve an important role in prioritising mnemonic content in preparation for efficient WM-guided behaviour, persistent activity is not necessary for maintenance per se. Activity-silent representations can still support WM-guided behaviour.

The dynamic coding perspective outlined in this review could have important implications for understanding capacity limits in WM. For example, dynamic coding would predict that capacity limits are more closely tied to limits in encoding and/or readout rather than ongoing competition between active representations during the delay period. It will be important to relate dynamic coding to limits in the amount and quality of information in WM or how information is bound between features. Individual differences in encoding/readout could also help explain the relationship between WM and general intelligence. At first glance, it would seem intuitive that a larger WM storage capacity should provide more computational power for supporting abstract reasoning and general problem solving. However, individual-difference studies suggest that selection and/or object-based grouping strategies appear to mediate the WM–IQ relationship rather than raw storage capacity. Similarly, cognitive studies of goal neglect suggest that low-performing participants systematically fail to use behaviourally relevant information provided at initial task instruction, although they can accurately recall the neglected rules at the end of the experiment. Goal neglect implies a clear distinction between maintenance and use: holding task-relevant information in mind might be necessary but not sufficient for WM-guided behaviour.

On a more practical level, activity-silent WM poses a challenge to research in cognitive neuroscience. Our basic tools are designed to measure activity states, but clearly we need to develop new ways to measure activity-silent states that might be important for WM. This could include functional connectivity measures (statistical dependencies between simultaneous recordings), but also perturbation methods to infer changes in response profile (e.g., A). If we consider active neural states only, we risk ignoring the broader landscape of temporary neural states that mediate flexible context-dependent processing.

This review has focused on how dynamic coding might contribute to WM-guided behaviour, but the same framework could also help to explain more general cognitive control, including context-dependent decision making or attentional control. Essentially, dynamic coding reconsiders WM as the current response potential of a network, conditioned by the recent stimulation history that determines the behavioural context. In this sense, standard WM tasks are reframed as context-dependent decision-making tasks, wherein the memory stimulus defines the stimulus–response mapping to the probe (e.g., match versus non-match). Instead of maintaining a perceptual representation per se, dynamic coding maintains the behaviourally relevant rule. Classic models of cognitive control suggest that active states in the PFC encoding current task context modulate other brain areas to reconfigure stimulus–response mapping for rule-guided behaviour; however, a dynamic coding framework essentially proposes that this remapping could be instantiated more directly to mediate context-dependent behaviour (akin to ultra-rapid adaptive coding or task-specific functional ensembles). It will be important for future research to disentangle the relative contributions of stationary activity states representing context and functional connectivity in context-dependent processing.

Dynamic coding is also conceptually related to mixed selectivity, which effectively maximises the dimensionality of a network. Time specificity effectively adds another dimension to the coding potential of a network. Indeed, the coding potential is directly proportional to the independence between time points. This is expressed in the off-diagonal correlations of the cross-temporal analyses. Nonlinear activity dynamics could also mediate context-dependent processing. For example, recurrent networks can learn to accumulate evidence according to an independent context signal. Recurrent dynamics could also mediate hysteresis for memories and dynamical systems analyses show that time-specific activity states could help energise subsequent dynamics. It will be important to integrate known mechanisms for short-term synaptic plasticity into such models to evaluate the relative contribution of various potential processes for mediating context-dependent processing in cortical circuits.


A unique role for the PFC

Dynamic coding is almost certainly not limited to the PFC but is observed from locust olfaction to the highest level of the primate cortex. What makes dynamic coding in the PFC so important for WM? The intrinsic time constants of PFC neurophysiology could provide extended hysteresis sufficient for WM. However, perhaps more importantly, the PFC occupies an ideal network position to exploit a general principle of dynamic coding for WM in the service of flexible cognition.

Diverse input connections deliver information about the external environment derived from the senses along with internal variables such as reward values, abstract rules, and long-term goals. At the apex of the feedforward hierarchy, information that reaches the PFC is already highly preprocessed, filtered, and integrated for task relevance. Therefore, information that drives changes to the PFC is already likely to be task relevant and optimised for cognitive control. By contrast, equivalent forms of dynamic coding in lower brain areas such as the perceptual cortex could reflect ‘lower’ forms of memory (e.g., iconic memory). Moreover, because perceptual areas are constantly updated by new input, temporary state changes may be particularly vulnerable to overwriting, thus limiting the durability and lifespan of non-prefrontal memory traces. The functional insulation of the PFC from moment-to-moment fluctuations in irrelevant signals provides an ideal space for maintaining information necessary for complex time-extended behaviour. Finally, extensive output connections also place the PFC in an ideal neuroanatomical position to modulate processing in other brain areas according to the product of external and internal variables.


Concluding remarks

A dynamic coding framework for WM is summarised in. This model effectively recasts WM as a flexible decision process where the memory item defines a temporary decision circuit for accumulating evidence during WM-dependent processing (e.g., match/non-match). The same framework could be applied for more general forms of context-dependent processing, including rule-dependent processing in the PFC. This shift in network input/output behaviour could provide a neurophysiological basis for a form of ultra-rapid adaptive coding that would be suitable for trial-wise assignment of neuronal selectivity in the PFC. Coding in the PFC could adapt as rapidly as thought itself.

This review identifies a number of outstanding questions. However, it is important to note that future advances will depend critically on new methodological approaches for characterising a diversity of neural states. Population-level analyses provide a powerful set of tools for characterising subtle patterns of neural activity as trajectories through multidimensional state space. However, even these activity-state representations provide only a partial glimpse of the neural states that underlie cognition. New methods to measure the consequences of experimentally controlled perturbations of the neural state indicate a promising avenue for future research. Future advances also critically depend on bridging levels of analysis. This review has focused on neurophysiological evidence from nonhuman primates. Ultimately, we must find new ways to measure and interpret dynamic neural states in the human brain. This is particularly important for studying high-level cognition such as WM. The nonhuman primate is an excellent model, but even monkey behaviour displays only a fraction of the cognitive flexibility that defines the human brain. Moreover, without the benefit of verbal instruction, animal experiments require extensive training regimens based on reinforcement leaning. The burden of learning further diminishes the nature of flexibility in monkey studies. Future progress therefore depends on better methods to bridge levels of analysis, from high-precision invasive recordings to large-scale dynamics in noninvasive neuroimaging. This is essential if we are to translate insights gained in our primate cousins to the target system: human cognition.


Who is That? Brain Networks and Mechanisms for Identifying Individuals

Catherine Perrodin, Christoph Kayser, Taylor J. Abel, Nikos K. Logothetis, Christopher I. Petkov — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2015. PMC4673906, CC BY 4.0.

Social animals can identify conspecifics by many forms of sensory input. However, whether the neuronal computations that support this ability to identify individuals rely on modality-independent convergence or involve ongoing synergistic interactions along the multiple sensory streams remains controversial. Direct neuronal measurements at relevant brain sites could address such questions, but this requires better bridging the work in humans and animal models. Here, we overview recent studies in nonhuman primates on voice and face identity-sensitive pathways and evaluate the correspondences to relevant findings in humans. This synthesis provides insights into converging sensory streams in the primate anterior temporal lobe (ATL) for identity processing. Furthermore, we advance a model and suggest how alternative neuronal mechanisms could be tested.

Our ability to identify unique entities, such as specific individuals, appears to depend on sensory convergence in the anterior temporal lobe.

However, the neural mechanisms of sensory convergence in the anterior temporal lobe are unclear.

Alternative accounts remain equivocal but could be tested by better bridging the findings in humans and animal models.

Recent work in monkeys on face- and voice-identity processes is helping to close epistemic gaps between studies in humans and animal models.

We synthesize recent knowledge on the convergence of auditory and visual identity-related processes in the anterior temporal lobe.

This synthesis culminates in a model and insights into converging sensory streams in the primate brain, and is used to suggest how the neuronal mechanisms for identifying individuals could be tested.


Missing Pieces in Identity Processes

Certain individuals are unmistakable by their visual face or auditory voice characteristics, others by their smell or how they move. Identifying an individual, or any other unique entity, is an instance of the general problem of object identification, which is a process occurring at different levels of categorization (e.g., basic or subordinate). At a basic level, identifying objects relies on recognizing the categorical features of the object class; social animals can also perceptually categorize species membership, social rank, body size, or age,. However, individuals are unique entities identified by more subtle within-category differences, referred to as ‘subordinate level’ identification. For example, while a human or monkey might be content to eat ‘a’ banana, social situations critically depend on identifying specific individuals to avoid or interact with. Identifying unique concrete entities, such as specific individuals, can be achieved by input from several sensory modalities, whereas the sound of a banana falling onto the ground may be indistinguishable from the sound of another fruit falling.

The nature of the multisensory computations underlying individual identification in the brain remains unclear. Here, we consider two scenarios: it could be that each sensory input is sufficient to activate an identity-specific neuronal representation. In this case, unique individual identification likely relies on amodal or modality-independent convergence sites, whose neural representations can be driven by any sensory input. We refer to this as an ‘or gate’. Alternatively, identification may emerge from the synergistic interplay of all available incoming signals that collectively shape the neural representation. In this case, missing input from one sensory stream will alter the neural representations at the site of convergence. We refer to this as a ‘synergistic’ process, which could be additive or nonadditive,. Pursuing the underlying mechanisms, whatever they may be, and their impact on behavior will reveal how neural activity is used to identify individuals and unique entities.

Initial insights into the regions underlying the identification of individuals were provided by lesion and neuroimaging studies,. Such work revealed a distributed network of brain regions engaged in extracting different types of sensory feature, such as faces. Lesion studies show that damage to face-selective regions in occipital, fusiform cortex and the ATL can impair face perception, a disorder known as ‘prosopagnosia’,. The analogous auditory disorder affecting voices (‘phonagnosia’) can arise from damage to parts of the same temporal lobe network involved in prosopagnosia, although the heterogeneity in lesion size and location across patients makes more detailed distinctions difficult,. Lesions of the language-dominant (left) ATL are associated with a decline in the ability to name both famous faces and famous voices,. Naming a person involves lexical retrieval, which depends on language-related processes in frontal, temporal, and parietal regions around the Sylvian sulcus, including the ATL,.

However, current accounts of the neural processes involved in assessing identity remain equivocal. The most common approaches can identify the large-scale neural substrates but provide limited insights into the overlap, segregation, and form of neuronal representations involved in identity processes, because neuroimaging approaches measure either surrogates of neuronal activity or large-scale neural responses. Consequently, there is a need for direct measures of localized neuronal computations to resolve alternative accounts. Direct neuronal recordings (depth electrode recordings or electrocorticography) in human patients being monitored for neurosurgery can inform on neuronal function in localized regions in the human brain, while work in animal models can describe neuronal processes at multiple scales directly from the regions of interest and offers greater specificity in neuronal manipulation (activation and/or inactivation). However, until recently the animal work had not kept apace. The current literature in humans considers multisensory interactions and convergence as a research priority, with studies often collecting data from at least two sensory modalities,. The human work also highlights the advantage of combining visual (face) and auditory (voice) input for identity recognition,. By contrast, neuronal-level studies in animal models are usually restricted to studying one sensory modality (e.g., face-identity processes in the visual system). In that respect, recent findings from auditory voice identity-related neuronal studies in monkeys may help the integration of human and nonhuman animal work and increase our understanding of the organization of identity processing in the brain.

Here, we briefly overview two alternative neurocognitive models of identity processing developed in humans. We then review recent studies on voice- and face-identity processes and multisensory pathways conducted in nonhuman primates and evaluate the correspondences to relevant findings in humans. From this synthesis, we propose a model of primate ATL function for identity-related processes and use it to identify imminent gaps in our understanding. We conclude by suggesting how alternative neuronal mechanisms could be tested.


Human Models of Identity Perception: What Are the Neuronal Mechanisms?

Current theoretical models developed from human studies of face- and voice-identity perception have suggested that the related auditory and visual streams converge in the ATL,. Convergence in the ATL has also been independently articulated in lesion studies of semantic disorders, where neurosurgical resection, stroke, or degeneration of the ATL (bilaterally or unilaterally) affects a person's ability to name or recognize an individual by seeing their face or hearing their voice,.

Two prominent, not mutually exclusive, models are as follows. A ‘distributed-only’ model proposes that the sensory features important for recognizing an individual engage distinct brain regions, interconnected into a network,. This model does not require amodal convergence sites because the interconnectivity allows inputs from different sensory modalities to influence the collective network-wide processes. Damage to any node in a distributed network will selectively disrupt the key contribution of that node and influence, but not necessarily preclude, the function of the rest of the network. For instance, a lesion of voice-sensitive regions might result in phonagnosia and affect voice–face multisensory interactions, but will not disrupt the ability to identify an individual with inputs from the preserved sensory modalities. Another ‘distributed-plus-hub’ model (or related ‘hub-plus-spoke’ models) for identity processing not only contains distributed processes, but also features the ATL as a key hub or convergence site whose function is amodal,. Crucially, the function of a damaged amodal process cannot be recovered by the rest of the network (for a computational model).

Both models rely on multisensory convergence sites, but differ in the processing at these sites. In this paper, we take this a step further to suggest neuronal mechanisms that could be tested even at the level of single neurons. For instance, multisensory convergence in the ATL as an amodal process suggests an ‘or gating’ function where one or another synaptic input is sufficient to result in neuronal depolarization. The alternative mechanism is a synergistic interaction of the available multisensory inputs, such that the form of neuronal representations depends on the combination of the different available inputs. It is also possible that the ‘or gating’ occurs as a side product of the converging synergistic multisensory neural process being assigned a top-down label.

Thereby, different scientific lines have converged on questioning the neural multisensory interactions in ATL sites and the identity-related processes that they support. Although animal models cannot directly address questions of interest for lexical retrieval, since naming relies on human language, work in nonhuman animals can clarify which identity processes in the ATL are evolutionarily conserved and the cognitive functions that they support (e.g., perceptual awareness, conceptual knowledge; see Outstanding Questions). Recent developments now allow better bridging gaps between the work in humans and other animals.


Face and Voice Regions in Humans and Other Animals

First, face-sensitive neurons were identified in the monkey inferior temporal (IT) cortex as neurons that respond more strongly to face than to nonface objects,. Subsequently, neuroimaging studies revealed face-category preferring regions in the human fusiform gyrus (FG) and occipital areas, and in the monkey fundus and inferior bank of the superior temporal sulcus (STS),. In the auditory modality, voice-sensitive regions have only recently been identified in humans and other animals.

Auditory studies in animal models have shown that neuronal responses typically become increasingly selective for complex sound features along the auditory processing hierarchy, and that the ventral-stream pathway processing ‘what’ was vocalized in primates involves auditory cortex, the anterior superior temporal gyrus (aSTG), temporal polar cortex, anterior insula, and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC),. To more directly study ‘who’ rather than ‘what’ was vocalized requires using stimuli that differ in voice content.

Regions responding more strongly to voice versus nonvoice categories of sounds were first identified in humans with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and include regions in the STG and STS (A). However, it is known that human voice regions can also strongly respond to or decode speech content, raising the concern that voice and speech representations might be functionally interdependent in the human brain and not evident in the same way in the brains of other animals. With the advent of auditory fMRI in nonhuman animals, scientists were able to address this: the comparison of voice versus nonvoice-driven responses showed evidence for evolutionary counterparts to human voice regions in the monkey supratemporal plane (STP) (B) and in the temporal lobe of domesticated dogs (C).

There are multiple voice category-preferring clusters in the primate STP, just as there exist several face category-preferring clusters in more inferior parts of the temporal lobe,. Yet, complementary findings have now been obtained in both auditory and visual modalities that point to ATL regions being more sensitive to unique identity compared with more posterior temporal lobe regions (face identity: humans, monkeys, voice identity: humans, monkeys, A,B; infant voice-sensitive regions).


Voice Cells, Face Cells and Multisensory Interactions

In monkeys, targeted neural recordings in voice identity-sensitive fMRI clusters in the ATL provided the first evidence for voice cells (A). These neurons respond strongly to the category of conspecific voices (B) as well as differentially to specific voices within that category (C,D). The neurons in the ATL voice region are also sensitive to auditory features in the vocalizations, such as caller identity (C), further qualifying this anterior STP region as a higher-order auditory area and supporting the notion that the ATL is important for identity processes.

However, the functional organization of face- and voice-sensitive clusters in the ATL may not be identical. For example, face cells might be more abundant in fMRI-identified face patches and be less selective to individual static faces (E),. By contrast, voice cells cluster in modest proportions and respond selectively to a small subset of the presented voice stimuli (E); for further discussion see. This high stimulus selectivity of auditory ATL neurons is not unexpected and is on a par with the selectivity of neurons in the vlPFC,. These initial comparisons suggest potential divergences in the neuronal substrates of identity representations in the auditory and visual streams at these processing stages.

Regarding the nature of multisensory interactions underlying individual identification, there is now substantial evidence for anatomical and functional crosstalk at various stages of the sensory pathways in humans and many other animal species,. Neuronal responses to voices and dynamic faces have been compared in monkeys between the voice-sensitive anterior (a)STP and the anterior upper-bank of the STS (uSTS), which is part of the multisensory association cortex in primates,. Anterior uSTS neurons, unlike those in the aSTP, are not particularly sensitive to auditory vocal features, which is also the case for more posterior regions of the uSTS,. By comparison, however, anterior uSTS neurons show a balance of both auditory and visual responses (B) and are sensitive to the congruency of the presented voice–face pairings: multisensory influences in the uSTS tend to occur more frequently in response to matching compared with mismatched audiovisual stimuli, such as a monkey face being paired with a human voice. By contrast, aSTP neurons exhibit weak visual-only responses. Also, multisensory influences in the aSTP are less selective for correct face–voice pairings and are qualitatively more similar to those reported in and around primary auditory cortex than they are to those in the STS. These observations are consistent with the evidence for integrative multisensory processes in the human and monkey STS, potentially at the cost of decreased specificity of unisensory representations. The results reveal visual modulation in the ATL, but underscore the auditory role of the primate voice-sensitive aSTP, with more robust multisensory integration occurring in the STS.

Several studies have also assessed the timing of neuronal responses relative to oscillatory activity, as a mechanism for routing and prioritizing sensory information. For instance, the latencies of auditory cortical responses decrease when there is a behavioral benefit of a visual face on the reaction time in detecting an auditory voice. Also, neurons in the monkey voice-sensitive aSTP show crossmodal (face-on-voice) phase resetting that can predict the form of multisensory neuronal responses. These phase-resetting effects appear to be more similar to those reported in and around primary auditory cortex than they do to those reported in the STS. Moreover, neurons in the monkey STS show specific patterns of slow oscillatory activity and spike timing that reflect visual category-specific information (faces versus objects). Taken together, this suggests that the interplay of individual neurons and the local network context shapes sensory representations. Yet, whether oscillatory processes are specifically involved in identity processing or constitute more general computational principles shared across brain regions remains unclear (see Outstanding Questions).


Interconnectivity between Face and Voice Regions and Other Areas

Recently, the directional effective connectivity of the voice network was investigated using combined microstimulation and fMRI in monkeys, providing insights into voice-related and multisensory processing pathways in the primate ATL. Stimulating a brain region while scanning with fMRI can reveal the synaptic targets of the stimulated site, a presumption supported by the fact that target regions activated by stimulation are often consistent with those identified using neuronal anterograde tractography.

Surprisingly, microstimulating voice identity-sensitive cortex does not strongly activate PFC, unlike stimulation of downstream multisensory areas in the STS and upstream auditory cortical areas in the lateral belt: the voice-sensitive area in the primate aSTP seems to interact primarily with an ATL network including the uSTS and regions around the temporal pole (C). By contrast, stimulating the uSTS results in significantly stronger frontal fMRI activation, particularly in orbital frontal cortex (D). These observations suggest that multisensory voice and face processes are integrated in regions such as the uSTS in the ATL before having a strong impact on frontal cortex, providing additional insights to complement those on ATL connectivity, and neuronal processes,.

However, there is a noted distinction between species, because human voice-sensitive clusters are often localized in the STS, which in monkeys is classified as multisensory association cortex,. Interestingly, a recent probabilistic map of human temporal voice areas suggests that anterior voice-sensitive regions are located in the human STG and posterior ones in the STS. Thus, there may be a close correspondence across the species in terms of anterior voice-sensitive clusters and multisensory processes in the STS, although this issue is worth evaluating further (see Outstanding Questions).

Human neuroimaging studies have shown that voice and face regions in the temporal lobe can be respectively influenced by the other modality, and are structurally connected to each other. Another study found that the posterior STS bilaterally and the right anterior (a)STS respond preferentially to people-related information regardless of the sensory modality, which could be construed as certain human voice regions in the anterior STS being amodal,. However, it is currently unclear whether and how voice and face regions in the human temporal lobe are interconnected with multisensory regions in the STS and those in the temporal pole or frontal cortex, knowledge that is already available in monkeys. Ongoing efforts could be complemented with more direct measures of local ATL neural responses to voices and faces in humans to compare with intracranial recordings in monkeys.


Human Intracranial Recordings during Face and Voice Naming

An earlier study recording from neurons in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) of patients reported highly selective responses to pictures of known celebrities, such as Jennifer Aniston. Recently, several studies have been conducted in human subjects performing voice- and face-naming tasks,. One group in particular has developed more extensive coverage of the different ATL regions for subdural cortical recordings,. Using a voice- or face-naming task while recording local field potentials revealed strikingly similar neuronal responses in the ATL regardless of the form of the sensory input, auditory or visual. By contrast, electrode contacts over auditory areas in the STG mainly responded to the voice, and those over the visual FG mainly to the face stimulus. Moreover, ATL responses to the voices or faces tended to be in lower frequency bands (strongest in the beta band), whereas unisensory responses in the STG and FG were in the gamma band. This might be of interest in relation to suggestions that gamma is a measure of local or feed-forward processes, while beta band activity could be an indication of top-down feedback. One speculative possibility is that the ATL is receiving and providing face and voice feedback on unisensory cortex, consistent with cognitive models whereby the ATL reactivates or routes information held in sensory-specific cortex. Alternatively, even certain feed-forward processes in the ATL might not appear in the gamma range because the temporal coordination of neural activity generating oscillations may differ across regions. Tentatively, these human intracranial recording results suggest modality-independent representations in parts of the ATL, while sensory-specific responses dominate in the superior (voice) and inferior (face) portions of the ATL. However, given that the task in these human studies involved lexical retrieval, it remains important to assess face- and voice-sensitive processes using nonlinguistic tasks.


Establishing Better Causal Relations with Identity Perception

Thus far, our understanding of how affecting neuronal processes or brain regions impacts on identity-related perception is limited. For practical reasons, recordings in monkeys and many human imaging studies are conducted with passive stimulation or a stimulus-irrelevant task, such as visual fixation. An earlier study showed that microstimulation of monkey IT neurons influenced subsequent face category judgments. Recently, human transcranial magnetic stimulation of temporal voice regions selectively disrupted voice category judgments. In another study, directly stimulating the FG of a human patient warped the patient's perception of a face. Whether these manipulations would have also affected perception in another sensory modality from the one studied is a topic for future research.


A Primate Model of Identity Processes

We propose a model of individual identity processes in primates, on the basis of the prior synthesis (Key Figure), as follows: (i) two independent but interacting auditory and visual ventral processing streams extract voice or face features. ATL regions are sensitive to identity features, with other temporal lobe regions evaluating different aspects of voice or face content, such as category membership; (ii) the STS is a key conduit between voice and face processing streams, with the aSTS an ATL convergence site that allows multisensory representations to more strongly influence frontal cortex; (iii) neurons in ATL subregions, such as the aSTS and the temporal pole, integrate highly subcategorized information specific for unique individuals and concrete entities. Such representations may not be tied to any sensory modality and the neural mechanisms need to be determined. Possibly, the ATL can feed back to unisensory processing streams to route specific forms of input; (iv) anatomical connectivity between the primate ATL regions is funneled into the temporopolar cortex, but less is known about its functional role in primates in relation to identity processes; and (v) identity recognition is likely to involve MTL structures. Currently, it is an open question whether auditory pathways to the MTL in primates are less direct than those in humans, requiring cross-species comparisons of interconnectivity.

The primate model at a regional level is generally in agreement with human models on face and voice perception, whereby distinct sensory processing streams have prominent multisensory interactions between face and voice areas,. One issue that needs addressing is whether human voice regions in the STG and STS are intrinsically more multisensory than the voice regions in the primate aSTP. It is possible that human auditory voice regions in the STG are difficult to distinguish from neighboring multisensory regions in the STS in group neuroimaging data. Thus, the anterior upper bank of the STS may be a key site of multisensory convergence in both humans and monkeys. The model suggests that candidate regions for convergence sites in the ATL are the aSTS and the temporopolar cortex.

Furthermore, the multisensory computations underlying identity identification remain unclear. First, it is possible that, in certain ATL sites, a process resembling convergence on a larger scale might, at a finer scale, be found to be partially segregated by unisensory input,. Second, implicating either multisensory ‘synergistic’ versus ‘or gate’ mechanisms in specific regions cannot be resolved by current findings: while the monkey recordings from the uSTS appear consistent with a synergistic process, as suggested by results of nonadditive multisensory interactions, they also reveal independent activation by auditory or visual stimulation (A). The human ATL recordings that show strikingly similar responses to voice and face stimuli before naming, which differ from responses in unisensory regions, suggest an ‘or gate’ operation. In humans, when ATL voice- and face-responsive sites are injured, voice and face naming are both impaired, possibly suggestive of a synergistic interaction. Formally testing the alternative neuronal mechanisms will require inactivating one of the input streams during multisensory stimulation, as we illustrate in, and might require animal models for adequate specificity.

While the notion of sites with amodal functions may well be disproved in the future, it is a useful concept for generating testable predictions on neuronal processes and multisensory interactions. It is also worth keeping in mind that the ATL is one of several highly multisensory convergence sites in the brain that serve various purposes. For example, the angular gyrus in humans is part of a multiple-demand, cognitive control network that appears to also be present in monkeys. There may also be a gradation between modality-specific and amodal representations in the ATL, which our simple model does not capture but which could be explored with computational simulations as well as additional data on neuronal processes in convergence sites and those that influence them. Finally, the picture becomes more complex with feedback interactions, but are important to consider because cognitive ‘reactivation’ of the ATL during retrieval may convert a synergistic process to an ‘or gate’.


Identity Processes from a Broader Evolutionary Perspective

The proposed primate model may be generalized for testing in other nonhuman animals. Rodents identify each other by odor, and odor identity is represented in the olfactory piriform cortex, (which is interconnected with the entorhinal cortex, one of the regions present in the primate MTL). Pup odors and vocalization sounds can synergistically interact to influence maternal behavior in mice, and there appear to be multisensory interactions between the rodent olfactory and auditory processing systems,. Moreover, auditory object-identity processes (i.e., the timbre of resonant sources) are being studied in ferrets, as is the distinction between the neuronal representation in songbirds of own song versus the song of another. A broader comparative approach will clarify evolutionary relations and enable researchers to harness the strengths of different animals as neurobiological models.


Concluding Remarks

By reviewing recent voice- and face-related neurobiological work in nonhuman primates and humans, we suggest here several principles that may be eventually extended for modeling the basic neural processes involved in subordinate or identity perception. The proposed model highlights some possible neural mechanisms and the key areas of uncertainty between the primate and human models. We argue that the next step in understanding the neurobiology of identity perception will benefit from cross-species comparisons, direct access to local neuronal processes in different ATL subregions, and causal manipulation of sensory inputs into convergence sites. We also need information on effective connectivity and to better establish causal relations between neuronal processes and identity perception and cognition (see Outstanding Questions). All such work will need to involve more than just one sensory modality.Is any sensory input at multisensory convergence sites sufficient for the identification of conspecifics, or are all incoming signals integrated and identification emerges out of their synergistic interaction?Which subregions of the human ATL support identity processes, how are they structurally and functionally interconnected, and how does this compare to data in animal models?How do ATL regions functionally interact with other brain regions, and is interaction with medial temporal lobe structures required for identity recognition and memory?Can animal studies clarify whether certain ATL processes are crucial for perception and/or conceptual knowledge? Attentional cuing tasks can be used to assess the perceptual awareness of an animal towards attended voice or face features. Also, person-specific conceptual knowledge could be modeled in nonhuman animals to assess modality-independent representations of specific individuals, using voices and/or faces of familiar animals or those with known social categories (e.g., social rank, etc.) within adaptation, oddball, or other experimental paradigms.What is the impact of degrading or inactivating a sensory input stream on the neuronal responses at face–voice convergence sites?Which subregions of the ATL have amodal representations of identity, and do these require an ‘or gate’ process or does top-down selection serve as the gating mechanism?Regardless of the nature of the multisensory mechanisms, what is the pattern of encoding at the neuronal subpopulation level in any of these regions (e.g., distributed, sparse, or other coding strategy) and how is this affected by removing sensory inputs?How do oscillatory mechanisms support identity representations in the ATL, and are these processes specifically involved in person identification or do they form part of general computational principles that apply across sensory tasks and brain regions?


Repetition suppression and its contextual determinants in predictive coding

Ryszard Auksztulewicz, Karl Friston — Cortex; a Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System and Behavior, 2016. PMC5405056, CC BY 4.0.

This paper presents a review of theoretical and empirical work on repetition suppression in the context of predictive coding. Predictive coding is a neurobiologically plausible scheme explaining how biological systems might perform perceptual inference and learning. From this perspective, repetition suppression is a manifestation of minimising prediction error through adaptive changes in predictions about the content and precision of sensory inputs. Simulations of artificial neural hierarchies provide a principled way of understanding how repetition suppression – at different time scales – can be explained in terms of inference and learning implemented under predictive coding. This formulation of repetition suppression is supported by results of numerous empirical studies of repetition suppression and its contextual determinants.


Introduction

The effect of stimulus repetition on neural responses is one of the most studied phenomena in neuroscience. Typically, repeated stimuli evoke neural activity with amplitudes smaller than responses to novel stimuli. Although repetition suppression is often portrayed as an expression of relatively simple mechanisms, such as neural fatigue (Grill-Spector, Henson, & Martin, 2006), its dependence on statistical regularities in the environment and other contextual factors casts repetition suppression as a consequence of sensory predictions (e.g., Summerfield, Trittschuh, Monti, Mesulam, & Egner, 2008). The predictive coding framework provides a principled explanation of repetition effects in terms of perceptual inference and learning, mediated by changes in synaptic efficacy (Friston, 2005). Adaptive changes in coupling of neuronal populations within areas and connectivity between areas are means of optimising a neuronal (generative) model of the external world to provide more accurate and precise predictions about sensory inputs. Thus, repetition suppression can be understood in terms of ‘explaining away’ sensory prediction errors.

In the following, we will review modelling and experimental work on repetition suppression in the setting of predictive coding. First, we introduce the predictive coding framework and portray neuronal message passing in terms of descending predictions, ascending prediction errors, and modulatory precision. We will then show how the predictive coding scheme can be mapped onto a canonical cortical microcircuit. The subsequent section will focus on explaining the dynamics of repetition suppression using simulations and computational modelling of empirical data. This will be followed by a review of empirical studies on repetition suppression and its context sensitivity, with a special focus on the crucial role of predictions and precision in modulating the effects of stimulus repetition.


Predictive coding

In order to maintain their integrity (e.g., homoeostasis), biological systems have to minimise the excursions or entropy of their interoceptive and exteroceptive states. Since entropy is the average of surprise (also known as surprisal or self-information) over time, biological systems should continually minimise their surprise about sensory states. Mathematically, this is equivalent to maximising the Bayesian evidence for their model of sensory inputs, also known as Bayesian filtering. Predictive coding (Friston, 2005, Mumford, 1992, Rao and Ballard, 1999) is a popular, neurobiologically plausible Bayesian filtering scheme that decomposes the optimisation of the agent's (neuronal) model of the world into two tractable components; namely (1) changes in expectations about the sensory inputs and (2) the computation of prediction errors that are needed to change expectations.

Minimising surprise – or maximising model evidence – lies at the heart of the free energy principle, where free energy provides a proxy for surprise that, under simplifying assumptions, can be reduced to prediction error (Friston, 2010). This means one can understand the process of perception as the resolution of prediction errors, by changing top-down predictions about the causes of sensory input. Intuitively, the predictions descending along the processing (e.g., cortical) hierarchy are compared against sampled sensory inputs in sensory cortex (or expectations as intermediate hierarchical levels). The ensuing prediction errors are then passed up the hierarchy to optimise expectations and subsequent predictions. If the ascending input matches the descending prediction, the prediction error will be low – as exemplified by repetition suppression. If the predictions are inconsistent with the incoming input, the prediction error will be high – as illustrated by mismatch negativity (Garrido, Kilner, Stephan, & Friston, 2009). In the following, the notion of perception under predictive coding will be unpacked in the context of repetition suppression.

The ability of the brain to infer the causes of its sensations rests upon the presence of statistical structure or contingencies in the environment. These contingencies can be embodied within a generative model describing the hierarchical and dynamic statistics of the external world:

In the equations above, v denote causes representing (hidden) causes (e.g., the bark of a dog), while x denote states of the world mediating the influence of that cause on sensory signals (e.g., the acoustic consequences of a dog barking). Because these dynamics follow stereotyped trajectories over time, they endow the model with memory. In equations above, tilde is used to augment the variables with their generalised coordinates of motion, i.e.,

Eq. describes the motion of states x(i) (at i-th hierarchical level) as a nonlinear function f of causes and states themselves. Here D is a block-matrix derivative operator, with identity matrices on its first leading-diagonal. Eq. describes the motion of causes at a hierarchically lower level i-1 as a nonlinear function g of hidden causes and states at the level above. Random fluctuations in hidden causes and states are denoted by and respectively.

Since the brain does not have direct access to the causes and states in the external world, it can only infer the most likely values under its generative model: mathematically, these values are expectations. In other words, the generative model maps from causes to sensory consequences, while perception solves the (usually very difficult) inverse problem which is to map from sensations to their underlying causes. An inversion of hierarchical dynamic models can be cast in terms of a hierarchical message passing scheme also known as predictive coding:

This message passing suggests two distinct populations of neurons: one encoding the trajectory of the expectations (conditional means) of hidden causes and states, which we can therefore label state-units, and one encoding the prediction errors and weighted by their respective precisions and, which we can label error-units. These precisions are the inverse amplitude of the random fluctuations above, so that when the fluctuations are small, prediction errors become precise and are amplified. To simplify notation, and are used to denote a partial derivative with respect to hidden states and causes respectively. Temporal derivatives, e.g., are denoted by a dot.

These equations may look complicated but are formally simple and quite revealing in terms of which (neuronal) units talk to each other. In brief, the equations suggest that error-units receive messages from populations in the same hierarchical level and the level above, while state-units are driven by error-units in the same level and the level below. The prediction errors from the same level and the level below provide lateral and bottom-up messages driving the conditional expectations towards better lateral and top-down predictions f(i) and g(i), serving to explain away the prediction error in the level below. Thus, predictions are subserved by the descending connections and prediction errors by ascending connections.

As mentioned above, prediction errors are weighted by their precision (or inverse variance). This allows for a dissociation of the magnitude of prediction error from its reliability – for example, in a noisy or volatile environment, continuous signalling of large prediction errors should not (necessarily) lead to large updates of expectations, since prediction errors will be very imprecise. Conversely, even minor deviations of sensory inputs from the descending predictions can lead to large updates of the conditional expectations if prediction errors are very precise. Crucially, precision itself has to minimise surprise (about the amplitude of prediction errors). Precision can therefore be manipulated exogenously; e.g., by changing the contrast or statistics (e.g., texture) of the stimulus, or endogenously; e.g., by attending to a particular sensory stream or changing the contextual expectancy of sequential stimuli. In other words, endogenous attention anticipates precise sensory information (or prediction errors). As we will see, the notion of precision will be key for interpreting some of the empirical findings showing that repetition suppression can be modulated by contextual factors such as attention.


Canonical microcircuits and predictive coding

The notion that the brain implements a predictive coding scheme in its cytoarchitecture (Mumford, 1992) has recently been put forward in the form of a canonical cortical microcircuit (Bastos et al., 2012). It draws upon the known laminar asymmetries of ascending and descending connections in the brain, with ascending connections (from hierarchically lower to higher regions) originating predominantly in superficial (supragranular) layers of the cortical sheet and targeting spiny stellate cells in the granular layer – and descending connections originating predominantly in deep (infragranular) layers and targeting all layers with the exception of the granular layer (Felleman & Van Essen, 1991). These asymmetries map neatly onto the distinction between predictions being propagated from hierarchically higher to lower regions in the message passing scheme and prediction errors being propagated in the opposite direction. Thus, in the canonical microcircuit for predictive coding, the deep pyramidal cells are associated with encoding predictions about the causes of inputs to a given area, while the superficial pyramidal cells are thought to represent prediction errors resulting from a comparison of top-down predictions with expectations in the microcircuit – or sensory input at the lowest hierarchical level.

Ascending and descending connections have also been shown to have distinct spectral profiles. Extensive work in the macaque visual system has demonstrated spectral asymmetries between superficial and deep cortical layers. Within cortical areas, activity in supragranular layers has been linked to local synchronisation of gamma-band oscillations, while neurons in infragranular layers typically synchronize in lower frequency bands such as alpha and beta (Buffalo et al., 2011, Roberts et al., 2013, Xing et al., 2012). Similarly, synchronisation between areas in the gamma band has been shown to subserve ascending connections from hierarchically lower to higher regions (Bosman et al., 2012), while descending connections are more likely mediated by inter-areal synchronisation in the beta frequency band (Bastos et al., 2015a, Bastos et al., 2015b) Interestingly, this spectral asymmetry between superficial and deep layers follows from a closer inspection of the mathematical form of the predictive coding scheme. Translating prediction errors into predictions rests on a linear accumulation of prediction errors to give slowly fluctuating estimates of hidden causes [Eqs.]. As such, translating prediction errors into predictions – or passing neuronal messages from superficial to deep cells – entails a loss of higher frequencies. Conversely, translating predictions into prediction errors rests upon a nonlinear function [Eqs.], which creates high-frequency prediction errors (imagine squaring a sine wave to double its frequency from beta to gamma). This raises the intriguing possibility that rather than constituting distinct physiological phenomena, different frequency bands form a spectrum determined by the form of the neuronal microcircuit. In other words, the laminar asymmetries inherent in microcircuits and hierarchical message passing require prediction error and prediction propagation to be mediated in different frequency bands.

Mapping the predictive coding scheme onto a canonical cortical microcircuit has important consequences. Since in the predictive coding scheme the descending predictions are subtracted from expectations in lower levels to form prediction errors, descending connections from deep pyramidal cells should inhibit activity in hierarchically lower areas (Murphy and Silito, 1987, Olsen et al., 2012, Silito et al., 1993), possibly using polysynaptic connections via inhibitory interneurons in Layer 1 (Chu et al., 2003, Meyer et al., 2011, Wozny and Williams, 2011). Similarly, the nonlinearity inherent in the generative model prescribing top-down predictions speaks to a modulatory character of descending predictions (Bullier et al., 1996, Covic and Sherman, 2011, De Pasquale and Sherman, 2011, Mignard and Malpeli, 1991, Sherman and Guillery, 1998). In the context of repetition suppression, the inhibitory effects of descending connections should attenuate the amplitude of neural responses, when expectations can be successfully predicted by hierarchically higher areas. The modulatory effects of descending connections, on the other hand, will manifest as changes in the precision of prediction errors; possibly at a slower time scale – such as changes in the attentional set or during perceptual learning. The dual role of descending connections (cf. Kanai, Komura, Shipp, & Friston, 2015) will be addressed in more detail in later sections.


Models of repetition suppression based on predictive coding

Many known characteristics of repetition suppression emerge in simulations of predictive coding. This has been previously shown in a formal model of an artificial brain perceiving sequences of sensory events, simulated using attractor dynamics (Friston & Kiebel, 2009). In this model, the predictive coding scheme was employed to allow the agent to infer, categorize and learn its sensory inputs. As described above, the predictive coding scheme formalises the notion that the brain estimates hidden causes and states, representing the hierarchical structure and dynamics of the environment, using precision-weighted prediction errors. This can be mapped onto canonical cortical microcircuits whose superficial pyramidal cells encode prediction errors about hidden causes, propagated to hierarchically higher areas via ascending connections (Bastos et al., 2012). Similarly, deep pyramidal cells send predictions via descending connections to levels below.

Here, this architecture was used to model an artificial songbird, assuming a simplified functional anatomy of birdsong generation and perception. The artificial agent's goal was to categorize three trajectories of sensory inputs corresponding to three birdsongs. A predictive coding scheme was used to model perceptual inference and categorisation. In perceptual inference, after a few hundred milliseconds of listening to any of the three birdsongs, the simulated neural activity corresponding to descending predictions about sensory input recovers the trajectory of the input actually presented to the agent. In perceptual categorisation, the expectations of hidden causes (that controlled the trajectories) at a higher level disambiguated or categorised the three songs. This provides an example of how sequences of sensory events unfolding in time can be predicted and mapped to more abstract locations in perceptual space, using predictive coding.

Crucially, by simulating evoked responses to repeated chirps, the same model can reproduce the dynamics of repetition suppression – and, conversely, mismatch negativity – at different time-scales. To investigate the responses of the artificial agent to repeated stimuli, a roving oddball paradigm was simulated. In this paradigm, tones are repeated a number of times, after which one or more of their attributes are changed and the resulting tone is repeated several times. The first tone in a sequence is defined as the sensory deviant, while its subsequent repetitions gradually become a sensory standard. Predictive coding of these sensory events (separately for each trial) revealed that the simulated prediction errors at the first (lowest) level peak at around 100 msec after stimulus onset, corresponding to the classical N1 component, while prediction errors at the second level peak at 150–250 msec after stimulus onset, mimicking the typical latency of mismatch negativity and consistent with its neural generators relying on hierarchically higher areas than those of the N1 component (Garrido, Kilner, Kiebel et al., 2009). Prediction errors at both levels are progressively eliminated over peristimulus time due to recurrent message passing and perceptual learning. In addition to minimising prediction error over time on every trial, the prediction error in response to a novel stimulus has a higher amplitude than prediction errors to stimuli repeated in subsequent trials. In terms of the difference waveform, the MMN is largest following the first presentation of a sensory deviant and vanishes after approximately two repetitions, while the amplitude of the N1 component fails to recover fully by the fifth repetition, consistent with empirical findings (Garrido, Kilner, Kiebel et al., 2009). This sort of simulation shows that the process of suppressing error can be decomposed into perceptual inference, occurring over peristimulus time, and perceptual learning, occurring over the course of several trials. These two aspects of error suppression can be formalised in terms of expectations about dynamic hidden states and slowly changing model parameters (including precision):

Here, perceptual inference – as described in earlier paragraphs – rests upon using precision-weighted prediction errors to drive changes in conditional expectations of hidden states and causes [Eq.]. In perceptual learning, the message passing scheme is optimised on a slower time-scale in that its parameters θ [Eq.] and precision parameters (hyperparameters) Π [Eq.] change as a function of precision-weighted prediction errors accumulated over trials. Learning the (hyper-) parameters of the model over the course of several trials can be linked to changes in synaptic efficacy and correspond to short-term plasticity.

An empirical study modelled the dynamics of repetition suppression using Dynamic Causal Modelling (DCM) of event-related potentials (ERPs) in humans (Garrido, Kilner, Kiebel et al., 2009). A roving oddball paradigm was again used, comprising a structured sequence of pure auditory tones with sporadically changing frequency. An incidental visual task was used to maintain an attentional set away from the auditory stimuli. An analysis of the ERPs revealed that after the third presentation of any given tone, the evoked responses to all subsequent tones differed only slightly, with no detectable differences after the fifth repetition. Therefore, a parametric DCM was adopted to examine the form of repetition-dependent connectivity changes during the first five stimulus presentations.

In the DCM, the effect of stimulus repetition was decomposed into two time courses: a monotonic exponential decay function of stimulus repetition, mimicking slow cumulative effects, and a phasic (gamma-density) function peaking after the first repetition. These two (basis) functions were used to model trial by trial changes in intrinsic connectivity, modelling the post-synaptic sensitivity of each source to all inputs, and/or extrinsic connectivity, modelling the post-synaptic sensitivity to source-specific inputs. The model that best explained the observed data featured a mixture of both effects, where biphasic plasticity (modelled as a combination of exponential decay and negative phasic functions) was deferred in intrinsic connections, while monotonic plasticity (modelled as exponential decay only) was linked to extrinsic (ascending) connections. This pattern of results is consistent with the notion that intrinsic connections reflect the precision (Friston, 2008), which should decrease after the presentation of a novel stimulus and recover with its subsequent repetitions (when more confident predictions can be made). On the other hand, a monotonic decrease in ascending connectivity speaks to an attenuation of prediction error signalling, after each subsequent repetition.

The two modelling approaches – one based on simulations of an artificial brain, one applied to empirical data – provide converging evidence for the notion that repetition suppression can be formulated in terms of predictive coding. With each stimulus repetition, the model of the sensory contingencies is gradually optimised, as encoded in changes to descending predictions. The descending predictions play a dual role, resolving the prediction error induced by sensory input and implementing changes in (expected) precision. Over the past few years, there have been further simulations of the mismatch negativity under predictive coding (e.g., Wacongne, Changeux, & Dehaene, 2012) and there have been many papers re-interpreting the mismatch negativity in terms of hierarchical inference in the brain (e.g., Winkler & Czigler, 2012). In the next section, the implicit mechanisms will be illustrated with examples taken from empirical studies of repetition suppression.


Empirical studies of repetition suppression in the context of predictive coding


The dual role of descending connections

Repetition suppression has been studied across species, imaging modalities, and stimulus categories. In the cat auditory cortex, single neuron recordings have shown a decreased response to standard stimuli and increased response to deviant stimuli within oddball paradigms (Ulanovsky, Las, & Nelken, 2003). These effects likely extend beyond auditory cortex to subcortical areas, with decreased responses to repeated stimuli reported in single-neuron recordings from rat inferior colliculus (Ayala & Malmierca, 2013) and the medial geniculate body of the thalamus (Antunes, Nelken, Covey, & Malmierca, 2010). Repetition suppression of subcortical activity is modulated, although not abolished, after deactivation of auditory cortex (Anderson and Malmierca, 2013, Antunes and Malmierca, 2011) as well as after pharmacological manipulation of GABAA receptors in the inferior colliculus (Pérez-González & Malmierca, 2012) and medial geniculate body (Duque, Malmierca, & Caspary, 2014). This is consistent with the implementation of predictive coding within a canonical microcircuit (Bastos et al., 2012), where descending predictions are typically modelled as targeting inhibitory interneurons that enable superficial pyramidal cells to compare incoming sensory input with the descending predictions. As mentioned above, in the cortex this computational principle is thought to rely on descending connections terminating predominantly in layer 1, containing exclusively inhibitory interneurons. Similar mechanisms might be in place in subcortical areas. For example, descending cortico-thalamic projections target inhibitory cells in the reticular nucleus of the thalamus (Zhang & Jones, 2004). In the inferior colliculus, GABAergic neurotransmission has been shown to play a dominant role in shaping and modulating functionally specialised responses (Faingold, 2002). The findings that deactivating descending connections has a predominantly modulatory effect suggests that subcortical areas may receive descending predictions of the precision of ascending auditory information, contextualising this input to mediate temporal attention (Nobre, Correa, & Coull, 2007). Indeed, manipulating temporal regularity in the roving oddball paradigm leads to increased repetition suppression effects under predictable stimulus timing (Costa-Faidella, Baldeweg, Grimm, & Escera, 2011).

The evidence for a modulatory role of descending connections in repetition suppression of BOLD responses was further addressed in a DCM study using fMRI (Ewbank et al. 2011). Here, participants viewed repeated images of human bodies, which were either identical across repetitions or differed with respect to the size and/or view of the depicted body. BOLD responses were modelled in DCMs comprising regions of interest in the ventral visual stream – the extrastriate body area and the fusiform body area. Repetition suppression was modelled as modulating the extrinsic connections between the extrastriate and the fusiform regions (ascending, descending, both, or neither) and/or the intrinsic connections describing the self-inhibition of the extrastriate and the fusiform regions. Model comparison revealed that when images were presented under changing size or view conditions, stimulus repetition affected the descending connections from the fusiform to the extrastriate body area, as well as intrinsic connections in both regions. However, under constant size and view conditions, stimulus repetition also affected the ascending connections, reducing the strength of these connections. The change in descending connectivity with repetition suppression is consistent with perceptual learning that enables them to suppress ascending sensory input. Concurrent modulation of intrinsic connections corroborates the dual role of descending predictions not only in resolving prediction errors but also in modulating their precision. Finally, the additional decrease in strength of ascending connections by repetition of identical images suggests that neuronal populations in the extrastriate body area learn to predict low-level visual features, thereby attenuating prediction errors propagated from that area.


Precision modulation and repetition suppression

Since prediction errors are weighted by their expected precision, changing precision at various levels of the cortical hierarchy should modulate repetition suppression effects. Synaptic gain control mechanisms such as N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA), as well as classical neuromodulators such as acetylcholine (ACh), dopamine and serotonin are natural candidates to implement precision or gain control in prediction error signalling (cf. e.g., Iglesias et al., 2013). Thus, pharmacological manipulations of neurotransmission and neuromodulation should influence repetition suppression. Similarly, manipulating sensory precision by stimulus construction (e.g., increasing its signal-to-noise ratio) or task instruction (e.g., by altering attentional set) should modulate the effects of stimulus repetition. Furthermore, due to the nonlinearity inherent in precision-weighting of prediction errors, manipulating precision at higher hierarchical levels of abstraction or encoding, e.g., by changing stimulus expectancy or environmental volatility, should have different effects on repetition suppression related to manipulating precision at lower (sensory) levels. In the following paragraphs, we will review studies providing evidence for the modulatory effects of changing the precision of sensory information at various hierarchical levels.

In predictive coding, the learning of statistical regularities in the environment rests upon optimising descending predictions (of content and context). This learning implicates short-term synaptic plasticity and neuromodulatory effects of the sort mediated by NMDA-type glutamate (for perceptual learning of content) and ACh receptors (for mediating attention through expected precision). Prediction errors, on the other hand, are conveyed by ascending (driving) connections that use fast AMPA-type glutamate receptors. This asymmetry is not only supported by empirical differences between ascending and descending projections but can be deduced from the form of Eqs.,: note that expectations are driven by a linear mixture of ascending prediction errors, while prediction errors depend upon non-linear functions of descending expectations (Friston, 2005). Thus, pharmacological manipulations of NMDA- and ACh-dependent processing should primarily influence learning and attention, leaving inference per se relatively intact. In the context of repetition suppression, impaired learning would be evident in a loss of the attenuation of evoked responses with stimulus repetition, while intact inference would manifest itself in a preserved response to sensory deviants. Exactly this pattern of results was observed in a double-blind study in which ACh receptor agonist nicotine (Baldeweg, Wong, & Stephan, 2006) was administered in a roving oddball paradigm. Drug administration, relative to placebo, increased the amplitude of neural responses in frontal areas to repeated stimuli, while leaving the negative components of event-related potentials in response to sensory deviants intact.

Similarly, a DCM study investigated the effects of galantamine (a cholinesterase inhibitor, increasing the availability of ACh in synapses) on mismatch negativity (Moran et al., 2013). An analysis of evoked responses to subsequent stimulus repetitions showed diminished repetition suppression to oddball stimuli in sensory cortices. Under placebo, as shown in a previous study (Garrido, Kilner, Kiebel et al., 2009), the expected precision of prediction errors is thought to be suppressed after the first occurrence of a stimulus and gradually increase with successive stimulus repetitions. This effect can be seen in, where precision recovers with repetitions of the new standard; thereby enhancing prediction error responses that are progressively attenuated by learning. The implication here is that repetition effects on learning and precision produce repetition suppression and enhancement respectively, where suppression would normally supervene. However, increasing the availability of ACh by galantamine administration should counteract any initial decrease of precision and augment repetition enhancement, leading to attenuated and delayed repetition suppression. Importantly, the DCM used to model this attenuation of repetition suppression empirically was based on a canonical microcircuit (Bastos et al., 2012). Cholinergic manipulation was linked to changes in gain (self-inhibition) of superficial pyramidal cells, consistent with its role in mediating the expected precision of prediction errors.

Another DCM study investigated the mechanisms underlying the effects of NMDA-receptor antagonist ketamine, administered in a roving oddball paradigm (Schmidt et al., 2013). Besides replicating previous findings (Garrido, Kilner, Kiebel et al., 2009) in terms of the winning model – which included a modulation of both intrinsic and extrinsic connections by sensory deviance – this study showed that ketamine reduced synaptic plasticity (extrinsic connections) but not adaptation (intrinsic connections) in the auditory cortex. This is consistent with a role of NMDA receptors in perceptual learning (that changes extrinsic connections), as distinct from a role of neuromodulation in precision or gain control (that changes intrinsic connections). Furthermore, changes in extrinsic connections were correlated with ratings of cognitive impairment induced by ketamine. These findings suggest that blocking the NMDA-type glutamate receptors impairs the ability to learn the (changing) parameters of a generative model efficiently. On the other hand, adaptive control of precision in the sensory cortex might rely more on classical neuromodulators, such as ACh. A more direct assessment (e.g., using optogenetic methods) of the relative contribution of different neuromodulatory mechanisms to hierarchical message passing remains an important subject of future studies.

Beyond pharmacological manipulations, sensory precision can be modulated by various exogenous and endogenous factors. Decreasing stimulus visibility, for instance, has been shown to abolish repetition suppression effects (Turk-Browne, Yi, Leber, & Chun, 2007), consistent with modelling work linking visual contrast to sensory precision (Brown & Friston, 2012). Similarly, directing attention to stimuli, which in previous modelling work had been linked to increased sensory precision (Feldman & Friston, 2010), has been shown to increase the amplitude of a mismatch response by disinhibiting early sensory areas (Auksztulewicz & Friston, 2015). In the latter study, DCM was used to model MEG data acquired from healthy participants performing a task in which sensory expectation and temporal attention were orthogonally manipulated. Specifically, auditory tones formed a roving oddball sequence, where changing tone frequency differentiated between sensory standards and deviants. Furthermore, attention could be deployed to (or diverted away from) different time windows in which the auditory tones could appear. Temporal attention was shown to significantly modulate sensory expectations, with the amplitude of evoked neural responses in auditory areas differentiating between sensory standards and deviants only when the tones were attended. Crucially, DCM revealed that the effect of attention was mediated by changes in descending connectivity from higher to lower auditory regions, targeting inhibitory interneurons in primary auditory cortex. This finding was consistent with previous fMRI studies in the visual domain, showing that repetition suppression of BOLD responses is modulated by spatial attention (Eger et al., 2004, Henson and Mouchlianitis, 2007) as well as feature-based attention (Moore et al., 2013, Yi and Chun, 2005, Yi et al., 2006). Although some forms of repetition suppression or mismatch responses can be preserved in the absence of attention (cf. Sussman, Chen, Sussman-Fort, & Dinces, 2014), the studies reviewed here suggest that attention – by increasing the gain at early processing stages, or the precision of sensory prediction errors – will serve as a modulatory factor, influencing the prediction error responses underlying repetition suppression.

Attention has often been operationalised as the relevance of a particular stimulus for the task at hand (Summerfield & Egner, 2009). A direct comparison of neural responses to relevant and irrelevant repeated stimuli provides evidence for the modulatory character of stimulus relevance, with respect to repetition suppression (Miller, Erickson, & Desimone, 1996), although these effects might not be universal across the cortex (Miller & Desimone, 1994). In these studies, macaques performed a variant of a delayed match-to-sample task in which the sample and target were separated by repeating non-match stimuli (e.g., ABB′A′, where A is the sample, A′ is the matching target, and repeating non-match BB′ stimuli separate the two). The macaques were trained to respond to the target stimulus only. Neurons in the prefrontal cortex that showed a suppression of their firing rate in response to repeated (task relevant) stimuli, relative to their first presentation in a trial (i.e., A′–A), also suppressed their responses to irrelevant repeated stimuli (B′), although to a lesser degree than for relevant repeated stimuli (Miller et al., 1996). In the inferior temporal cortex, on the other hand, the degree of suppression was not significantly modulated by task relevance – at least when compared to the sample stimulus A (Miller & Desimone, 1994). In both areas, however, neurons that showed repetition suppression of target-evoked activity fired most vigorously in response to the first occurrence of the non-match stimulus (B), indicating a strong prediction error response. Since neither of these studies analysed the interaction of repetition suppression and task relevance directly (A′–A vs B′–B), but only compared the firing rate of neurons in response to repeated stimuli relative to the sample (A′–A vs B′–A), further work is needed to directly assess the interactive effects of relevance and repetition on the firing rate of single neurons in areas beyond sensory cortex. Crucially, however, if task relevance provides a good operationalisation of attention, its modulatory effects should be most pronounced in early sensory areas (cf. Auksztulewicz & Friston, 2015).

In contrast to attention, which has been be linked to low-level (sensory) precision, manipulating precision at higher contextual levels has been addressed by manipulating repetition probability – building upon a distinction between repetition suppression and expectation suppression. The expectations here rely upon context (e.g., sequential structure or stimulus probability), and thus are presumably located at high hierarchical levels that can represent contextual factors. According to predictive coding, descending predictions of incoming repeated stimulus should suppress the prediction error resulting from the presentation of this stimulus. However, if the stimulus sequence is constructed such that stimulus alternation is more likely than repetition, presenting an identical stimulus twice should result in a prediction error, while valid expectations of a different stimulus should suppress prediction error. The initial finding that stimulus repetition probability affects repetition suppression (Summerfield et al., 2008) was based on fMRI data acquired from humans, and has since been replicated by other groups (Andics et al., 2013, Grotheer and Kovács, 2014, Larsson and Smith, 2012, Mayrhauser et al., 2014). The latter study (Grotheer & Kovács, 2014) also showed that the influence of expectation on repetition suppression depends on prior experience. Although repetition suppression occurred for both familiar (upright Roman letters) and unfamiliar (false fonts) stimuli, the influence of expectation on repetition suppression was only observed in the case of familiar stimuli. This suggests that extensive prior experience facilitates the forming of predictions which, at the contextual level, influence repetition suppression.

Interestingly, the effects of repetition suppression and expectation suppression have been shown to be dissociated in time using MEG (Todorovic & de Lange, 2012). While repetition suppression was most prominent at relatively early latencies (40–60 msec) of the auditory evoked response, expectation suppression was present at later latencies (100–200 msec), within the mismatch negativity range. The relatively early onset of repetition effects suggests that repetition suppression may reflect low-level expectations based on local transition probabilities (Garrido et al., 2007, Kiebel et al., 2008, Wacongne et al., 2011), and replicates previous findings showing that deviance magnitude (i.e., the absolute frequency of a deviant in the stimulus sequence) affects early components of the evoked response up to the N1 component (Horváth et al., 2008) but not the later components of the MMN proper. The effects of stimulus probability, on the other hand, might rely on hierarchically higher expectations about the sequence structure or likelihood of stimuli, induced by learning of the statistical regularities of the sequence. This pattern of results is consistent with a cascade of prediction errors that update predictions at progressively higher levels of the processing hierarchy, as reflected in the hierarchically distinct generators of the early and late components of the evoked response (Friston and Kiebel, 2009, Garrido et al., 2009b). Interestingly, at even later latencies (200–500 msec) repetition and stimulus probability showed an interaction effect, replicating the modulatory effects of expectation observed in fMRI.

As discussed above, repetition suppression is subject to attentional modulation. Similarly, the interaction of expectation and repetition has been shown to depend on top-down attention (Larsson & Smith, 2012). When participants attended to the visual stimuli, expectation influenced repetition suppression of BOLD activity in extrastriate areas. However, when participants diverted their attention away from the stimuli, only repetition suppression was observed (albeit the overall amplitude of the visual response was attenuated), while the effects of stimulus expectation were abolished. This finding might explain why the interaction of expectation and repetition was not replicated in an invasive study in the macaque inferior temporal cortex (Kaliukhovich & Vogels, 2011), since in that study stimuli were presented under passive fixation.

The results of studies investigating the interactions between repetition and attention are in line with the nonlinear, modulatory nature of precision or gain control in predictive coding. Due to this nonlinearity, independent manipulations of precision at different hierarchical levels might even have antagonistic effects on neural responses in sensory areas (Kok, Rahnev, Jehee, Lau, & de Lange, 2012). Therefore, we now turn to experiments showing that, under specific conditions, stimulus repetition might lead to enhanced neural activity.


Repetition suppression and repetition enhancement

Besides repetition suppression effects, several studies have reported repetition enhancement effects, or increased neuronal responses to repeated stimuli (for a review, cf. Segaert, Weber, de Lange, Petersson, & Hagoort, 2013). In a roving oddball paradigm administered in MEG (Recasens, Leung, Grimm, Nowak, & Escera, 2014), repetition enhancement has been shown to occur later (at 230–270 msec) than the repetition suppression effects (95–150 msec) which contribute to the mismatch negativity. Both of these effects could be localised to sources in auditory cortex including Heschl's gyrus and superior temporal gyrus, as well as middle temporal gyrus. However, repetition enhancement effects were associated with additional sources in the anterior insula. Functional dissociations between repetition suppression and enhancement have also been observed using fMRI for distinct stimulus categories. For example, repetition suppression characterised BOLD responses to familiar faces, while repetition enhancement was observed in response to unfamiliar faces (Henson, Shallice, & Dolan, 2000). Similarly, repetition suppression was reported under conditions of high stimulus visibility, while degrading stimulus visibility yielded repetition enhancement effects (Turk-Browne et al., 2007).

A recent fMRI study (Müller, Strumpf, Scholz, Baier, & Melloni, 2013) tried to reconcile these two apparently opposing phenomena. In this paradigm, novel visual scenes were presented to participants at low contrast and exposure duration (50 msec) a number of times. BOLD responses in scene-selective regions followed an inverted U-shape function of stimulus repetition, with the first five presentations of a novel stimulus showing gradual repetition enhancement and further presentations showing gradual repetition suppression. This suggests that while learning a new model of a stimulus, repetition leads to a gradual increase in the precision of perceptual predictions at higher levels in the hierarchy, consistent with the relatively late latency of repetition enhancement observed in MEG (Recasens et al., 2014). After the perceptual representation of a stimulus has been established, precision control can be deployed at lower levels in the sensory processing hierarchy, leading to (early-latency) repetition suppression. This deployment can be understood as a reduction of model complexity at the lower levels of the hierarchy. Formally, this may correspond to Bayesian model averaging, in which the predictions of different models are weighted according to their evidence. The ensuing Bayesian model average provides an optimal model, under which learning can proceed (FitzGerald, Dolan, & Friston, 2014).

Similar arguments have been raised in interpreting the results of another study (Zago et al., 2005), where the amplitude of BOLD repetition suppression – as well as behavioural performance (cf. Miyoshi et al., 2015) – was shown to depend on the exposure duration of the first stimulus in a non-linear fashion. At the shortest exposure duration examined (40 msec), BOLD response to subsequently repeated stimuli was not significantly suppressed, and in some areas was nominally enhanced (cf. Müller et al., 2013, although note that the two studies differ in the level of visual contrast and familiarity with the stimuli). For exposure durations up to 250 msec, the BOLD activity in extrastriate regions was progressively more suppressed in response to repeated stimuli. However, for even longer exposure durations (up to 1900 msec), the degree of repetition suppression decreased again, although it remained stable across a range of durations tested. This is consistent with the idea that at very short durations (e.g., 40 msec), the process of perceptual inference might be incomplete, recovering the hidden causes of sensory inputs with low precision – and resulting in weak repetition suppression. However, with longer exposure times of 250 msec, the hidden causes can be recovered with high precision, leading to stronger repetition suppression. Finally, longer exposure times can lead to further model optimisation and deployment of precision control to hierarchically lower areas, resulting in a steady level of repetition suppression.

Another attempt at integrating repetition suppression and enhancement effects provided evidence for their co-occurrence within extrastriate visual regions (de Gardelle, Waszczuk, Egner, & Summerfield, 2013). Based on fMRI data acquired in a paradigm in which face images were repeatedly presented to participants, two subpopulations of voxels were isolated in the fusiform face area (as well as at more posterior occipital sites in Brodmann Areas 18 and 19), showing repetition suppression and enhancement effects respectively. The two subpopulations in the fusiform face area were spatially clustered (for example, the right fusiform face area showed an anterior-posterior gradient of voxels showing enhancement vs. repetition), stable across experimental sessions, and showed different peak latencies of the BOLD response (again, with the repetition suppression effects occurring earlier than repetition enhancement) as well as differential functional connectivity patterns. Specifically, the activity of voxels showing repetition suppression correlated preferentially with activity in lower visual regions, suggesting that these voxels might be more responsive to ascending input. This is consistent with the findings of invasive studies in the macaque cortex, where inferior temporal cortex has proportionally more neurons showing repetition suppression (Miller & Desimone, 1994), in contrast to the prefrontal cortex with more neurons showing repetition enhancement (Miller et al., 1996). In terms of predictive coding, this suggests that voxels showing repetition suppression effects might be mediated by neurons signalling prediction errors, which become progressively weaker as stimulus repetition leads to their more effective reconciliation with the descending predictions. On the other hand, the repetition enhancement subpopulation – originally interpreted in terms of these voxels being populated by prediction units – might reflect positive effects of stimulus repetition as the expected precision of (or confidence in) prediction errors increases with perceptual learning. As a result, even minimal differences between the descending predictions and the incoming sensory inputs will be amplified by strong precision weighting (for a more detailed discussion of the relation between confidence and precision, see e.g., FitzGerald et al., 2015, Kanai et al., 2015, Moran et al., 2013). The relatively late latency of repetition enhancement effects on the amplitude of the evoked response (Recasens et al., 2014) speaks exactly to the sort of slow neuromodulatory mechanisms (i.e., short-term plasticity) of perceptual learning discussed above. In summary, we again see the opposing effects of learning that mediates repetition suppression (of prediction errors) and the increase in precision or confidence in prediction errors with repetition that may underlie repetition enhancement (through precision weighting).


Oscillatory mechanisms of repetition suppression

As discussed in previous sections, the predictive coding framework postulates different spectral profiles of descending predictions and ascending prediction errors (Bastos et al., 2012). Since prediction errors are linearly accumulated over time in order to inform predictions, the implicit transformation of prediction errors into predictions will entail a loss of high frequencies. Conversely, the non-linear dependency of prediction errors on prediction augments high-frequency message passing from deep to superficial cortical layers. How do these spectral asymmetries hold in the context of repetition suppression? MEG studies in humans have shown suppression of gamma-band synchrony (as well as evoked responses) in auditory cortex following an expected stimulus repetition, consistent with a successful minimisation of the prediction error (Todorovic, van Ede, Maris, & de Lange, 2011). In the same study, unexpected stimulus repetitions were associated with stronger gamma-band responses than expected stimulus repetitions, indicating stronger prediction error signalling – possibly in superficial layers of auditory areas, although a direct assignment of prediction error propagation to a specific laminar profile remains to be established using intralaminar recordings – when the descending prediction did not match sensory input.

Gamma-band synchronisation in response to stimulus repetition has also been studied invasively in the macaque visual cortex (Brunet et al., 2014). Here, a repeated presentation of visual gratings increased visually-induced gamma-band activity in the primary visual cortex and in area V4, as well as gamma-band coherence between V1 and V4 activity. Although these findings might seem inconsistent with the results from the human auditory cortex, in which expected stimulus repetition is linked to decreased gamma-band activity, the macaque study also reported dissociations in the trial-by-trial evolution of gamma-band response depending on cell population. Interestingly, the repetition-dependent increase of gamma-band activity was limited to narrow-spiking cells in area V4 (putative inhibitory interneurons), while broad-spiking cells (putative pyramidal cells) showed repetition-dependent decrease of gamma-band activity, consistent with their role in signalling prediction error. The positive effect of stimulus repetition on inhibitory interneurons, on the other hand, supports their role in modulating pyramidal activity by providing a gain mechanism which can be described in terms of precision of prediction errors (cf. Auksztulewicz & Friston, 2015).


Predictive coding and alternative accounts of repetition suppression

One of the initially counterintuitive features or repetition suppression effects is that less neural activity is associated with improved behavioural performance. This apparent opposition has attracted various explanations in terms of facilitation, sharpening, and synchronisation (Gotts, Chow, & Martin, 2012). According to the “facilitation” hypothesis of repetition suppression (Henson, 2003, James and Gauthier, 2006, James et al., 2000), repeated stimuli evoke earlier and less prolonged neural activity than novel stimuli. In fMRI studies, the earlier onset of neural activity would not be detectable due to the slow time course of the BOLD response, while the shorter duration of evoked activity would be detectable as repetition suppression. The “sharpening” hypothesis (Desimone, 1996, Wiggs and Martin, 1998), on the other hand, postulates that repeated stimuli evoke on average less neural activity, although this decrease can largely be associated with cells that are poorly tuned to the stimulus. Conversely, the cells that are well-tuned to the stimulus are assumed to increase their response rate with stimulus repetition. Finally, the “synchronisation” model postulates that while repetition leads to lower overall firing rates, the cells responding to the stimulus fire more synchronously with one another, which should lead to more efficient neural processing (Gilbert, Gotts, Carver, & Martin, 2010).

The “facilitation” and “sharpening” phenomena are readily explained within the predictive coding framework. Facilitation, or a speeding of evoked neuronal responses, is equivalent to an in increase in synaptic rate constants. This is formally identical to an increase in synaptic gain, encoding the precision of prediction errors. Similarly, increased precision will boost prediction errors that will inform higher levels of the hierarchy about the most likely cause of sensory input, while suppressing other explanations of the sensorium. This is identical to sharpening of the neural representation of a given stimulus. Stimulus repetition will lead to monotonic changes in connections between cortical areas, enabling a more efficient (facilitated and sharpened) neural response to repeated stimuli.

The connections between cortical areas are subject to modulation of post-synaptic gain to specific inputs. Synchronisation of pre-synaptic inputs has been proposed as a likely candidate for controlling post-synaptic gain (Chawla, Lumer, & Friston, 1999). As discussed above, synchronisation of pre-synaptic inputs would show spectral asymmetries depending on the directionality of effective connectivity, with ascending connections being mediated by higher frequency bands than descending connections (Bastos et al., 2015a, Bastos et al., 2015b, Bosman et al., 2012, Buffalo et al., 2011, Roberts et al., 2013, Xing et al., 2012).

Similarly, several competing hypotheses had previously been proposed to account for a phenomenon closely related to repetition suppression, namely the mismatch negativity. According to the model-adjustment hypothesis (Näätänen and Winkler, 1999, Winkler et al., 1996), the MMN is a reflection of modifications of a perceptual model, occurring when the sensory input does not match the predictions of the model. The adaptation hypothesis (Jääskalainen et al., 2004, May et al., 1999), on the other hand, postulates that the MMN reflects adaptive changes in post-synaptic sensitivity during learning. As suggested by the DCM study of the roving oddball paradigm (Garrido, Kilner, Kiebel et al., 2009), the predictive coding framework accommodates both these accounts. In the context of repetition suppression, after each repetition of a stimulus, the perceptual model is optimised by increasing the precision-weighting of prediction errors. This entails a gradual increase in post-synaptic sensitivity to sensory inputs over the course of a sequence of standard stimuli.

Crucially, beyond accommodating previous, more particular accounts of repetition suppression, predictive coding – by postulating a central role for descending connections in perceptual inference and learning in conveying predictions of sensory inputs and their precision – readily explains contextual effects of attention, expectancy, and confidence on neural responses to repeated stimuli. At the same time, it generates testable hypotheses in terms of laminar specificity of prediction and prediction error propagation, as well as the key involved neurotransmitters and neuromodulators, whose interactions will be reflected in the amplitude and dynamics of observable repetition effects.


Conclusions

The predictive coding framework offers a mechanistic explanation of repetition suppression in terms of optimised predictions about the content and precision of sensory inputs. This dual role of predictions, mediated by descending connections between levels of the cortical hierarchy, explains how contextual factors such as attention, contextual expectancy, and prior experience might modulate the effect of stimulus repetition – by simultaneously minimising prediction errors in perceptual inference, and increasing their precision due to perceptual learning. The precision-modulation of the underlying prediction error suppression is likely due to NMDA-receptor dependent plasticity and classical neuromodulators such as ACh. The ensuing modulation of inhibitory populations in sensory regions will influence neural activity in superficial layers that are populated by neurons encoding prediction errors. By bridging the neurophysiological and computational levels of description, the predictive coding framework reconciles several accounts of repetition suppression and offers insights into the most general principles of neuronal message passing.


A systematic review of MRI studies examining the relationship between physical fitness and activity and the white matter of the ageing brain

Claire E Sexton, Jill F Betts, Naiara Demnitz, Helen Dawes, Klaus P Ebmeier, Heidi Johansen-Berg — Neuroimage, 2016. PMC4851455, CC BY 4.0.

Higher levels of physical fitness or activity (PFA) have been shown to have beneficial effects on cognitive function and grey matter volumes in older adults. However, the relationship between PFA and the brain's white matter (WM) is not yet well established. Here, we aim to provide a comprehensive and systematic review of magnetic resonance imaging studies examining the effects of PFA on the WM of the ageing brain. Twenty-nine studies were included in the review: eleven examined WM volume, fourteen WM lesions, and nine WM microstructure. While many studies found that higher levels of PFA were associated with greater WM volumes, reduced volume or severity of WM lesions, or improved measures of WM microstructure, a number of negative findings have also been published. Meta-analyses of global measures of WM volume and WM lesion volume yielded significant, but small, effect sizes. Overall, we found evidence for cautious support of links between PFA and WM structure, and highlighted key areas for future research including the extent to which the relationship between PFA and WM structure is anatomically specific, the influence of possible confounding factors, and the relationship between PFA, WM and cognition.

Keywords: Ageing, Fitness, Magnetic resonance imaging, Physical activity, Review, White matter


Introduction

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies have provided key insights into the macro- and micro-structures of the brain's white matter (WM) (Walhovd et al., 2014). For example, T1-weighted MRI studies have quantified WM volumes, with either a single global measure of WM volume assessed, or WM volume analysed on a voxel-wise basis across the whole brain; proton-density, T2, T2* or fluid attenuated inversion recovery studies have examined the volume or rating of WM lesions; and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) studies have detailed measures of WM microstructure, including fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), axial diffusivity (AD) and radial diffusivity (RD).

Such MRI studies have played a prominent role in the characterisation of WM changes with ageing, detailing decreasing WM volumes, increasing volume and severity of WM lesions, and declining WM microstructure with advancing age (Bennett and Madden, 2014, Gunning-Dixon et al., 2009, Sexton et al., 2014). In addition to describing the relationship between age and WM measures, MRI studies have also highlighted substantial between-subject variance. As a result, there is great interest in identifying factors that can help explain such heterogeneity, as well as in interventions that could slow, prevent or even reverse, age-related decline.

Higher levels of physical fitness (PF) and physical activity (PA) have been shown to have beneficial effects on cognitive function and grey matter volumes in older adults (Bherer et al., 2013, Erickson et al., 2014). However, the relationship between physical fitness or activity (PFA) and the brain's WM is not yet well established. Here, we aim to provide a systematic report of cross-sectional and longitudinal MRI studies that have examined the effects of PFA on the WM of the ageing brain. For each aspect of WM structure (WM volume, WM lesions, WM microstructure), we summarise the results to date and perform meta-analyses of global WM measures where possible. We hypothesise that higher levels of PFA would be associated with greater WM volumes, reduced volume or severity of WM lesions, or improved measures of WM microstructure.


Methods


Data sources

Online searches of the databases EMBASE and MEDLINE were performed in August 2015. An example of the search strategy used in the MEDLINE database is shown in the Supplementary Material: Fig. S1. Reference lists of included studies and relevant reviews were manually searched for additional studies.


Study selection

Two authors independently screened the title, abstracts and, where appropriate, full-text of identified citations and any disagreements were resolved by consensus. For studies to be included in the review, the following criteria had to be met:

Published as a journal article or letter. While this may raise susceptibility to publication bias, restricting the search to published results serves as a guarantee of peer-reviewed quality in included reports.

Assessed the level of PFA by fitness test, questionnaire or accelerometry, or administered an exercise intervention. Studies assessing mobility or motor performance were excluded, e.g. gait tests and activities of daily living questionnaires.

Administered an MRI brain scan to examine one or more aspects of WM structure. Composite measures of WM spanning more than one aspect of WM structure (e.g. the single factor outcome of principal component analyses of FA and WML values in Burzynska et al., 2014) were not included, nor were DTI analyses of grey matter structure.

Examined a direct association between PFA and MRI measures, a difference in MRI measures between groups that differed in PFA, or a difference in PFA measures between groups that differed in WM outcomes.

Included a sample of healthy adults, with a mean age over the age of 60, who were not selected based upon the presence of medical diagnoses (including hypertension, mild cognitive impairment or dementia), or genotype. Studies that selected participants based upon PFA level, mobility or WM measures were included.


Data extraction and analysis

Two authors independently extracted the following details using a structured data abstraction form: aspect of WM structure examined (WM volume, WM lesions, WM microstructure), anatomical specificity (global or local measure of WM structure), study design (cross-sectional or longitudinal MRI assessment, interval between PFA and MRI assessments, frequency and duration of exercise intervention), participant demographics (sample size, mean age, percentage of female participants), methods (PFA and MRI assessment) and results (statistically significant findings, p < 0.05 unless a different limit was imposed by the authors).

Where possible, results are presented after co-varying for age and sex, but before co-varying for additional factors (e.g. BMI, social class, disease), with results after additional co-varying noted in table footnotes. For studies that examined WM structure locally, regions were grouped according to cerebral lobe (frontal, temporal, parietal, occipital, limbic) or tract (corpus callosum, superior longitudinal fasciculus, etc) and any lobe or tract that contained a minimum of one region that was statistically significant is presented.

Studies with overlapping samples were only excluded when the same aspect of WM structure was examined in both papers. In such cases, preference was first given to the study with the largest sample size (Tian et al., 2014a preferred to Tian et al., 2014b). Where sample size was equal, preference was given to analyses of a global measure of WM volume expressed as a percentage of intracranial volume (ICV), rather than raw values (Tseng et al., 2013b preferred to Tseng et al., 2013a), and voxel-wise analysis was preferred to region-of-interest (ROI) analysis (Liu et al., 2012 preferred to Marks et al., 2011). When studies reported multiple MRI analysis methods in a single paper (e.g. voxel-wise analysis and tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) (Liu et al., 2012)), results from the primary analysis method is presented in the table, with results from additional methods noted in the table footnotes. Analyses in which the directionality of the relationship between PFA and WM could not be inferred were not included (e.g. differences in the prevalence of moderate WMH score, which could reflect differences in mild or severe WMH score (Frederiksen et al., 2015)). When studies used multiple measures of PFA, results are only presented from one measure (fitness test preferred to accelerometry or questionnaire, accelerometry preferred to questionnaire, kcal/week preferred to frequency of activity). This order was chosen as a result of a recent review concluding that results from cross-sectional studies of PF on grey matter were more consistent than studies of PA (Erickson et al., 2014). Finally, when both group difference and correlational analyses were performed, the primary analyses are reported in the table, with additional results discussed in the text.


Data synthesis

Data for global WM volume and global WM lesion volume were analysed using Comprehensive Meta-Analysis (version 2.2, © July 27 2011, Biostat Inc., Englewood, NJ). Effect size was measured using standardised mean differences (Cohen's) d, calculated from available statistical parameters, and a random-effects model was used to calculate the pooled mean effect size (Borenstein et al., 2010). Heterogeneity was assed using Cochrane's Q and publication bias was considered using Begg and Mazumdar rank correlations (Begg and Mazumdar, 1994). Finally, the influence of participants' characteristics (age, percentage female) and design (interval between PFA and MRI assessment) was analysed using fixed effect regression with Hedges' g.

As only one study analysed global WM microstructure, a meta-analysis of this measure was not performed. Local WM measures require co-ordinate-based or image-based meta-analysis methods (Salimi-Khorshidi et al., 2009), which were considered beyond the scope of this review.


Results


Study selection

Titles and abstracts of three hundred and ninety nine citations were screened, with twenty-nine papers included in the review. A flow diagram of the identification and attrition of studies is provided in the Supplementary Material: Fig. S2.


Global white matter volume

A total of five studies examined the relationship between a global measure of WM volume and PFA, as summarised in.

All studies employed a cross-sectional MRI design. Although three studies did not report a significant association (Bugg and Head, 2011, Burns et al., 2008, Tseng et al., 2013b), higher levels of PA were associated with greater global WM volumes in the two largest studies (Benedict et al., 2013, Gow et al., 2012).

A meta-analysis of all five studies showed an overall small mean effect size of 0.22 (95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.10 to 0.34, p < 0.001). Studies were not significantly heterogeneous (Q4 = 0.956, p = 0.916, I2 = 0). The possibility of publication bias was assessed by calculating Begg and Mazumdar rank correlation and by inspecting a funnel plot. Both suggest no publication bias: the Begg and Mazumdar rank correlation was not significant (τ = 0.100, two-tailed p = 0.81), and the funnel plot was symmetric. Attempted modelling with potential confound variables (age,% female, interval between MRI and PFA assessments) was not significant.


Local white matter volume

A total of seven studies employed a voxel-wise approach to examine WM volume locally, as summarised in.

Of six studies that examined local WM cross-sectionally, three studies did not report any significant results (Colcombe et al., 2003, Gordon et al., 2008, Honea et al., 2009). The largest study of WM volume to date, though, found that higher levels of PA were associated with increased WM volume within the corona radiata and parietal–occipital lobe (Ho et al., 2011), with each increase in PA (categorised in quintiles) associated with ~ 2–2.5% greater average WM volume. In addition, Erickson et al. (2007) reported that higher levels of PF were associated with increased frontal and corpus callosum WM volume, and Tseng et al. (2013b) found higher WM volume in temporal, parietal and occipital regions in a sample of Masters athletes compared with a sedentary control group.

One study to date has examined local WM volume before and after an exercise intervention, with the aerobic exercise group displaying a significant increase in frontal WM and corpus callosum volume compared with the stretching group (Colcombe et al., 2006).


Global white matter lesions

A total of fourteen studies have examined the relationship between global measures of WM lesions and PFA, with results summarised in.

All studies employed a cross-sectional MRI design and primary analyses were not significant for ten studies (Burzynska et al., 2014, Carmelli et al., 1999, Fleischman et al., 2015, Frederiksen et al., 2015, Ho et al., 2011, Rosano et al., 2010, Tian et al., 2014b, Tseng et al., 2013a, Willey et al., 2011, Zheng et al., 2012). However, Saczynski et al. (2008) found that participants in the upper quartile of WML load were more likely to be physically inactive than those in the lower three quartiles; Sen et al. (2012) reported that increased PF was associated with lower total WM lesion volume, and Wirth et al. (2014) found that higher PA was associated with reduced WM lesion volume. Furthermore, Gow et al. (2012) found that a higher level of PA at baseline was associated with decreased WM lesion volume and combined rating of periventricular and deep WM lesions at 3-year follow-up.

A meta-analysis of nine studies that assessed global WM lesion volume continuously showed an overall small mean effect size of − 0.165 (95% confidence interval (CI) = − 0.26 to − 0.07, p = 0.001. Studies were not significantly heterogeneous (Q8 = 10.6, p = 0.22, I2 = 25). Begg and Mazumdar rank correlation was not significant with τ = − 0.25 (two-tailed p = 0.35), and a funnel plot also did not indicate significant publication bias. Attempted modelling with potential confound variables was not significant.


Local white matter lesions

Two studies have examined the relationship between local measures of WM lesions and PFA, with results summarised in.

In a cross-sectional study that did not detect a difference in global WM lesion volume between Masters athletes and a sedentary control group, Tseng et al. (2013a) reported an 83% reduction in deep WMH volume.

In contrast, in a longitudinal MRI study, Podewils et al. (2007) found that a higher level of PA at baseline was associated with an increased rate of periventricular and deep WM lesion progression.


Global white matter microstructure

Only one study examined the relationship between PFA and global measures of WM microstructure using DTI, with results summarised in.

Gow et al. (2012) reported that higher levels of PA were associated with increased FA at 3-year follow-up, with no significant relationships for diffusivity values.


Local white matter microstructure

A total of eight studies have examined the relationship between PFA and WM microstructure locally using DTI, with results summarised in.

Seven studies examined WM microstructure cross-sectionally. Of seven studies that examined FA, three studies reported that higher levels of PFA were associated with increased FA: within the corpus callosum (Johnson et al., 2012), superior longitudinal fasciculus and arcuate fasciculus (Liu et al., 2012), and superior longitudinal fasciculus, superior corona radiate, inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus and inferior longitudinal fasciculus (Tseng et al., 2013a). Of three studies that examined MD, findings were not significant for two studies (Johnson et al., 2012, Marks et al., 2011), while Tseng et al. (2013a) reported decreases in MD in non-overlapping regions to their FA results, within the cingulum and posterior thalamic radiation. Only one study examined AD and RD, with Johnson et al. (2012) finding that reductions in RD accompanied increases in FA.

In an interventional study, Voss et al. (2012) did not find any group-level difference for FA, AD or RD. However, greater percentage change in fitness was associated with significant increases in prefrontal, parietal and temporal FA within the exercise group, with no significant relationships detected within the control group. Furthermore, correlations were significantly different between groups for prefrontal and temporal FA.


Discussion


Anatomy of findings

A key outstanding question identified by this review is the extent to which the relationship between PFA and WM structure is anatomically specific. First, it has been hypothesised that PFA is associated with global measures of WM structure. Despite several negative reports, our meta-analyses found that higher levels of PFA were significantly associated with higher global WM volume and smaller global volume of WM lesions, although effect sizes were small in both cases. Some support for a global effect can also be drawn from the positive relationship observed using DTI between PA levels and global FA (Gow et al., 2012), although more studies of this nature would be necessary for a more confident conclusion.

Second, it is hypothesised that the relationship between PFA and WM structure is localised to specific regions. A recent review of MRI studies that examined the relationship between PFA and grey matter volume reported consistent evidence within the hippocampus and frontal cortex (Erickson et al., 2014). While our review did not identify consistent evidence to support localised WM results within the temporal lobe, it does highlight some complementary results with regard to the frontal lobe. For example, higher PF levels have been associated with greater volumes in prefrontal WM tracts cross-sectionally (Erickson et al., 2007), a 6-month aerobic exercise intervention has been shown to lead to increases in volumes in anterior WM compared with a stretching program (Colcombe et al., 2006), and improvements in PF have been reported to correlate with increases in prefrontal FA following a one-year aerobic exercise intervention (Voss et al., 2012). However, while it is encouraging that positive findings have been reported across different WM measures and study designs, there has not yet been consistent replication of such findings.

While few studies to date have examined WM measures both globally and locally, it is important to note that global and local relationships between PFA and WM are not mutually exclusive. In fact, in a review of age-related changes in cognition, Bennett and Madden (2014) found that there was evidence to support both global and tract-specific changes in WM microstructure. In the case of PFA and WM structure, the evidence, although more sparse, seems to indicate a similar combination of global and localised effects. To further develop this discussion, it would be desirable for future studies to report both global and local changes associated with PFA.


Methodological considerations

Studies included in this review varied in their focus, quality, design and participant demographics — limiting the extent to which results are directly comparable.

A formal quality assessment revealed that, overall, studies were of good quality (Supplementary Material: Table S1). All studies provided a good description of sample characteristics and PFA–WM findings, however, there was variation in the extent to which the methods used to assess PFA and WM outcomes were detailed, reporting of PFA and WM outcome measures for the included participants, sample size (range 15–1787), and reporting of exact p values. In addition, there was variation in the extent to which characteristics of excluded participants were described. Often, limitations reflect the relationship between PFA and WM not being the primary focus of a study, rather than the overall quality of the paper. For the two intervention studies (Colcombe et al., 2006, Voss et al., 2012), risk of selection bias was judged to be unclear, as the methods for random sequence generation and allocation concealment were not specified. Performance bias and detection bias were judged to be low-risk: blinding of participants and trainers is typically not feasible in aerobic exercise interventions, while automated imaging analysis techniques minimise the possibility researcher bias. In addition, in Colcombe et al. (2006) WM analyses were performed by a researcher who was blind to the group assignment of each individual. Attrition bias was also judged to be low-risk/unclear.

With regard to design, although twenty-one of twenty-four studies administered a MRI scan at a single time-point, the order of and interval between MRI and PFA assessments varied from PA assessment occurring 3.2 years prior to MRI scan (Gow et al., 2012) to PA assessment being administered 8–11 years after MRI scan (Tian et al., 2014a). For both global WM volume and global WM lesion volume, though, meta-regressions between effect size and the interval between time-points did not reveal significant associations. Only two studies examined WM measures before and after an aerobic exercise intervention (Colcombe et al., 2006, Voss et al., 2012), of 6-months and 12-months in length, respectively. While these studies reported some encouraging findings, further studies are needed to offer insights into the optimal frequency, intensity, time and type of exercise for WM health.

With regard to participant characteristics, studies included in this review were notably heterogeneous in terms of mean age (range 65 to 83 years) and gender distribution (range 0–100% female), and also varied in terms of the inclusion and exclusion criteria employed.

Advancing age is associated with reductions in WM volume, increasing severity of WM lesion and an accelerated decline in WM microstructure (Bennett and Madden, 2014, Gunning-Dixon et al., 2009); and a key outstanding question concerns the trajectory of the association between WM structure and PFA with age. One possibility is that greater levels of PFA are particularly beneficial in later life. Indeed, in a study of adults aged between 55 and 79 years that did not detect a main effect of PF, it was reported that age-related WM volume loss in frontal, parietal and temporal cortices was reduced as a result of PF (Colcombe et al., 2003). Such findings concur with a meta-analysis of studies examining cognitive function in older adults, which found that adults aged between 55 and 65 years benefitted least from PA interventions, compared with both adults aged between 66 and 70 years and 71 and 80 years (Colcombe and Kramer, 2003). However, in our analyses of global WM volume and global WM lesion volume, meta-regressions with age did not reveal significant associations between effect size and mean age. Furthermore, given it is possible that the brain's ability to adapt and change could actually wane with age, further research into the effect of age on the relationship between PFA and WM structure is warranted.

While beneficial effects of PFA on cognitive function have been reported in both male-only (Schuit et al., 2001, Van Gelder et al., 2004) and female-only (Weuve et al., 2004, Yaffe et al., 2001) populations, a meta-analysis of intervention studies in older adults found that cognitive benefits were significantly greater in studies in which the majority of participants were female (Colcombe and Kramer, 2003). Whether the relationship between PFA and WM structure is different in males and females, though, is not yet clear. For example, in contrast to cognitive findings, in a study of 715 participants, of whom 54% were female, the protective effect of PF on WM lesions was found to be only significant in males (Sen et al., 2012). Also, for both global WM volume and global WM lesion volume, the meta-regression with percentage of female participants in this review was not significant, and more research is needed.

Studies also varied in terms of inclusion and exclusion criteria. For example, some observational and intervention studies limited their sample to participants who displayed low levels of PA at baseline, while studies that administered fitness tests often employed strict criteria regarding vascular risk factors. It is important to note that results from such studies may not necessarily generalise to wider populations. In contrast, cohort studies that administered questionnaire-based measures of PA typically employed less stringent criteria, and such differences in inclusion and exclusion criteria may lead to a systematic bias in findings.

Finally, while the links between PFA and cognition are well documented (Bherer et al., 2013, Colcombe and Kramer, 2003, Smith et al., 2010), it is important to highlight that few studies to date have directly explored whether such links are mediated by the effects of PFA on WM structure. Encouragingly, in a path model, Wirth et al. (2014) demonstrated that current PA had a beneficial effect on global cognitive functioning via the mediation of WM lesions. However, exercise-induced increases in FA were not associated with improvements in backward digit span performance in an interventional study (Voss et al., 2012). Further studies examining domain-specific effects will be of great interest to the field.


Mechanisms of action

A number of pathways may explain the observed relationships between PFA and WM structure. First, PFA may lead directly to improved WM structure. This hypothesis is supported by interventional studies that have shown that a 6-month aerobic exercise intervention leads to increases in volumes compared with a stretching program (Colcombe et al., 2006), and that improvements in PF over the course of a 12-month program correlate with increases in FA (Voss et al., 2012). Such a direct link may be mediated by a number of possible neurobiological mechanisms.

For example, cerebrovascular health and perfusion play an important role in WM health. In addition to periods of hypoxia, damage to the vascular wall, leakage of fluid into the surrounding tissue and disruption of the blood–brain-barrier have all been identified as contributing factors to the formation of WM lesions (Pantoni, 2002, Schmidt et al., 2007). PFA, however, has well-known beneficial effects on the vascular system, including the preservation of arterial elasticity and wall integrity, reduction in arterial stiffness and blood pressure (McDonnell et al., 2013). PFA may thus be protective against potentially damaging cerebrovascular decline. Indeed, MR angiography studies have shown an association between the number and integrity of small blood vessels and aerobic fitness in older adults (Bullitt et al., 2009), as well as many studies reporting increased capillary density with an exercise in animals (Black et al., 1990, Ding et al., 2006, Isaacs et al., 1992, Swain et al., 2003). As such, improved vascular health and cerebral perfusion as a result of PFA may contribute positively to WM health and structure via improved oxygen and nutrient delivery.

The brain's response to exercise involves several neurotrophic factors, including brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). The strongest evidence implicates BDNF, which is increased in the expression in the rat brain in response to exercise (Neeper et al., 1996), as well as being positively linked with exercise-induced change in hippocampal volume in humans (Erickson et al., 2012) and improved functional connectivity (Voss et al., 2010). BDNF is especially interesting due to its role in the growth and survival of many neuronal subtypes, as well as in synaptic plasticity and normal axonal pruning (Cao et al., 2007, Singh et al., 2008). In addition to providing neuroprotection against hypoxic–ischaemic insult in an age-dependent fashion (Cheng et al., 1997), BDNF promotes the regeneration of injured axons in the adult rat brain (Mamounas et al., 2000) and has been shown to have a neuroprotective influence on white matter in both rodents and humans (Husson et al., 2005, Weinstock-Guttman et al., 2007). Higher secretion of BDNF in multiple sclerosis patients has been linked with higher WM volume, as well as higher inflammatory activity (Weinstock-Guttman et al., 2007), suggesting protective up-regulation. Increased expression of BDNF in response to PFA may thus have a neuroprotective influence, positively promoting WM structure and integrity. It is notable, though, that many genes that are up-regulated in response to exercise interact with BDNF. IGF-1 is a potent survival factor for neurons and oligodendrocytes, and has also been linked to improved functional connectivity after exercise, along with BDNF and VEGF (Voss et al., 2013). While the evidence is strongest for the effects of BDNF in the exercise response, it is likely that its effects are supported by both IGF-1 and VEGF and it will be important for future studies to include measures of all these factors.

Though not consistently linked, there is also some evidence to suggest an association between exercise and proliferation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs), which continue to generate new oligodendrocytes throughout adulthood, allowing for continued myelination. For example, in a study of voluntary exercise, running increased the number of immature and mature oligodendrocytes in the spinal cord of the mouse (Krityakiarana et al., 2010), and OPC proliferation has been reported to increase in the hippocampus by 30% after 7 days of running (Matsumoto et al., 2011). As such, the extent of axonal myelination may alter in response to exercise, mediated via increased oligodendrocyte proliferation and differentiation.

PFA may also lead to improved WM structure via third variables. For example, PFA is associated with general improvements in health and wellbeing, including positive effects on the cardiovascular system, body composition and mental health, with many of these factors having also been shown to be related to WM structure in ageing populations (Raz and Rodrigue, 2006). Several of the cross-sectional MRI studies included in this review included possible confounding variables as additional covariates in their analyses, in order to examine the degree to which such factors influence the relationship between PFA and WM structure. While, in the majority of analyses, results remained significant after taking such factors into account (Benedict et al., 2013, Gow et al., 2012, Sen et al., 2012, Wirth et al., 2014), notably Ho et al. (2011) reported that PA was no longer statistically correlated with WM volume after BMI was included in their model. In both studies that examined the effects of an aerobic exercise intervention, a control group that participated in stretching and toning classes meant that effects could not be attributed to increased social engagement associated with an exercise program (Colcombe et al., 2006, Voss et al., 2012). Moving forward, it will be important for future studies to systematically examine a range of factors hypothesised to be protective or detrimental to WM structure in the ageing process to examine the relative weight and inter-dependency of factors.

Finally, compromised WM structure may have an impact on an individual's ability to participate in physical activity, and indeed, an increased risk of impaired mobility, gait and balance dysfunction has been identified in individuals with WM changes (Srikanth et al., 2009, Starr, 2003, Wakefield et al., 2010). WM integrity may itself be a propagator of reduced physical activity, and the causal directionality of the two factors may be reversed.


Conclusions

The study of the relationship between PFA and WM structure is still in its infancy. From the studies reviewed here, a promising tendency towards a positive relationship between PFA levels and WM structure emerged. Although encouraging, we remain cautious in our conclusions due to the small size of effects and a number of negative findings. Throughout this review, we have called attention to areas warranting further research. Specifically, the development of this research area would benefit from studies: (1) that further examine the anatomical specificity of the relationship between PFA and WM; (2) that offer insights into the optimal frequency, intensity, time and type of exercise; (3) that address how gender and age mediate the PFA–WM relationship; (4) that explore whether PFA-related effects on WM translate to cognition; and (5) that distinguish between biological mechanisms which may lay behind such effects (e.g. vascular health, cerebral perfusion, and neurotrophic factors). Ultimately, although many questions remain unanswered, PFA remains a promising candidate in the search for factors that can reduce or delay the deteriorating effects of age on WM structure.


The Anterior Cingulate Gyrus and Social Cognition: Tracking the Motivation of Others

Matthew AJ Apps, Matthew FS Rushworth, Steve WC Chang — Neuron, 2016. PMC4885021, CC BY 4.0.

The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is implicated in a broad range of behaviors and cognitive processes, but it has been unclear what contribution, if any, the ACC makes to social behavior. We argue that anatomical and functional evidence suggests that a specific sub-region of ACC—in the gyrus (ACCg)—plays a crucial role in processing social information. We propose that the computational properties of the ACCg support a contribution to social cognition by estimating how motivated other individuals are and dynamically updating those estimates when further evidence suggests they have been erroneous. Notably this model, based on vicarious motivation and error processing, provides a unified account of neurophysiological and neuroimaging evidence that the ACCg is sensitive to costs, benefits, and errors during social interactions. Furthermore, it makes specific, testable predictions about a key mechanism that may underpin variability in socio-cognitive abilities in health and disease.


Main Text


Introduction

Accounts of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) have highlighted its role in fundamental cognitive processes, including motivation, decision making, learning, cost-benefit calculation, as well as conflict and error monitoring (Holroyd and McClure, 2015, Holroyd and Yeung, 2012, Rushworth et al., 2012, Kolling et al., 2016, Laubach et al., 2015, Shackman et al., 2011, Shenhav et al., 2013, Ullsperger et al., 2014, Verguts et al., 2015). While such theories have dominated research on ACC, there is also a long, if less influential, tradition associating ACC with social behavior. For example, many years ago, links were drawn between ACC and the basic affiliative and communicative behaviors in which all mammals engage (MacLean, 1993). That link has persisted even as the neuroscientific approaches and behavioral paradigms used to investigate social interaction have increased dramatically in their sophistication (Saxe, 2006, Schilbach et al., 2013, Somerville et al., 2006, Wang et al., 2011, Haroush and Williams, 2015). It is apparent when neuroimaging is used to examine human brain activity when people engage in socially oriented modes of cognition, such as empathy (Singer et al., 2004, Lamm et al., 2011), that might once have been thought recalcitrant to neuroscientific examination. In addition, disorders of social cognition have long been linked to the structure and function of the ACC (Apps et al., 2013b, Anderson and Kiehl, 2012). Understanding the mechanistic contribution of this region to social behavior is therefore vital for understanding social cognition in health and disease.

It is sometimes assumed that any role ACC has in processing social information simply reflects an aspect of more generalized cognitive control processes. Here we review recent experiments, primarily in primates such as macaques and humans, to examine whether this is indeed the case. Drawing on anatomical, lesion, single-unit recording, and neuroimaging studies, we suggest that the notion that social information processing in the ACC simply reflects general cognitive control processes can be refuted. Anatomical evidence points to considerable heterogeneity in ACC cytoarchitecture and connectivity. Such heterogeneity is indicative of functions being localized to discrete sub-regions. We highlight how evidence points to social information being processed in a specific ACC sub-region in the gyrus (ACCg). Both single-unit recording and neuroimaging studies suggest that this region computes “other-oriented” information (i.e., information about other agents that might be animals or people, rather than ourselves; Apps et al., 2013b, Behrens et al., 2009). We also review this region’s connectional and functional properties in health and in disorders of social cognition before finally describing a model of how this region might compute information that guides our understanding of how motivated other people are. We suggest that this computational framework has potential for providing mechanistic understanding of variability in social behavior in healthy people and also disorders of social cognition.


Using Social Information to Guide Learning and Decision Making in ACC

Classical as well as recent accounts of the ACC have often posited that this region plays a vital role in processing rewards and also in decision making (Ullsperger et al., 2014, Kolling et al., 2016). Recent work has highlighted that this region may also be particularly important for evaluating cost-benefit information that influences how motivated we are and foraging decisions such as whether to maintain or switch behavior (Holroyd and Yeung, 2012, Kolling et al., 2016). The ACC encodes variables determining the reward rate of a behavior, including its probability of reward and its effortfulness, which are key determinants of how vigorously behaviors should be pursued (Kennerley et al., 2009, Kurzban et al., 2013, Kolling et al., 2016, Rushworth et al., 2012). On first glance it may therefore seem surprising to suggest that this region is also particularly important for processing information about others. However, from an ecological perspective, it isn’t surprising at all. Despite major differences in avian and mammalian neuroanatomy, in birds, species in which foraging is sophisticated, information about the presence of conspecifics is processed in adjacent regions to those concerned with both the costs and benefits of the bird’s own behavior (Aoki et al., 2006, Amita and Matsushima, 2014). Moreover, in humans, social information is processed in the same or adjacent brain structures as those that are engaged during foraging decisions, which may in part be because information about competitors also crucially determines foraging decisions (Mobbs et al., 2013). Such a confluence of information appears to be a general principle of neural circuits for decision making.

Electrophysiological recordings in rodents suggest that neurons in a homologous region to human ACC are concerned with cost-benefit decisions made in social contexts and with learning through observation of others. Hillman and Bilkey (2012) recorded from the ACC as rats evaluated the costs and benefits of competing with a conspecific for a reward. They found that a large proportion of ACC neurons coded the net value (benefit minus cost) of competing for a reward but did not respond similarly to equal levels of reward when no competition was required. Lesions of the same ACC region (Cg1/Cg2) in rats disrupt both cost-benefit decision making (Rudebeck et al., 2006a) and diminish the normal interest they take in other rats (Rudebeck et al., 2007). In mice, the typical “freezing” response when receiving painful stimulation can also be learned by observation. Jeon and colleagues (2010) showed, however, that when the ACC of mice is inactivated, they are no longer able to learn the freezing response through observation. Inactivation of the lateral amygdala did not abolish the ability to learn from observation in the same way. This would suggest that the ACC may have a particularly important role in learning about the behavior of conspecifics in rodents as well cost-benefit information about an animal’s own behavior.

Over the last decade many neuroimaging studies in humans have shown that ACC is active when people interact with others during economic games in which, typically, the experimental participants make decisions that affect not only their own subsequent payoff but also the payoff that other players will receive (Behrens et al., 2008, King-Casas et al., 2005, Gabay et al., 2014, Sanfey et al., 2003, Tomlin et al., 2006, Ruff and Fehr, 2014). A recent study suggested that such responses in the ACC may be driven by neurons that are predictive of the behaviors of another. Haroush and Williams (2015) recorded from the ACC as monkeys performed a similar type of game to those used in human neuroimaging studies—the prisoner’s dilemma game. In this game, players have to choose between cooperating with another or defecting—failing to cooperate. Cooperating resulted in a medium-sized reward for the monkey but only if the other cooperated too; the monkey only received a small reward if it cooperated and the other defected. Defecting led to a large reward payoff although, again, the payoff depended on what the other did too. Not surprisingly ACC neurons responded to the monkey’s own decisions of whether to cooperate or defect but intriguingly they found a second class of neurons predicting the decisions of the other monkey. Such findings suggest some specificity for monitoring and predicting the behavior of others within ACC. However, such experiments give rise to important questions: (1) is such activity a corollary of the social interaction that such tasks entail, or (2) is it simply the case that any difficult decision making, whether it involves other people or not, is associated with ACC activity? After all there are many reports linking ACC to decision making even in the absence of social context, so at the heart of this Review is the question: is there anything special about responses in the ACC when tracking others’ behavior?

If primate ACC activity tracks the behavior of others, then we might expect ACC lesions to disrupt social behavior. It is indeed the case that lesions in humans that impact on large areas of medial prefrontal cortex, including portions of the ACC, result in changes in social behavior, social decision making, and the ability to learn from observation (Blair and Cipolotti, 2000, Krajbich et al., 2009, Anderson et al., 1999, Moretti et al., 2009, Kumaran et al., 2015, Hornak et al., 2003). However, the identity of the key areas that, if damaged, cause social impairments has been difficult to determine because the lesions are large and directly affect several anatomical areas and undercut the connections of even more. In macaques, circumscribed lesions to the ACC, more so than some other frontal areas, disrupt the processing of social information and lead to changes in social behaviors (Hadland et al., 2003, Rudebeck et al., 2006b, Rudebeck et al., 2007, Noonan et al., 2010). There is therefore evidence of a causal link between social behavior and the ACC.

Taken together, research points to the ACC playing a key role not just in reward-guided learning and decision making but also in social cognition. However, to truly understand the “reference frame” in which the ACC responds during social interactions and to examine the specificity of any region for processing social information, it is important to use tasks where such features can be disentangled. In the following sections, we consider some simpler tasks that allow us to examine how ACC activity tracks specific features of others’ behavior and the motivations that inform those behaviors. First, however, we consider the anatomy of the ACC in greater detail and examine whether some of its component zones may have distinct functional properties.


The Anatomy of the ACC


Anatomical Dissociation between the Sulcus and Gyrus

The cingulate cortex in both humans and monkeys contains multiple distinct cytoarchitectonic zones (Palomero-Gallagher et al., 2008, Vogt, 2009) that imply localization of different functions to each zone (A). Although many discussions of ACC focus on the anatomical distinctions that arise along the rostro-caudal axis (Silvetti et al., 2014), an equally crucial cytoarchitectonic distinction also exists in the dorsal-ventral dimension between gyral and sulcal regions. Furthermore, differences in connectional anatomy, related to the direction and strength of inter-regional communications, suggest that the ACCg may be functionally distinct from the more frequently studied regions in the adjacent ACC sulcus (ACCs), often referred to as the dorsal ACC (dACC). Notably, the distinction in anatomical properties between the sulcus and gyrus extends across a large extent of the ACC. In many atlases the ACCg contains areas 24a/b and 32 in both humans and macaques, whereas areas 24c and 32′ lie predominantly in the ACCs (A).

Throughout this Review, we use the terms ACCg and ACCs to refer broadly to locations anterior to the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) in the gyrus and sulcus, respectively. We do this because the location of the border between areas 32 and 24a/b has varied across anatomical studies (Walker, 1940, Preuss and Goldman-Rakic, 1991, Carmichael and Price, 1994, Vogt, 2009) and it was not possible to carry out detailed histological analysis of brain tissue in the humans and monkeys in the experiments we discuss. Moreover, although not acknowledged by every authority, there is evidence for cytoarchitectural subdivision within area 24 (24a, a’, b, and b’; Vogt, 2009). However, the anatomical connections of these subdivisions, which constrain and determine function, appear broadly similar throughout 24a/24b (Van Hoesen et al., 1993). In fact many of the connections of both area 32 and 24 are similar (B; Van Hoesen et al., 1993, Beckmann et al., 2009, Neubert et al., 2015). Patterns of activity coupling between these areas and the rest of the brain, which only partly reflect monosynaptic connections (O’Reilly et al., 2013), suggest important similarities between human and macaque 24a/b, macaque area 32 and human area 32pl, and the manner in which they interact with the rest of the brain in both species (Neubert et al., 2015; B).

Importantly, it has also been argued, on the basis of cytoarchitectural analyses, that there is homology between human and macaque ACC (Preuss and Goldman-Rakic, 1991, Vogt, 2009, Vogt and Paxinos, 2014) and that the ACCs and ACCg differ from one another in similar ways in the two species. This evidence suggests that it may be possible to integrate findings from lesion and neurophysiological studies in monkeys with neuroimaging evidence in humans.


The “Social Connectivity” Profile of the ACCg

Humans live in large, complex social groups. It has been argued that living in such large groups has led to evolutionary pressure for larger brains in the primate order. As a result, it is often suggested that there are networks in the brain that have evolved to play important roles in social cognition and behavior (Dunbar and Shultz, 2007, Passingham and Wise, 2012, Chang, 2013, Chang et al., 2013b). Historically, neurobiological models of social cognition have placed importance on three distributed neural networks, each of which may perform different functions that contribute to social behavior (Blair, 2013, Frith and Frith, 2006, Kilner, 2011): (1) a “mentalizing” network involved in inferring others’ mental states and abstract information about social situations, comprising a region in the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) and the dorsal portions of the medial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) (Apps and Tsakiris, 2013, Frith and Frith, 2006, Hampton et al., 2008, Lee, 2008, Lee and Seo, 2016); (2) an action observation network (AON) including the ventral premotor cortex (PMv) and adjacent BA44 and the anterior, inferior parietal cortex (Iacoboni and Dapretto, 2006, Kilner, 2011); and (3) a network involved in affective and value-based processing, including the amygdala, ventral portions of the medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), and anterior insula (AI) (Blair, 2013, Ruff and Fehr, 2014, Chang et al., 2015, Fareri et al., 2015).

Although there are exceptions, the ACCg has classically not been considered as a part of these networks. Nevertheless, anatomical tracer studies in monkeys and neuroimaging studies in humans examining human brain connections (B and 1C) suggest that this region may in fact have strong connections to each of these three social networks (Apps et al., 2013b, Beckmann et al., 2009, Mars et al., 2012, Mesulam and Mufson, 1982, Morecraft et al., 2012, Sallet et al., 2013, Vogt, 2009). This region connects to the TPJ and the dmPFC, which are engaged in mentalizing processes; to several amygdala nuclei, the vmPFC and the AI regions, which are engaged during affective and social processing; and also to the PMv and the inferior parietal cortex regions engaged during action observation. This connectivity profile places the ACCg as a potentially important region that integrates a variety of distinct forms of social information from the different social networks.

Is the connectivity profile of ACCg distinct from other cingulate sub-regions? Notably, both tracer and resting-state studies in macaques and humans highlight that its connectional fingerprint is distinct from that of the adjacent cingulate regions (Beckmann et al., 2009, Margulies et al., 2007). Specifically, none of the connections from the ACCs overlap with those of the ACCg to the mentalizing network or the AON and the connections of the ACCg and the ACCs to the vmPFC and the amygdala also do not fully overlap (Vogt, 2009, Van Hoesen et al., 1993). This would suggest that overall the ACCg has a connectivity profile that plays an important role in processing social information, whereas the ACCs may not have access to all of the same information.

Obviously not all ACCg’s connections are distinct from those of the ACCs. The ACCg also interconnects with many regions to which the ACCs does also. This includes strong interconnections between the ACCg and ACCs, between both regions and several other portions of the prefrontal cortex, as well as parts of the striatum, the parietal lobe, and both the ACCg and ACCs receive monosynaptic input from dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmental area (Vogt, 2009, Williams and Goldman-Rakic, 1998). A diverse array of functions has been ascribed to these regions. However, it is clear that they play important roles in processing the costs and benefits of acting (Floresco et al., 2008, Kolling et al., 2016, Rushworth et al., 2012, Verguts et al., 2015). This would therefore suggest that while the ACCg may be functionally distinct from the ACCs in terms of its role in processing social information, it may also be sensitive to some similar information. This may therefore highlight an important role for the ACCg in processing the costs and benefits of acting in social contexts, much how the ACCs does when evaluating the value of acting for ourselves (Kolling et al., 2016).


The ACCg and Social Cognition


A Functionally Distinct Region of the Cingulate Cortex for Other-Oriented Information?

Lesion studies in macaques suggest that the region of the ACC that is most important for the processing of social information lies in the gyrus. Rudebeck and colleagues (2006b) showed that lesions to the ACCg decreased the value that macaques placed on social stimuli and also led to reductions in the execution of social behaviors. In contrast, lesions to the ACCs, and other parts of the frontal cortex, do not lead to similar changes to the valuation of social stimuli or social behavior, suggesting a special role for ACCg in social cognition (Noonan et al., 2010). Neuroimaging studies in primates provide further support for the notion that the ACCg processes social information. Resting-state connectivity in the ACCg has been shown to correlate with the size of social group in which macaques were living (Sallet et al., 2011, Noonan et al., 2014).

Single-unit recording studies in macaques also suggest that the ACCg processes other-regarding information that is particularly important for social behavior, in a manner that is distinct from other regions of the cingulate cortex. Chang et al. (2013a) used a modified dictator game in monkeys, in which the actor monkeys made a decision to share or withhold reward from a conspecific or a decision to reward the conspecific or no one. Using this design they were able to disentangle whether neurons responded to rewarding outcomes being delivered to self, other, no one, or combinations of conditions. As well as ACCs, they recorded from neurons in a relatively anterior portion of ACCg, approximately at the border of areas 24a/b and 32 (A and 2B). They found that a significantly higher proportion of neurons in the ACCg responded to rewarding outcomes delivered to another, with many responding exclusively when another monkey was receiving a reward. Specifically, they found that approximately 60% of neurons that responded to any choice, cue, or reward outcome (approximately 25% of total neurons recorded) in the ACCg (C) signaled when another monkey was receiving a reward (whether exclusively for another monkey [other-referenced] or in a mirrored fashion when either self or other obtained a reward [both-referenced]). Nearly half of these reward-sensitive neurons in ACCg only responded to the other monkey’s reward. While 25% may seem a small proportion of neurons, it is comparable with the proportion of neurons in the premotor cortex exhibiting “mirror neuron”-like profiles and yet such PMv neurons putatively influence behavior (Kilner and Lemon, 2013) and impact on electromyographic activity at several synapses distance (Catmur et al., 2011). In contrast, approximately 70% of reward-modulated neurons in the ACCs and 80% in the OFC were self-referenced and did not respond to any information about other monkeys. Thus, the proportion of neurons in the ACCg sensitive to other’s reward outcome, including those that exclusively use an other-oriented frame of reference, is striking and distinctive. This finding would therefore suggest that, compared to the ACCs and other cortical regions, the ACCg may play a more significant role in processing “other-oriented” information.

Is there a similar specialization for other-regarding information in the ACCg in the human brain? Recently, a number of studies have asked whether ACCg processes self or other-oriented information. With a striking consistency, they have localized an ACCg region near area 24a/b that only responds to other-oriented information (A). Crucially, all of these studies have highlighted that ACCg processes cues that are informative as to what events will impact another person even if it does not always process cues informative of events that will impact upon ourselves.

The ACCg is activated when processing cues that are predictive of others’ reward (Apps and Ramnani, 2014, Lockwood et al., 2015; A and 2B) or provide information about whether rewarding outcomes are being delivered during social interactions (Apps et al., 2012, Apps et al., 2013a, Behrens et al., 2008, Zhu et al., 2012; C and 3D) or when subjects process stimuli that are predictive of painful stimulation being delivered to another person (Lockwood et al., 2013, Lamm et al., 2011; A). However, the ACCg is not activated by similar cues indicating that the subject themselves will receive painful stimulation or a reward. In addition, a study by Apps and colleagues (2013a) examined activity in the ACCg when processing the outcomes of either another’s decisions or the responses of a computer. Crucially, they found that the ACCg—albeit in a slightly more posterior region from the other neuroimaging and neurophysiological recording studies—responded to the outcomes of the other person’s decisions but not to the outcomes of a computer’s responses. Taken together, neurophysiological and neuroimaging evidence reveals that the ACCg responds to other-oriented information but not to information about ourselves or about non-biological agents.


The ACCg and the Motivational Value of Behavior for Another

As highlighted in the previous section, there is accumulating evidence that the ACCg processes other-oriented information. Although teasing apart signals that are related to decisions, predictions, or outcomes can be challenging (Cai and Padoa-Schioppa, 2012), in the this section we review evidence that suggests that the ACCg may play an important role in processing cues that allow for predictions about cost-benefit evaluations to be made about the value of a behavior for another.

In the study by Chang et al. (2013a), not only did the ACCg activity reflect reward delivered to others, but it also, at earlier time points in each trial, reflected the monkeys’ expectations about the reward about to be received by the other. Specifically, the normalized response profile of ACCg neurons reflected reward that the other monkey would receive prior to their delivery, but it did not change when rewards were to be delivered to no one or just to the self (B). Therefore, ACCg activity reflects predictions about the motivated state of a conspecific prior to the actual reward delivery.

Neuroimaging studies have highlighted that human ACCg activity is found exclusively for cues that are predictive of reward for others. Lockwood et al. (2015) examined activity at the time of cues that was predictive of a high probability or a low probability of a reward for the subject or for another person. Crucially, they found that activity in the ACCg was sensitive only to the probability of another receiving a reward.

Some neural circuits are not just sensitive to primary reward but they are also sensitive to other factors that determine the net value of a course of action, such as costs entailed by the action made to obtain reward. This certainly is the case for cingulate regions concerned with reward-guided decision making even in the absence of social context (Rudebeck et al., 2006a, Kennerley et al., 2009, Kolling et al., 2016), but is it also true of the ACCg? Apps and Ramnani (2014) used fMRI to examine activity at the time of cues that indicated whether the subject or another person would have to exert effort to obtain a reward (A). They found ACCg activity covaried with net value (reward – effort) at the time of the cues, but only on trials when the other person would have to exert the effort to obtain the reward. Such an activity pattern is analogous to that seen in the ACCs in non-social reward-guided decision making (Kolling et al., 2016). Other studies have also reported activity in the ACCg at times when predictions can be made about the value of a behavior for another (Boorman et al., 2013, Jones et al., 2011). Importantly, this includes studies in which subjects are evaluating reward that will be received by others that are delayed in terms of their receipt–another key factor that devalues rewards (Nicolle et al., 2012).

How does ACCg activity manifest when there is a possibility of a net negative state for another individual? If the ACCg is truly signaling value, then its activity should decline even further in such situation, but if instead the ACCg is signaling the net motivational impact of another person’s state, then its activity will increase as the net negative impact increases (cf. Roesch and Olson, 2007). ACCg activity conforms with the latter pattern; it encodes motivational salience; cues indicative of affective states closely linked to motivation, such as fearful faces or pictures of others in pain, also increase activity in the ACCg in the same manner as rewarding stimuli (Rotge et al., 2015, Lockwood et al., 2013, Molenberghs et al., 2012). But, as highlighted above, activity in this region shows an opposing profile in terms of being sensitive to the costs of others’ actions.

This profile suggests that at the time of cues that are predictive of behavior by another, activity increases in the ACCg when the benefit associated with the behavior is greater and actions will be more motivated (invigorated). The prospect of negative states as well as positive ones can lead to similar motivation or invigoration and it is with this motivational factor that ACCg activity covaries. That is, activity increases when another will avoid pain or obtain a reward. However, activity in this region also decreases with costs that decrease motivation, such as the effort costs or temporal delay before a beneficial outcome is received. This suggests that the ACCg is signaling the motivational value of acting for another.


The ACCg and the Outcomes of Others’ Behavior

While many studies suggest that the ACCg responds to stimuli that are predictive of events that impact another, the ACCg also appears to be sensitive to the outcomes of decisions that impact upon another. A large number of EEG and fMRI studies have shown during social interaction tasks that the ACCg signals when the outcomes of others’ actions are unexpected (Koban et al., 2010, Shane et al., 2008). As highlighted above, Chang et al. (2013a) identified that a group of reward-sensitive neurons in the macaque ACCg signal only when reward will be delivered to another and not to no one or ourselves. In humans, Behrens and colleagues (2008) asked participants to make decisions on the basis both of the history of reward that they had experienced with different choices, and also on the basis of advice that they were given. When the participants were given feedback at the end of the each trial, they were able to update both their estimates of action values and their estimates of how good the advisor was. The weight of influence, or impact, of the feedback information on these two updates was associated with activity change in the ACCs and ACCg, respectively; the activity increases were, respectively, proportional to the action learning rate parameter size and the advisor learning rate parameter size in the model used by Behrens and colleagues. This would point, therefore, to the ACCg playing an important role in other-oriented learning—learning about the behavior of others, and perhaps also, to learning about the value other’s place on behavior.

Other studies suggest that not only does the ACCg signal information at the time that outcomes are delivered to other people, but it signals when other people’s expectations about the consequences of their actions are revealed as erroneous. Such signals are typically referred to as prediction errors (PEs), a signal for tracking the statistical properties of the environment (Schultz, 2006). In the ACCg, the statistical properties of the contingencies between stimuli and rewarding outcomes for others are tracked by PEs. As reported above, Apps et al. (2013a) found that the ACCg was active when the outcomes of another’s actions are revealed to a subject. Specifically, they showed that ACCg activity signaled when the outcome of another’s action was discrepant from the predicted outcome. However, it signaled this PE only for the unexpected outcomes of another’s action and not for the outcomes of a computer. ACCg activity has also been found to covary with PEs when monitoring the outcomes of another’s strategy (Zhu et al., 2012) as well as when updating beliefs about other people’s strategies (Hampton et al., 2008). Crucially, all of these studies point to the ACCg being engaged when monitoring others’ outcomes and suggest that this region may signal “outcome”-related PEs (OPEs).


The ACCg and Monitoring Others’ Actions

Recent evidence suggests that the ACCg may also signal prediction errors (PEs) while we monitor the actions of another person, not only when viewing the outcomes of their actions. Apps et al. (2015a) asked subjects to act like a teacher and monitor the actions of another person (student) engaged in learning stimulus-response associations by trial and error (B). As the subjects had learned all of these associations themselves, when they saw the action of the other person they could infer a PE for how different another’s prediction was from the actual outcome the subject knew they would receive. They found activity in the ACCg signaled this PE (Apps et al., 2015a). In other studies, the ACCg was found to respond more strongly when observing others’ actions that have unfamiliar or unusual kinematics (Casile et al., 2010, Maffei et al., 2015). It could be postulated that such a response in the ACCg might reflect the signaling of a discrepancy between the expected and actual kinematics of another’s action. That is, the ACCg may signal a PE when monitoring another’s movement, coding for the difference between an expectation about the value of a movement for another and the actual value of the movement executed.


Domain Generality in the ACCs

In contrast to the ACCg, the adjacent ACCs (or dACC as it is often called) does not seem to have such a specialization for other-oriented information. Based on single-unit recordings, lesion studies, and neuroimaging approaches (see Silvetti et al., 2014 or Kolling et al., 2016 for reviews), the ACCs, including its anterior perigenual portion, signals the value of our own behavior (Amemori and Graybiel, 2012), and updates those estimates when feedback suggests that they may have been incorrect (Procyk et al., 2016). As a result of these findings, many attempts have been made to develop domain-general models of the contributions of this region to cognitive processing (Alexander and Brown, 2011, Holroyd and McClure, 2015, Holroyd and Yeung, 2012, Silvetti et al., 2014, Verguts et al., 2015).

In studies directly investigating social information processing, there is mixed evidence as to how important a role the ACCs plays in processing social information. In human neuroimaging studies, the ACCs is activated when painful stimulation is delivered to either ourselves or other people. However, it also responds to the unexpected outcomes of both other people and computers (Apps et al., 2013a). This suggests that ACCs processes information regardless of whether it pertains to another biological agent or not. In Chang and colleagues (2013a), a study discussed in the preceding sections, the vast majority of ACCs neurons differentiated between reward delivered to self and other but the same neurons also similarly differentiated between conditions in which the self or no one obtained a reward. In fact, within the ACCs very few neurons distinguished between reward delivered to the other or to no one (B). This would suggest that neurons in this region predominantly respond to “foregone” reward. That is, these neurons code for when a reward is not going to be delivered to ourselves. This would place these neurons within a “self” reference frame and not an “other” frame of reference.

In contrast, recent studies recording from the ACCs during more complex social interaction tasks could be interpreted as suggesting that neurons in this region signal other-oriented information. Yoshida et al. (2012) found neurons in the ACCs that responded when another monkey made an error during a reward incentivized action selection task. While this could be interpreted as reflecting “other-oriented” information, it is important to note that the subject’s own outcome and subsequent behavior was critically dependent on the action selection of the other monkey. A failure of the other monkey to act appropriately would therefore lead to an absence of reward for the monkey themselves. Thus, this finding is remarkably consistent with that of Chang et al. (2013a), who showed that the majority of responses in the ACCs reflect a “foregone” reward for ourselves in a self-referenced manner.

In another study, Haroush and Williams (2015) recorded from neurons in ACCs as monkeys played the prisoner’s dilemma game with another monkey. They found neurons that were predictive of the other monkeys’ choices of whether to cooperate in the iterative game. While these signals may be interpreted as reflecting the other-oriented process, it is also equally plausible that these signals may be self-referenced. With differential probabilities of the monkey themselves receiving a reward depending on the history of choices of the two monkeys, these neurons could be reflecting a prediction of a foregone reward as in Chang et al. (2013a). These neurons may therefore reflect the updating of the first monkey’s decision-making strategy on the basis of the other’s previous actions, which is critical for social interactions.

While this notion of domain generality might suggest that the ACCs has limited specialization for social information processing, it is important to consider the connections highlighted in previous sections between the ACCg and other areas of the brain. As noted, the ACCg has strong connections to the OFC, ventral striatum, and ACCs. Without doubt, these regions are important for guiding behavior, including social interactions (Azzi et al., 2012, Burke et al., 2010, Watson and Platt, 2012). However, neuroimaging and neurophysiological evidence suggests that they may not process information in the same reference frame as ACCg (Lee and Seo, 2016, Chang et al., 2013a, Azzi et al., 2012, Báez-Mendoza et al., 2013). Moreover, the ACCg is also connected to portions of the dmPFC and TPJ that have been shown to signal “other-oriented” information in a variety of different tasks (see Lee and Seo, 2016 for a review). This therefore places the ACCg within a distributed network that guides social behavior, with the ACCg processing information about the level of motivation of others agents during social interactions.


The ACCg and Variability in Social Behavior

Social abilities vary considerably even between healthy individuals (Bird and Viding, 2014). Notably, the structural and functional properties of the ACCg have been linked to variability in both social behavior and factors that influence socio-cognitive abilities.

As highlighted above, the connectivity of the ACCg has been shown to reflect social group size (Sallet et al., 2011) (A). There is also evidence that activity in the ACCg in response to other-oriented information—and particularly to stimuli that carry information about the motivational value of behavior for another—varies with trait levels of social abilities. Levels of our ability to empathize with others have been shown to be correlated with activity in the ACCg when processing information about pain being delivered to others (Lamm et al., 2011) or cues that are instructive of the probability of another receiving a reward (Lockwood et al., 2015) (B).

There is also evidence that variability in the ACCg response is linked to social behavior during tasks in which people interact. Specifically, the extent to which activity in the ACCg responded to feedback about the advice of another is related to variability in the degree to which people are influenced by that advice (Behrens et al., 2008; C). In addition, the extent to which ACCg signals information at the time of the outcomes of others’ actions, and particularly the degree to which this region signals PEs, correlates with how influenced by others’ behavior people are during competitive interactions (Zhu et al., 2012; D).

These findings therefore suggest that while the response of the ACCg in the typical population is predominantly “other-oriented,” the degree to which the ACCg processes information in this reference frame varies between individuals. As a result, there is considerable variability in the response of the ACCg to predictions about the value of a behavior for another and also to the extent to which PEs update our predictions about other people. These studies point to individual differences in the response of the ACCg or the degree to which the response is in an other-oriented frame of reference (Chang et al., 2013b) being closely linked to variability in the ability to understand the value of a behavior for another individual.


Disorders of Social Cognition and the ACCg

In clinically diagnosed psychopathy and ASD, there is also evidence of disruptions to the structural and functional properties of the ACCg. Post-mortem evidence has highlighted changes in the histological properties of the ACCg and ACCs as one of the most replicable differences between the brains of individuals with ASD and healthy control individuals (Zikopoulos and Barbas, 2013). Resting connectivity of an area including the ACCg and also ACCs has also been shown to be different in a large sample of individuals with ASD compared to a matched control group (Balsters et al., 2016). It has also been shown that symptom severity in ASD is correlated with activity in the ACC during an economic exchange with another (Chiu et al., 2008; C). In addition, psychopathic individuals and children who are rated as highly callous show differences in gray matter volume in the ACCg and connectivity between this region and other regions involved in processing social information such as the AI and the AON (Bird and Viding, 2014, Blair, 2013, Ly et al., 2012).

Existing evidence suggests that the functional properties disrupted in the ACCg in these disorders may be linked to the processing of information about the pain another is receiving. Activity in the ACCg to the pain of others has been shown to be attenuated in psychopathic individuals and those who exhibit callous traits (Anderson and Kiehl, 2012, Carré et al., 2013, Lockwood et al., 2013; D). Similarly, the response of the ACCg to stimuli that indicate another is in pain is reduced in ASD compared to healthy controls (Fan et al., 2014). Prominent theories of ASD have also argued that deficits in social behavior may arise from the inability to effectively process motivation related information during social interactions (Chevallier et al., 2012).

There is therefore evidence to suggest that the ACCg may be a key region that is disrupted across different disorders of social cognition. Moreover, the deficit in the ACCg appears to be specifically tied to the processing of “other-oriented,” motivationally relevant information. Thus, while there have been limited specific investigations of the ACCg in disorders of social cognition, these results suggest that this region may be a fruitful target to examine in disorders of social cognition.


Motivation and Vicarious Error Model: A Computational Framework of ACCg Contributions to Social Cognition

In the previous sections, we have highlighted how the ACCg may be the key region of the ACC that processes information in an “other-oriented” reference frame. Disruption to this region changes social behavior, a group of specialized neurons in this region respond to others’ reward, the region signals when information learned specifically about others is unexpected, and variability in this region is related to variability in social behavior. However, to date, there has been an absence of a theoretical framework that can inform future basic or clinical research. Moreover, while studies have hinted at the computational mechanisms that may operate within this region, this has never been formalized in a generalized manner that could characterize variability in behavioral or neural signals across a variety of tasks. This is in stark contrast to generalized models of dACC/ACCs, of which theoretical accounts are numerous and classical accounts suggest that the ACCs may be important for conflict monitoring, error detection, learning, and decision making (Alexander and Brown, 2011, Rushworth et al., 2012, Holroyd and Yeung, 2012, Shenhav et al., 2013, Ullsperger et al., 2014, Holroyd and McClure, 2015, Verguts et al., 2015, Kolling et al., 2016). Here, we suggest that the ACCg shares some of the computational properties of the ACCs but processes this information in an other-oriented frame of reference. In this next section, based on the extant literature and relevant research on the computations that underlie value-based motivation, we put forward a model that may be useful in explaining the previously identified contribution of the ACCg to processing information about others.


Understanding Others’ Motivation: A Key Social Process

In order to successfully interact with others, an agent must monitor the behavior of other individuals closely in order to predict the behaviors that they are likely to produce next and respond in the most adaptive manner (Adolphs, 2003, Brent et al., 2014, Fehr and Fischbacher, 2004, Frith and Frith, 2006). Crucially, to do so, an agent needs also to estimate the motivation of others. Accurately processing the level of motivation another has to obtain a desirable outcome (i.e., vicariously processing the value of a behavior for another individual) is a fundamental ability that is distinct from many other more frequently discussed components of social cognition (e.g., theory of mind, perspective taking, or empathizing) (Frith and Frith, 2006, Bird and Viding, 2014). For example, when I see someone running fast, this tells me that they are highly motivated at that moment in time. The vigor (speed) of their behavior therefore informs how motivated they are. However, it does not necessarily provide information on what their mental state is, nor is it necessarily informative as to their current mood. That is, we are able to infer whether someone is highly motivated or not, but their level of motivation can be orthogonal to the inferences we can make about their cognitive or affective state. Tracking another’s motivation may therefore be a key, but often neglected, component of social cognition.

The level of motivation or vigor in another’s behavior can therefore be thought of as a key piece of information that must be tracked during social interactions. Importantly, it can also be quantified. Anything that increases vigor can be thought of as motivating behavior toward a beneficial outcome that is being sought (e.g., obtaining a reward or avoiding pain), and anything that decreases vigor when there is a highly beneficial outcome offered can be thought of as a cost. This can be quantified as a “value” signal, with the benefits of moving fast traded off against the costs (Manohar et al., 2015). As argued in previous sections, we suggest that ACCg is sensitive to factors determining the motivation of others (their costs and benefits). There is little evidence that many other brain regions signal as much information about the reward or pain that is, or may be, received by another apart from perhaps the AI, a region to which the ACCg is strongly connected (Lamm et al., 2011, Mesulam and Mufson, 1982). This includes frontal lobe regions linked to reward-guided decision making, such as vmPFC and ACCs, and other brain regions such as TPJ and dmPFC linked to other aspects of social cognition and meta-representation (Chang et al., 2013a, Lee and Seo, 2016).


Vicarious Motivation: The Value of Behavior for Another

We break vicarious motivation processing down into the three distinct phases. (1) We must infer and represent the expectations another has about the value of their own behavior in terms of the beneficial outcome they desire for themselves, and the costs they will incur to obtain the outcome. This vicarious value (Vv) can either be derived from exogenous cues from the environment that have been learned to be predictive of costs and benefits for others, from communication directly, or from cues such as facial expressions. (2) The Vv ascribed to others’ behaviors are updated dynamically, online during the monitoring of their actions; and (3) the value of cues associated with such behaviors are updated when a subsequent outcome reveals that the initial expectation at the time of a cue was erroneous (i.e., when we learn that the value of a particular cue for another is different from what we had expected). In this section, we outline how a model derived from computational accounts of value processing and motor control may be useful for quantifying the mechanisms underlying the vicarious processing of motivation. From henceforth, we refer to this computational framework as the Motivation and Vicarious Error model (MoVE).

As noted in previous sections, the ACCg appears to process information that increases the value of acting (e.g., avoiding pain or approaching reward) and also that which decreases value (e.g., effort or delays). Computationally, we therefore characterize a prediction of how motivated another is as processing the vicarious value (Vv) of an action they will perform. This Vv is dependent upon the magnitude of the benefit (R) for another individual. This benefit can be thought of as being always positively valenced or unsigned (i.e., regardless of the positive or negative valence of the outcome, the Vv increases with the magnitude of the outcome such as greater pain or reward). So avoiding a large loss, obtaining a large reward, or avoiding a significant amount of pain would all reflect a large benefit for another person and thus increase “value.” The benefit magnitude is devalued by three distinct costs: (1) the temporal delay (D) before another receives the benefit (Charnov, 1976, Mazur, 1985, Shadmehr et al., 2010, Schultz, 2006, Wolpert et al., 2003); a benefit received in a week is valued as worth less than the same benefit received immediately; (2) the probability (P) of the benefit being received (if a particular behavior has a low probability of resulting in the desired benefit, then motivation to execute that behavior will likely be low and so reaction times and movement velocities will be slower; Wolpert et al., 2003, Schultz, 2006, Manohar et al., 2015); and (3) the effort that must exerted in order to obtain the beneficial outcome (E). This “effort” is determined by the amount of control that must be exerted during the performance of the behavior (Wolpert et al., 2003). The greater the effort to be exerted, the more the behavior is devalued (Manohar et al., 2015, Verguts et al., 2015).

This model therefore predicts that activity in the ACCg will be highest for a highly beneficial behavior for another, which is immediate, has a high probability of being received, and for which minimal effort needs to be exerted. However, each of these is weighed by a parameter that dictates how sensitive we believe another is to these sources of information (k,θ,Φ). That is, how impulsive someone is (k), how sensitive they are to probability (θ), and how averse they are to effort (Φ) all dictate how motivated they will be. The response of the ACCg therefore depends on how these sources of information are weighed, as well as the real delays, probabilities, and effort that another must exert. Importantly, we do not suggest that these specific characteristics—that define other people’s traits—are necessarily “stored” in the ACCg, merely that when monitoring another’s behavior, they can influence the valuation another places on a behavior and how invigorated their actions will be. These parameters reflect how different individuals may therefore value benefits differently. Through its connections with other regions that are important for learning about others’ traits and states, the ACCg may therefore form part of a network that allows the Vv to be constantly updated based on how much another weighs benefits against costs.

As outlined in the previous paragraphs, a prediction of how motivated another is can therefore be characterized in the following equation:

This equation therefore represents the key properties of the MoVE, evaluating the costs and benefits of a behavior for another. As noted in previous sections, activity in the ACCg has previously been shown to be modulated by all of these features and to signal the net value of others’ behaviors.


Two Different PEs for Updating Estimates of Others’ Motivation

As highlighted in previous sections, the ACCg signals PEs both when the outcomes of others’ actions are processed, but also when monitoring other’s actions. Similarly, two distinct updating signals are crucial for dynamically controlling one’s own behavior and learning from exogenous feedback (B). At the time of an outcome (feedback) of a behavior, a comparison can be made between the actual value of an action and the expected value of the action. When these are discrepant, PE signals drive learning based on the magnitude of the error (Schultz, 2006, Sutton and Barto, 1998). These PEs are scaled by learning rate parameters that dictate how much is learned from a PE. The outcomes of others’ actions reveal whether expectations about the value of a behavior for that individual were accurate. At the time of the outcome of another’s behavior, we can compare our expectation about the value of an outcome of a particular behavior for another to the value of the actual outcome they receive. When there is a discrepancy, vicarious outcome PEs (vOPEs) update our expectations of the level of motivation of another in the future following similar cues in the environment. That is, if we observe another obtaining a reward after they have performed an action, having never previously been rewarded for that behavior, we will come to expect they will be more motivated to perform the action in the future.

Control theories also postulate another form of PE signal that occurs during movements. During our own actions, we monitor their consequences and correct errors in our movements by identifying discrepancies between expected and actual movement kinematics (Wolpert et al., 2003). During actions we can also dynamically update our evaluations of others’ motivations on the basis of the properties of the others’ movements that are witnessed, such as the speed (vigor) of their movement (Wolpert et al., 2003). When monitoring another’s behavior, we can therefore compare our expectation about the value of a behavior—and an expectation about the vigor of their movement—with the actual behavior we observe. These can therefore be thought of as “dynamic” PEs as they code for errors during movements. If the movement is faster than predicted, then the model increases the estimate of the value the other agent is placing on behavior (i.e., their motivation is higher than was expected), whereas the opposite is true when the movement is slower than predicted. Such discrepancies between the actual and expected speed of another’s movements are updated by a vicarious dynamic PE (vDPE) that improves estimates of how motivated another currently is while executing a behavior.

Crucially, vDPEs and vOPEs can be used to update estimates of the effort required, as well as the probability of receiving a reward (Verguts et al., 2015). In the MoVE model, these two forms of PE update estimates of the value of another’s behavior.

The responses in the ACCg to the value of behaviors for others and to PEs that were discussed in earlier sections approximate the signals predicted by the MoVE model (Lockwood et al., 2015, Apps and Ramnani, 2014, Zhu et al., 2012, Apps et al., 2012, Apps et al., 2013a, Apps et al., 2015a). This model therefore provides a new framework for understanding previously identified signals in the ACCg during social interaction tasks. Notably this model also has the potential to quantify individual differences in people’s processing of the motivation of other individuals. This model may therefore be able to quantify and provide a mechanistic understanding of failures to accurately represent the motivation of others (C).


Distinguishing the MoVE Model from Others

Notably, the MoVE model shares commonalities with other models that have been proposed that can account for strategic learning and reasoning during social interactions including models of simulation (Suzuki et al., 2012), strategic inference (Camerer and Ho, 1998, Christopoulos and King-Casas, 2015, Hampton et al., 2008) or trust (Behrens et al., 2008). There are two key differences between these models and the MoVE. First, these models are predominantly aimed at computing abstract information about the strategy of others, and how we ourselves should adapt our strategy to reach goals during social interactions. In the MoVE model, the aim is to account for much lower-level information about how motivated other people are. Rather than attempting to explain strategic or theory of mind type inferences, this model makes predictions simply about the value of a behavior for another individual that allows predictions about the invigoration of another’s movement to be optimized. Second, in no previous model has the effort cost to be exerted by another been included within a model. This is pertinent given the significant influence that effort costs have on motivation (Kurzban et al., 2013, Manohar et al., 2015, Verguts et al., 2015, Apps et al., 2015b). The MoVE model therefore makes predictions about a component of social behavior that is not directly considered or parameterized in any of these models and as highlighted in other sections have been shown to be tracked in the ACCg.

We note, however, that Behrens and colleagues (2008) did report activity in the ACCg at the time of the outcomes of decisions that scaled with the volatility (or the current parametric value of a dynamically changing learning rate) of another’s advice. While the MoVE model does not directly predict the response in the ACCg witnessed in that study, it may have approximated some of what was observed, as in many circumstances the two models make similar predictions. Future studies should therefore use tasks where the properties of the two models lead them to make distinct predictions that can be tested against the response of the ACCg to determine whether volatility needs to be incorporated into the outcome response present in the ACCg.


Future Directions

By proposing a new conceptual framework of the contribution of the ACCg to social cognition, there are a number of potential avenues of research. From an anatomical perspective, perhaps the most interesting question is what are the precise locations of ACCg zones processing other-oriented information. To date, recordings from the gyrus of the cingulate cortex in macaques have not extended posterior to the genu of the corpus callosum. In contrast, neuroimaging studies show activity across the ACCg to social information in both more posterior and anterior locations. Future research should therefore examine whether the other-oriented zone of the ACCg lies just in a small circumscribed region or whether a large portion is concerned with social information. Moreover, it has recently been shown that in the ACCs outcomes delivered to different parts of the body evoke activity in different zones (Procyk et al., 2016). It would be intriguing to examine whether a similarly topographic representation of others’ outcomes is also evident in ACCg. For example, is feedback for another’s arm movement, as opposed to feedback for facial movements, represented in a different portion of the cingulate gyrus.

To fully support the framework we have proposed, it would also be important to demonstrate that single neurons in the ACCg respond in a manner predicted by the MoVE model. For example, it will be important to examine whether neurons in the ACCg signal PEs relating to the unexpectedness of the speed of others’ movements and also to the unexpected outcomes of their actions.

An interesting question, which was beyond the scope of this Review, is whether different components of computing the value for others’ behaviors can be tied to distinct neuromodulators. Past studies suggest dissociable roles for oxytocin, dopamine, and serotonin in influencing social behavior (Chang et al., 2015, Crockett et al., 2015). However, future research should examine the specific influences of each of these on the processing of costs and benefits in the ACCg when they are vicariously processed.

Finally, we believe this model and framework may be more generally useful for understanding variability in social abilities such as empathy, cooperation, competition, as well as disorders of social cognition. Do all disorders of social cognition have deficits in processing others’ motivation and, if they do, can they be parameterized by different components of the MoVE model? Future work using tasks tailored to understanding how motivation is tracked during social interactions may be able to tease apart distinct deficits in different disorders in which there is ACCg dysfunction.


Conclusions

In summary, research across different species in terms of anatomical connectivity, neuroimaging, and neurophysiology support the notion that a region in ACCg—adjacent and dorsal to the genu of the corpus callosum in humans—plays a crucial role in evaluating the behaviors of others and in estimating others’ level of motivation. We review the anatomical and functional role of the ACCg in social processing and put forward a mechanistic, computational account of the contributions of the ACCg to social cognition. Our account predicts many of the responses observed in the ACCg including those recorded from individual neurons and in neuroimaging studies. In addition, the MoVE model is easily generalizable to other domains of complex social behavior in which it is also necessary to understand others’ motivation. Looking forward, this framework may help to characterize and provide a mechanistic understanding of disorders of social cognition, by parameterizing potentially dysfunctional components of social behavior.


Seven Glimpses into the Emotional Brain

Gabriel Gasque — PLoS Biology, 2016. PMC5169360, CC BY 4.0.

In the last century, and particularly since the 1950’s, we’ve witnessed a shift in our efforts to understand the human mind. Cognition—the term that includes mental processes such as attention, memory, problem-solving, planning, and language—stopped being exclusively a philosophical subject approached by introspection and became a matter of empirical investigation and objective quantification. However, the traditional approaches to study cognition have focused on the information-processing functions and have generally excluded emotions.

Today researchers acknowledge a close relationship between our feelings and our thoughts, and have begun to disentangle how this relationship affects how we view the world, what we learn from it, and how we adjust our behavior accordingly. In this short article, I summarize recent research published in Open Access journals that explores the quantification and manipulation of emotions and investigates the interactions between emotions and cognitive processes such as attention and memory. This work provides insights from human subjects and animal models on the underlying neural mechanisms of cognition.

In a recent study published in PLOS Biology, the authors investigated how emotions impact visual attention. To do so, they used a combination of psychophysical experiments and functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), which measures brain activity by detecting changes associated with blood flow. When human subjects were shown emotionally loaded stimuli, the size of the attention field changed depending on whether the stimuli had a positive or negative valence. For example, a smiling face has a positive valence, and when presented to the subject, their attention field broadened. However, when the subjects were presented with a face with a negative valence (frowning or angry), the subject’s attention field narrowed. Interestingly, the emotional strength of the negative or positive faces, as explicitly reported by the participants, closely matched the size of the effects in the behavioral and brain-imaging experiments. The authors could establish that the effects of emotional valence on the size of the attention fields were mediated by a feedback from the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex—a functional brain structure that contributes to executive functions such as working memory, cognitive flexibility, planning, and abstract reasoning—to the primary visual cortex. These findings pave the road for understanding how the interaction between emotion and attention shapes our experience of the world.

In a complementary study published in PLOS Computational Biology, researchers explored additional neural mechanisms that could account for the emotional regulation of attention. The scientists developed a computational model to investigate how the amygdala—the gateway of the brain's emotional system—controls the inhibitory thalamic reticular nucleus, which is central to the attentional system. Lesions in the thalamic reticular nucleus, for example, result in attentional deficits. The computational model indicates that the amygdala-thalamic reticular nucleus pathway can select emotionally salient stimuli and inhibit transmission of irrelevant signals to the cortex, thereby determining the information available for subsequent cortical processing. In this way, the model accounts for both flexible bottom-up and focused top-down attention guided by emotions. Bottom-up (or stimulus-driven) attention concentrates on the most important aspects of the environment to drive adaptive behaviors. Top-down (or goal-directed) attention focuses only on what is relevant according to a pre-selected plan. Importantly, the model predicts three mechanisms that could potentially contribute to abnormal emotional-related behavior: dysfunctional cortical drive to the amygdala and dysregulation of local inhibition in the amygdala as well as in the cortex.

Emotions influence not only the way we perceive, view, and react to environmental stimuli, but also how we learn and create new memories. A recent study published in Nature Communications shed light onto the neurobiological mechanisms that underlie the effects of emotions on learning. Experiments carried out in mice revealed that a single synaptic connection between the amygdala and the ventral hippocampus—a region of the brain involved in both processing emotions like anxiety and fear as well as in regulating learning and memory—could explain the influence of emotions on learning. The authors showed that opposite emotional states—helplessness and hopefulness—modulate in different directions both spatial memory formation and the strength of amygdala-to-hippocampus synaptic connectivity. Hopefulness enhanced spatial memory and increased the synaptic connection via the up-regulation of excitatory receptors known as AMPA receptors. Conversely, helplessness induced memory deficits and attenuated the synaptic connections. To prove that this synaptic connection was causative, the authors artificially weakened the connection between the amygdala and the hippocampus in hopeful mice or strengthened the connection in helpless mice, and found they were able to eliminate the expected effect. Disruption of the synaptic connection impaired hopefulness-induced synaptic plasticity and abolished the positive effects on memory; whereas experimentally stimulating the amygdala-to-hippocampus synapse rescued helplessness-induced memory deficits and mimicked the effects of hopefulness.

To better understand emotions and their influences on cognition, researchers need a way to measure emotions objectively, without relying on a subject’s description of their emotional state. In a recent study published in PLOS Biology, the authors used fMRI to correlate different patterns of activation of the whole brain with different categories of emotions. By treating the fMRI signal like a problem of pattern recognition—similar to face- or character-recognition software—the authors could classify different patterns of activation as different emotional states, like content, amusement, surprise, fear, anger, sadness, or neutral. The authors could then tell the emotional state of the participants and could successfully predict their feelings in a resting mind-wandering state. Interestingly, the data showed that an emotional state was not stable, instead the brain visited multiple distinct emotional states during the interval that the experiment lasted. These fluctuations among distinct feelings depended on the emotional status of the subject: individuals with traits of depression or anxiety, visited sadness and fear, respectively, more frequently. The authors argue that their findings are relevant to clinical settings, suggesting that the emotional brain-decoding tool may be useful to assess the emotional status of patients who cannot report their own feelings, like patients in a locked-in state, for example.

Think of patients suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), sometimes called Lou Gehrig's disease. ALS is a rapidly progressive, invariably fatal multi-system disorder that is mainly characterized by degeneration of the motor-neurons in the brain and spinal cord that control voluntary movements. While classically seen as a motor disease that eventually traps patients in a completely locked-in state, ALS also impairs cognitive and emotional processes. An article in PLOS ONE documents that these patients showed decreased behavioral responses in processing of disgust and fear, because they were less accurate at recognizing faces expressing those emotions. In a complementary brain imaging experiment using fMRI, the patients suffering from ALS showed altered activity in areas involved in processing negative emotions such as sadness. The authors argue that this decrease in negative emotions might be adaptive to the negative consequences of neurodegenerative processes associated with the fatal disease.

Adaptive emotional responses require healthy underlying neuronal tissue. Research published in Nature Communications explored the mechanisms required for normal development of the amygdala. Ephrins are membrane-bound proteins that act as ligands of Eph receptors and have been extensively documented as fundamental for axon guidance. This study found that ephrin-B3 is required during a critical period in the neonatal brain for axon targeting and dendritic spine formation in the amygdala and for the development of innate fear. The authors argue that because aberrant wiring of emotional circuits could lead to neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by socio-emotional impairments, these results could explain why deficiencies in Ephrin-B/EphB signaling have been linked to anxiety disorders and autism.

A fundamental challenge for future studies, particularly in humans, is to develop strategies to understand the mechanistic underpinnings of emotions and their influence on cognition. This would require the experimental manipulation of the distributed networks that support these mental processes. In a study published in PLOS Biology, scientists demonstrate that inducing specific patterns of activity within the same specific brain region can lead to opposite emotional states. The authors used a technique called fMRI decoded neurofeedback to manipulate the activity in the cingulate cortex, a part of the cerebral cortex that is important for establishing preferences to different categories. As the participants looked at faces that were neutrally preferred, fMRI decoded neurofeedback was used to induced patterns of brain activity that corresponded to higher (or lower) preference. This perturbation resulted in the neutrally preferred faces becoming more (or less) preferred, without the subject being aware of the aim to change the preference. These exciting results reveal that highly specific patterns of activation within a brain region, rather than total activation of that region, are important for cognitive functions; in this case, positive and negative facial preferences are represented by spatially overlapping but distinct activation patterns in the cingulate cortex. The experimental activation of these specific patterns suffices to induce a change in preferences beyond the subject’s will.

For more detailed reading please see the associated PLOS Collection.


Social cognitive impairment and autism: what are we trying to explain?

Susan Leekam — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2016. PMC4685527, CC BY 4.0.

Early psychological theories of autism explained the clinical features of this condition in terms of perceptual and sensory processing impairments. The arrival of domain-specific social cognitive theories changed this focus, postulating a ‘primary’ and specific psychological impairment of social cognition. Across the years, evidence has been growing in support of social cognitive and social attention explanations in autism. However, there has also been evidence for general non-social cognitive impairments in representational understanding, attention allocation and sensory processing. Here, I review recent findings and consider the case for the specificity and primacy of the social cognitive impairment, proposing that we should focus more explicitly on clinically valid features for insights on the integration of ‘social’ and ‘non-social’ cognition.


Introduction

Despite being one of the most heritable of neurodevelopmental conditions, autism spectrum disorder continues to be defined as a behavioural syndrome that is based on clinical information from a child's developmental history and current behaviour. The diagnostic criteria are diverse, spanning not only the social domain (nonverbal communication, social reciprocity and peer relationships), but also behaviours in the non-social domain (restricted, repetitive, routinized behaviour and sensory reactions). However, there is surprisingly little research on the nature and potential reason for this co-occurrence between social and non-social symptoms. Instead, social cognitive research in autism in recent decades has focused on separating out the social impairment and its underlying cognitive or biological mechanisms. In this paper, I review recent findings that address the issue of specificity of the social cognitive impairment and propose that a domain-general explanation of these findings will help us to refocus attention on clinically valid features in both social and non-social domains.

Traditionally, theories of autism have been shaped by the pursuit of two traditional and interrelated goals. These are the goals of horizontal and vertical integration. Horizontal integration refers to the way that a disparate set of behaviours or cognitive traits are to be understood relative to one another. The goal of horizontal integration is often pursued by making the assumption that certain cognitive/behavioural features are ‘primary’ or ‘core’. Other features are explained in relation to them in a secondary capacity, either as a downstream consequence or else as being incidentally associated and not specific to autism. Vertical integration refers to the way in which such traits are to be understood in terms of underlying neurobiological systems or processes and has been viewed as a particularly important goal for neurocognitive research. The selection of primary features at the horizontal level has fuelled the quest for vertical integration, with scientists searching for abnormalities in brain regions or networks that underlie such core, primary features. Hence, assumptions governing the selection of clinical and cognitive features that are primary and specific to autism have led to the foregrounding of particular behavioural and cognitive symptoms over others, and directed the way that autism has been researched and understood.


A primary social cognitive impairment?

Within the history of autism research, there have been changing views about what should be considered to be the primary impairment. Kanner originally proposed in 1943 that an affective disturbance of children with autism was the primary impairment. There followed a period in which sensory-perceptual and repetitive motor behaviour impairments were considered to be key factors leading to the cognitive hypothesis by Hermelin and O'Connor in the 1970s that children with autism have difficulty in recruiting sensory input to make perceptual discriminations.

The arrival of domain-specific social cognitive theories changed this focus, postulating a ‘primary’ impairment of cognition specifically in the social domain described as a ‘theory of mind’ or ‘mentalizing’ impairment. This approach focused a growing new interest in cognitive explanations of autism more generally, towards a more specific account that targeted the core social and communication symptoms. This approach also had appeal for the goal of vertical integration in setting out an agenda that could causally connect diverse biological abnormalities to clinical behavioural symptoms by means of a simple cognitive mechanism designed for inferring mental states. Currently, the theory of mind impairment still continues to be proposed as an important cognitive mechanism that can explain some key social communication functioning difficulties of autism.

The claims for a domain-specific cognitive impairment in autism began with evidence from Wimmer and Perner's false belief task which was considered the ‘litmus test’ of theory of mind in that it aimed to test understanding about another person's mental representation of a situation independently of the current situation in the real world. In this task, children observe a scenario in which a protagonist puts an object into location A and leaves the room. The object is then unexpectedly moved to location B in his absence. Typical 4-year-old children correctly predict that on his return, the protagonist will look for the object where he left it, while younger children and also children with autism predict that the protagonist will look where the object is now. A landmark study by Baron-Cohen, Leslie and Frith in 1985 was the first of many studies to show that children with autism often fail or are extremely developmentally delayed in passing this task.


A domain-specific impairment in understanding mental representations?

Empirical evidence of false belief difficulty in children with autism has driven forward the quest to identify the nature and origins of this key social cognitive impairment. A crucial question is whether the impairment in attributing false beliefs is a domain-specific or domain-general capacity. This is different from the question of whether false belief impairment is specific to autism. Instead, the issue here is whether the cognitive requirements of this task belong specifically to a class of social cognitive or mentalizing processes rather than to general high-level cognitive or lower level perceptual processes. Those taking the domain-specific approach have argued that there is a dedicated, innate theory of mind system with specialized mechanisms that process mental representations about one's own and other people's beliefs. On the domain-general side of the debate, the proposal has been that false belief understanding develops gradually through the development of general cognitive functions. For example, children develop understanding of alternative representations of the world and improve in their executive control skills of cognitive inhibition and working memory, enabling the development of both mental state and non-mental state reasoning.

The debate between domain-specificity and domain-generality of false belief understanding was first tested empirically by comparing false belief tasks with a false photograph task testing understanding of representation in the non-mental domain. In contrast to poor performance on the false belief task, children with autism excelled on the false photograph task. However, the ‘formally identical’ nature of the false belief and false photograph tasks was challenged on the grounds that a ‘false’ photograph is not actually ‘false’ but an outdated and true representation of an earlier situation. In contrast, the false belief is a misrepresentation of the current reality. In order to properly test the domain specificity debate therefore, another task was devised—the false sign task, which like the false belief, misrepresents current reality. In the standard false sign task, a scenario is enacted in which children see a signpost that indicates an object in location A. For example, an arrow-shaped sign indicating an ice cream van points to its location at the village playground but then the ice cream van is moved to location B, the church, and children are asked, ‘Where does the signpost show that the ice cream van is?’

The results of a series of studies with typically developing children showed that performance on the false sign task strongly correlated with performance on the false belief task, even when age and performance on the false photograph task was controlled. Importantly, training studies with typically developing children aged 3–5 years also demonstrated that learning in one false representation task is potentially transferable to the other task; by contrast, performance on the false photo and false belief tasks are not transferable. The first study that was carried out with children with autism used a different, but structurally similar (false signal) task. Results showed that 10-year-old children with autism, matched for mental age with typically developing children, performed as poorly on this signal task as they did for the false belief task. However, given that the false sign/signal tasks required complex language processing skills, it is possible that poor performance might be explained by this factor. The subsequent design of a new non-verbal false sign task, therefore, offered the opportunity to test false sign understanding without complex language demands or the need to inhibit where an object really is.

A non-verbal false sign task by Iao and co-workers used a non-verbal version of the false belief task that had previously shown selective impairments in children with autism compared with children who had Specific Language Impairment. In this non-verbal false belief task, an object's location is hidden to the child and the child has to find the object. In a video version of this task, an object was placed in one of two boxes. A woman in the film saw where it was hidden, while participants did not. The object's location then continued to be unknown to the participant throughout the test trial. For the test trial, the woman then left the room and the boxes were swapped in her absence, creating a false belief in the woman. When she returned, she briefly placed a marker on the box to indicate the location that she thought contained the object, and removed the marker again. The participants then had to locate where the object really is, which required taking into account the box swap and the woman's resultant false belief to correctly locate the object in the box that the woman had not marked.

Performance on this task was compared with an equivalent non-verbal false sign task. An electrically operated arrow-shaped signpost was positioned on a table between two boxes. In a brief training phase, children were familiarized with the operation of the signpost and quickly acquired the contingent link between the activation of the signpost direction and the location of an object in a box. In the test phase, as in the false belief task, an object was hidden in one of two boxes; the child did not know in which box the object was hidden. Participants could see the boxes on each side of the signpost but the signpost was covered by a screen. The signpost turned behind the screen towards one of the two boxes (the participant heard the usual sound of its activation but could not see or identify which box it turned to). The signpost was then switched off so its direction remained fixed. The locations of the two boxes were swapped. The screen was then briefly removed to reveal the signpost's direction and covered again. In order to correctly locate the object in the box, participants had to take into account the direction of the false sign and the swap of the boxes. Results showed that children with autism (verbal age 4–10 years) performed like the younger 3- to 5-year-old typically developing children. They failed both the false belief and false sign tasks while older 5- to 7-year-old children typically passed both. Additional experiments demonstrated a close correspondence between performance on non-verbal and standard verbal versions of both tasks. Furthermore, performance on executive functioning control tasks showed that children with autism competently grasped other cognitive demands of the task including being able to inhibit a prepotent response and being able to use working memory to coordinate and recall the information components. Therefore, we argue that this evidence joins a growing body of other evidence (for example research measuring understanding of identity) which supports the case for a domain-general difficulty. Hence understanding of belief does ‘not develop within an isolated domain but in unison with other domains that share needed conceptual abilities'.


A domain-specific impairment in implicit theory of mind?

How does the evidence for a domain-general impairment in understanding false belief, compare with recent evidence from several studies that measure implicit false belief reasoning? The two-system interpretation of theory of mind described by Apperly & Butterfill provides a distinction between fast, automatic implicit processes and later developing, slower and more effortful explicit cognitive processes. Evidence of children's anticipatory looking behaviour during false belief tasks has been used to make the proposal that even typically developing infants can correctly ascribe implicit false belief even though they cannot give correct answers to direct questions in standard false belief tasks. By contrast, individuals with autism consistently have difficulty even on implicit false belief tasks.

In a series of implicit false belief studies, Senju and colleagues used an anticipatory looking paradigm, with individuals who had autism including adults, children aged 6–8 years (verbal age 3–12) and 3-year-old siblings at risk of autism and other conditions. In the Southgate–Senju task, participants watched a video in which a puppet placed the ball in one of two boxes, overseen by an actor. However, when a phone rang behind her, the actor turned behind and, while her back was turned, the puppet transferred the ball to a second box, then removed it, and then disappeared altogether. Participants were then presented with an audio-visual cue. They had previously learned in a familiarization trial that this cued a window to open and the actor to reach her hand through the window to retrieve the object. Results showed that even before the window opened, the typically developing 2-year-olds made correct anticipatory looks to the window above the box where the woman last saw it, even though in reality there was no object in either box; individuals with autism showed no bias for looking towards either box.

How should we compare the poor performance of individuals with autism on the Southgate–Senju task and the equally poor performance on the non-verbal false representation (false belief and false sign) tasks described above? Different explanations seem to be required. Although all these tasks were non-verbal and were designed to control for difficulties in language and executive functioning demands, if we follow the interpretation of the two-system account above, only the Southgate–Senju task qualifies as a candidate for implicit theory of mind (fast, automatic) while the other tasks would count as explicit (slow, effortful) tasks. In support of this conclusion, a series of anticipatory looking and explicit reasoning studies carried out by Low with typically developing children showed that while implicit knowledge (anticipatory looking) was related to explicit reasoning, the capacity to pass explicit false-belief tasks was exclusively related to other skills such as higher order cognitive flexibility, representational understanding and complex language processing.

The results of ‘implicit’ theory of mind studies then may lead us to an assumption that individuals with autism have a problem with attributing belief spontaneously, in a rapidly changing social situation. However, a major criticism of the Southgate–Senju task is that it does not actually provide evidence of the attribution of false belief in typical children. Nor does the task necessitate the attribution of more simple mental states such as ‘know’ or even ‘see’. Instead it is possible to use anticipatory looking to ‘pass’ this task, by means of ‘behaviour rules’. These behaviour rules include keeping track of the direction in which agents look and forming an ‘experiential record’ of how agents behave. One interpretation of the Southgate–Senju results therefore could be that individuals with autism had difficulty in tracking an agent's looking behaviour to different locations. By contrast, typically developing infants were able to quickly track the actor's head direction (indicated by the angle of the peak of the actor's visor). By tracking this association between left/right head direction and linking it to object location in the test trials, the typically developing child could consolidate a learned association already established in the four previous familiarization trials.

Nevertheless, even though this task does not provide evidence of attribution of ‘false belief’ or any other mental state for that matter, one might argue that the capacity to pass the task by tracking social cues highlights the potential power of social attention for typically developing children and the absence of this capacity for children with autism. Interestingly, however, the Southgate–Senju eye-tracking data do not fully support the hypothesis that children with autism fail to correctly anticipate due to failure to track where the actor is looking. Results showed that although participants with autism did show less spontaneous gaze checking of the actor's face, when this was statistically controlled for in the analysis, the group difference in anticipatory looking towards the correct box still remained. Several other interpretations are possible for the pattern of performance. One possibility that I expand on below is that the individuals with autism had difficulty spontaneously allocating attention to the box when the connecting link between social cue and target object was disrupted. Another proposal made by Heyes is of memory interference as children were distracted by the telephone ringing and head turning and failed to encode or recall the object's last location. The typically developing children resorted to looking to the location where they themselves had last seen the object and individuals with autism responded randomly with no reliable basis for predicting which window to look towards.

Heyes argues further that the bias to track human directional movement does not need to rely on a domain-specific social mechanism; non-social directional cues such as arrows also capture and direct attention to the same extent as heads and eyes. When tasks are designed to test implicit theory of mind (in this case, the mental state of ‘seeing’) by including control tasks such as a directional arrow cue or a non-human agent, no differences between social and non-social conditions are found. Typically developing adults and even adults with autism perform similarly in both the conditions. To date, however, direct tests of the domain-specific hypothesis of implicit mental states understanding (e.g. belief, seeing and knowing) are few and have been confined to able adults. Meanwhile the domain-specific view has been generally accepted, particularly in the form of the impaired social attention hypothesis of autism. I review evidence for the social attention hypothesis below, before returning to domain-general approaches to autism.


An impairment in social attention?

So far, I have made the case that understanding of ‘explicit’ representational false belief involves an appreciation of the relationship between a representation and what it represents and argued that false belief difficulty in children with autism reflects a domain-general impairment that applies to both mental and non-mental representations. I have also supported the ‘lean’ interpretation that correct anticipatory looking during ‘implicit’ false belief tasks does not provide evidence of ability to attribute beliefs or possibly any other mental state. Instead, the lack of correct anticipatory looking in these tasks might be explained by an inability to keep track of others' behaviour. This might be because of a lack of social attention or possibly because of a domain-general impairment that is not specific to social stimuli.

While domain-specific explanations propose innate, maturational, mechanisms that are specialized for handling mental representations, social attention accounts propose that reduced social attentional biases lead to reduced opportunities for experiential learning. These accounts have focused on ‘low-level’, bottom-up social cognitive processes, and their arrival has corresponded with a move towards more social constructivist and social cultural explanations of autism. Taken together, social attention accounts propose that children with autism fail to preferential orient to people due to impairment in the developing social brain network responsible for the processing of faces, human voices and biological motion, and impaired social reward preferences. The resultant impoverishment in social information input, lack of social experience and reward from social engagement and lack of coordinated joint attention activities with others then has a cascading or downstream effect that compromises the development of cognitions such as theory of mind.

Although evidence for social orienting impairments in infants and in older children and adults has been extensively cited, it is important to remember that poor social gaze to faces, social initiation and lack of gaze following and pointing are already common clinical symptoms of autism by the time of diagnosis at 2–3 years, helping to assign children to the grouping of autism. If the goal is to provide an underlying explanation for these symptoms, it is important to avoid the circularity in simply re-describing them. One approach that helps to reduce this circularity is a longitudinal approach, which aims to identify social-specific behavioural or neural markers in the first year of life as independent predictors of diagnostic symptoms before these diagnostic symptoms actually appear. Another approach is to use experimental tasks that include both social and non-social stimuli.

Surprisingly, longitudinal findings taken from a range of measures of social orienting and social reward indicate very few differences between at-risk infants who are later diagnosed with autism, and typically developing infants in the first year of life. A recent review reported that basic aspects of orienting and reward (e.g. scanning of faces, preference to look at the eyes, response to still face) are intact in at-risk infants when they are six to nine months old and even as young as two months, contradicting claims of an innate social orienting or theory of mind impairment from birth. Evidence from event-related potentials (ERP), at six to nine months old, do indicate failure to distinguish gaze direction, a result that is not replicated in terms of impaired behavioural gaze-following however until after 12 months when infants followed gaze but looked less to the gazed-at object. As the control tasks in these ERP studies did not include non-social directional cues it is not clear if the earlier difficulty reflected a general or specific response to a directional cue.

The limited range of evidence supporting both social and non-social impairments makes it difficult to draw strong conclusions. The findings above do not show that there is early social attention impairment in the first year of life in children who are later diagnosed with autism. This indicates that the domain-specific social attention account of innate social orienting or early learning in the first year is unlikely to be supported. Other longitudinal evidence taken from typically developing children does show that anticipatory looking (‘implicit theory of mind’) at 18 months predicts false belief reasoning at 48 months. However, even these findings may also need not necessarily indicate conceptual continuity. Awareness of ‘behaviour rules’ in infancy that someone will look where an object is last seen may be useful for building the reconceptualization at an older age that someone will think an object is where he or she last saw it and will look where he or she thinks it is. However, in tasks involving locations, it may be that it is possible to also draw information from domain-general direction cues as described above. This is indicated by the finding that significant longitudinal relationships between 18-month-old implicit anticipatory looking and 4-year-old explicit false belief were found only for the location tasks and not for the contents-identity false belief tasks.

Experiments with older children and adults have used structured Posner-type gaze-cueing paradigms, in which a central face cue looks left or right followed by a peripheral target stimulus appearing to the left or right. Social-specific impairments have not been found for the autism group where non-social arrow cues provide a control condition. However, autism participants tend to respond more slowly in both conditions than ability matched control groups. These and other studies reveal that the gaze-following capacity itself is not missing. Many individuals with autism follow gaze, especially when an instruction is given. By pre-school age, they can make fine discriminations based on the angle of the other person's eyes, yet tend not to spontaneously follow gaze unless given an explicit verbal or sensory cue and have difficulty particularly at low developmental ages and when there is no visible target to ‘anchor’ their gaze. Such reliance on predictable cue-target links might indicate difficulty in the spontaneous initiation and allocation of attention.

Evidence of atypicality in attention allocation can be seen in free-viewing tasks even with adults, for example in the vanishing-ball illusion. In this task, a magician throws a ball into the air twice. His social cues misdirect one's expectations and attention so that when he makes a third throw, this time a fake throw, we ‘see’ a ball vanish in the air. Eye-tracking findings in adults with autism viewing this illusion showed that contrary to the predictions of the specific social attention hypothesis, they followed social cues and had typical patterns of fixation when looking at the magician's face and eyes. However, they were slower to launch their first eye movement to the face and had difficulty in fixating the fast-moving ball that he was looking at. Several other studies using either eye-tracking measures or electrodermal measures of non-social stimuli have reported delay in responses to the first presented stimulus. These results are consistent with results from Senju's adult findings for the ‘implicit’ false belief task of a group difference in first eye fixation, but the findings here suggest a more domain-general difficulty that is not specific to social stimuli.

Atypicality in sensory-perceptual and attentional processing is not only evident in adults, it is also evident in infants. Longitudinal findings of at-risk infant siblings in the first year of life who develop autism, show reduced visual fixation durations in spontaneous looking to a range of object stimuli at six to nine months old, indicating atypical attentional deployment at a very early age. Other studies show enhanced visual search ability at nine months in the detection of target items from an array of distracters. By contrast to this superior visual search, slowed disengagement of attention has also been found in 7- to 14-month-olds although at least five studies have not reported atypical disengagement in older children. A critical factor affecting disengagement performance is likely to be the stimulus presented. Dynamic moving stimuli of abstract form and strong colour and that have high stimulus interest value to the participant will increase the slowing of disengagement.

Recent domain-general approaches focus on atypical perception, attention, sensory modulation and arousal and aim to explain both diminished and enhanced abilities in individuals with autism at low and high levels of processing. For example, reduced multisensory facilitation and difficulties with competing information processing demands may help explain not only performance on particular visuo-spatial tasks but also on high-level reasoning tasks (e.g. false belief tasks).

Sensory symptoms across all modalities are highly prevalent in autism and delays in the allocation of attention may be exacerbated particularly when deviant or novel stimuli appear or in the presence of a strongly interfering stimulation. Even after attention has been allocated to a particular stimulus, individuals with autism may have difficulty with modulating their attention, particularly when stimuli are complex and changing. Understanding these kinds of difficulties is central to our understanding of clinical features of repetitive behaviour as well as to social-communication problems. Hermelin and O'Connor originally proposed that children with autism have difficulties in recruiting sensory input to make perceptual discriminations unless these are based on their own motor feedback. New research aimed at measuring neural correlates of sensory and also motor difficulties may help to revive this account and develop an explanatory approach that connects sensory, motor and social/emotional clinical features.


Conclusion: what are we trying to explain?

Despite theoretical changes in the study of autism in the last few decades, the goals of horizontal and vertical integration continue to be pursued. Primary symptoms are still elevated above secondary symptoms and ‘core’ underlying biological mechanisms are still sought to explain these primary symptoms. These assumptions are part and parcel of the way that causal models have traditionally been formulated for developmental disorders, but in the new movement away from domain-specific, localized and innate explanations, I propose that we avoid the temptation to swing completely back in time to an exclusive focus on the sensory-repetitive clinical symptoms and non-social cognitive processing as primary symptoms.

Instead I suggest that we loosen the goal of horizontal integration beyond the grip of primary impairments, and consider other forms of integration that link across different types of social impairment and across social and non-social symptoms. Atypical behaviours in the social domain include difficulty in quite different sub-type areas of social functioning. These include non-verbal communication, conformity to social conventions, sharing and empathic relationships, and atypical social approach, e.g. aloof, passive or one-sided styles of interaction. How should these social sub-types be understood in relation to each other outside of a domain-specific explanatory framework? Furthermore, atypical behaviours in the social domain must, by necessity, co-occur with restricted and sensory features in order that any autism diagnosis can be given. How do different subtypes of social functioning interact with different subtypes of restricted and sensory functioning not only at behavioural but also cognitive and neural levels of description? Research has not yet scratched the surface of this question although some researchers are beginning to move in this direction by dissecting features within the social domain that cross several neurodevelopmental or psychiatric disorders. Further work is needed across social and non-social domains if we are going to explain the social-cognitive impairment in autism in a domain-general context.

New ways of thinking about the goal of horizontal integration will lead to new ways of thinking about the goal of vertical integration. Neurocognitive models are now emerging that conceptualize alternative developmental pathways linking domain-general synaptic function to social and non-social autism symptoms and incorporating heterogeneity at both neural and behavioural levels. Developmental change is central to these models. Longitudinal evidence will be important in highlighting cases where there are early signs of sensory-perceptual and domain-general cognitive processing difficulties that do not develop into a clear-cut clinical presentation of autism. It has long been argued that developmental outcomes may not be determined by any particular critical underlying impairment but instead that elements within causal relationships are co-actional, with factors having a dynamic impact on each other across time. Therefore, we should retain a focus on the full range of clinically valid features of autism for insights on the integration of ‘social’ and ‘non-social’ cognition across development. Such insights are important not only for those who develop a clinical diagnosis of autism but also for those who do not.


From damage response to action potentials: early evolution of neural and contractile modules in stem eukaryotes

Thibaut Brunet, Detlev Arendt — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2016. PMC4685582, CC BY 4.0.

Eukaryotic cells convert external stimuli into membrane depolarization, which in turn triggers effector responses such as secretion and contraction. Here, we put forward an evolutionary hypothesis for the origin of the depolarization–contraction–secretion (DCS) coupling, the functional core of animal neuromuscular circuits. We propose that DCS coupling evolved in unicellular stem eukaryotes as part of an ‘emergency response’ to calcium influx upon membrane rupture. We detail how this initial response was subsequently modified into an ancient mechanosensory–effector arc, present in the last eukaryotic common ancestor, which enabled contractile amoeboid movement that is widespread in extant eukaryotes. Elaborating on calcium-triggered membrane depolarization, we reason that the first action potentials evolved alongside the membrane of sensory-motile cilia, with the first voltage-sensitive sodium/calcium channels (Nav/Cav) enabling a fast and coordinated response of the entire cilium to mechanosensory stimuli. From the cilium, action potentials then spread across the entire cell, enabling global cellular responses such as concerted contraction in several independent eukaryote lineages. In animals, this process led to the invention of mechanosensory contractile cells. These gave rise to mechanosensory receptor cells, neurons and muscle cells by division of labour and can be regarded as the founder cell type of the nervous system.

All the essential problems of living organisms are already solved in the one-celled … protozoan and these are only elaborated in man or the other multicellular animals.G. G. Simpson, The Meaning of Evolution, 1941.


Introduction

The intracellular composition of all living cells differs radically from that of extracellular fluids: the cytoplasm is richer in potassium, poorer in sodium—and, in particular, much poorer in calcium (which does not exceed 10−7 M in the resting cell but reaches 10−3 and 10−2 M in blood and seawater, respectively). The peculiar chemistry of the cytoplasm is often assumed to reflect the environment of the first cells. Indeed, based on their reconstituted membrane composition (rich in simple single-chain lipids), primitive cells were probably leaky to small molecules—their intracellular ionic balance thus necessarily matching the one of their environment. One such possible environment could have been geothermal fields. The composition of the primordial ocean itself is debated, but it could have been calcium-rich from the very beginning, or calcium could have accumulated as recently as 1.5 billion years ago. In any case, the presence of abundant extracellular calcium poses a special challenge to cellular life, as a high quantity of intracellular calcium is highly toxic to all living cells. One key reason is that energetic metabolism is universally phosphate-based (e.g. ATP hydrolysis and synthesis of nucleic acids release phosphate ions), but calcium readily forms insoluble precipitates with phosphate.

The evolving discrepancy between intracellular and extracellular chemistry forced concomitant adaptations of living cells. No known cell has altered its cytoplasmic composition to match modern environmental conditions but, instead, ways to maintain the old cytoplasmic chemistry in the new environment have evolved. The most prominent are active sodium and calcium efflux pumps: Na+ and Ca2+ efflux ATPases are widespread in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes, and are probable ancestral features of all living cells. Another shared strategy is concentration of calcium in specialized storage spaces, both intracellular and extracellular, like cell walls or skeletal structures. This discrepancy between the intracellular and extracellular medium has two further consequences: the necessity to isolate the cell content—by enclosing it in tight membranes, and quickly repairing any wound; and the necessity to maintain the transmembrane voltage close to its setpoint—as required for the integrity of membrane protein structure. These two protective mechanisms probably evolved in stem eukaryotes and set the stage for the evolution of a powerful signalling system: influx of calcium and membrane depolarization became the functional core of the later evolving nervous systems.

We reason here that the key signalling role of calcium-triggered depolarization in neuron and muscle physiology (where it controls, respectively, secretion and contraction), or depolarization–contraction–secretion (DCS) coupling, evolved from an ancient ‘emergency response’ to external calcium influx after membrane damage. We detail how controlled membrane depolarization and action potentials evolved from ancient voltage regulation mechanisms, and how they became coupled to the downstream responses such as ciliary beating and whole-cell contraction. Differential distribution of these functions among distinct cell types by division of labour finally gave rise to the configuration of modern neuronal and neuromuscular circuits in animals.


From membrane rupture to depolarization–contraction–secretion coupling

The control of actomyosin contraction by an increase in intracellular calcium concentration, pivotal in animal muscle physiology, appears to be an ancestral feature of eukaryotic cells. Actin, myosin and calmodulin are virtually universally present in eukaryotic genomes. Myosins are composed of a heavy chain containing the motor domain (with ATPase and actin-binding activities) and usually a light-chain binding neck domain. In most myosin families, the light chains are calmodulin proteins; in others, specialized calmodulin-related proteins have evolved—such as the essential and regulatory light chains of myosin II (MELC and MRLC). In all cases, the light chains contain an EF-hand calcium-binding domain. (Notably, the control of contraction by direct binding of calcium to the myosin light chain is lost in vertebrates). Besides animals, myosin-mediated cell contractions have been observed in amoebozoans and in the green algae Volvox and Chara. How did this tight and ancient coupling between calcium influx and actomyosin-based contraction originate?


Local contraction and secretion originated as a damage response to uncontrolled calcium influx

Calcium concentration is always much larger (usually about 105-fold higher) in the extracellular medium than in the cytoplasm. Intracellular Ca2+ concentration has to be maintained within a narrow margin because of the high toxicity of calcium ions (see above). Because of this extreme concentration difference, calcium is by far the ion with the steepest electrochemical gradient across the membrane.

Owing to this strong gradient and to its extreme toxicity, an influx of extracellular calcium within the cell is both the first detectable consequence and the main hazard of local membrane rupture. It is thus unsurprising that, in all eukaryotic cells studied, ‘wound healing’, i.e. membrane repair mechanisms are quickly activated upon local rupture, and are directly downstream of calcium ions. Two major responses are conserved across eukaryotes: (i) contraction of an actomyosin ring around the puncture, observed in both animals and plants; (ii) exocytosis of vesicles that seal the damaged membrane. The latter response is directly triggered by calcium activation of SNAP-25 and synaptotagmin, in a striking parallel to the mechanisms of neurotransmitter release. More specialized calcium-dependent proteins that control vesicle fusion in both membrane repair and neurotransmitter secretion were discovered later, such as ferlins (involved in auditory neurotransmitter secretion) and annexins (involved in catecholamine secretion by chromaffin cells). Membrane repair by exocytosis is observed in animals and in plants.

We propose that this wound healing response dates back to the last eukaryotic common ancestor (LECA) and was the first manifestation of a tight coupling of depolarization (through uncontrolled calcium influx), contraction and secretion, referred to here as DCS coupling. Membrane wound healing is a vital necessity for any eukaryotic cell which lacks a protective extracellular cell wall (as was the case of ancestral eukaryotes). There must thus have existed a strong selective pressure for the evolution of membrane repair from the very first stages of eukaryotic evolution onwards. Owing to its steep concentration gradient and high toxicity, there are good reasons for calcium in particular to be the wounding signal—rather than any other ion or molecule. Finally, calcium has remained the key trigger for actomyosin contractility and exocytosis in other functional contexts, including muscle contraction; in these more specialized cases, specific mechanisms are required for calcium influx or release (from the extracellular medium or internal stores) instead of calcium influx being passively forced by wounding. The general control of exocytosis by calcium release has indeed been confirmed in both plants and animals.


Anticipating damage: evolution of mechanosensitive Ca2+ channels

We propose that the next step in the evolution of eukaryote DCS coupling has been the recruitment of stretch-sensitive calcium channels, which allow controlled influx of calcium upon mechanical stress before the actual damage occurs, and thus anticipate the effects of membrane rupture. Indeed, ion channels of the TRP and Piezo families known to be mechanosensitive in animals were ancestrally present in eukaryotes, and all characterized members are either partly or uniquely calcium-permeant. The mechanosensitive role of Trp channels has been demonstrated both in animals and in the green alga Chlamydomonas, while bikont Piezo channels still await functional characterization—but mechanosensitive calcium incurrents (by mostly unknown channels) are broadly present in plants.

To prevent the actual rupture, the first role of mechanosensory Ca2+ channels might have been to pre-activate components of the repair pathway in stretched membranes. As another anticipatory step, actomyosin might have been pre-positioned under the plasma membrane (hence the cortical actomyosin network detected in every eukaryotic cell) and might have also evolved direct sensitivity to stretch: the ATPase activity of myosin is stimulated by tension via the small GTPase Rho and the ROCK kinase, which are also active in membrane repair. Once its cortical position and mechanosensitivity were acquired, the actomyosin network could automatically fulfil an additional function: cell-shape maintenance—as any localized cell deformation would stretch the cortical actomyosin network and trigger an immediate compensatory contraction. This property would have arisen as a side-effect (a ‘spandrel’) of the presence of cortical actomyosin for membrane repair, and quickly proved advantageous.


Evolution of amoeboid movement

Once covering the cell cortex, the actomyosin network acquired the ability to deform the cell by localized contraction. Actomyosin-mediated cell deformation is especially instrumental in amoeboid locomotion, in which part of the cytoplasm undergoes pulsatile contraction that project the rest of the cell forward. Based on the genomic study of the protist Naegleria, which has a biphasic life cycle (alternating between an amoeboid and a flagellated phase), amoeboid locomotion has been proposed to be ancestral for eukaryotes. It might have evolved in confined interstitial environments, as it is particularly instrumental for cells which need to move through small, irregularly shaped spaces by exploratory deformation. Amoeboid locomotion has recently been the focus of regained interest with the discovery that a surprisingly wide diversity of animal cell types (both embryonic and adult) can undergo a switch to fast amoeboid locomotion under high-confinement, low-adhesion conditions. This ‘amoeboid switch’ has been speculated to be evolutionarily ancient, and might recapitulate an ancestral protist escape response to pressure. One can hypothesize that, if stretch-sensitive calcium channels and cortical actomyosin were part of the ancestral eukaryotic molecular toolkit (as comparative genomics indicates), membrane deformation in a confined environment would probably trigger calcium influx by opening of stretch-sensitive channels, which would in turn induce broad actomyosin contraction across the deformed part of the cell cortex, global deformation and cell movement away from the source of pressure. Similarly, in migrating fish keratinocytes, stretching of part of the cell opens mechanosensitive calcium channels and triggers local cell retraction, possibly by actomyosin contraction. In Amoeba, cell contraction has been proposed to be controlled by local cell depolarization and calcium influx. One can thus propose that a simple ancestral form of amoeboid movement evolved as a natural consequence of the scenario outlined above for the origin of cortical actomyosin and the calcium–contraction coupling; once established, it could have been further elaborated. As a note of caution, the molecular mechanisms that mediate the amoeboid switch under pressure are still unknown. If they involved mechanotransduction by calcium influx, for example, via stretch-sensitive calcium channels, this would support our evolutionary hypothesis. Direct stretch-sensitivity of the actomyosin network (for example via ROCK) might also have contributed.


The control of flagellar beating by calcium

In addition to the actomyosin-based effector system, the LECA also possessed microtubule-based cilia. These were both sensory and motile, representing an independent sensory–effector system in a separate cellular compartment. Besides cAMP and cGMP, calcium plays a conserved role in the control of ciliary beating. It is thus tempting to speculate that, once calcium signalling had gained control over primitive forms of amoeboid movement, the same signalling system started to modify ciliary beating, possibly for ‘switching’ between locomotor states. In Naegleria, calcium signalling stabilizes the amoeboid phase at the expense of the flagellated phase. If calcium-induced ciliary arrest is ancestral for eukaryotes (which remains to be fully tested, see below), this might have been part of a calcium-mediated switch to amoeboid locomotion.

Calcium has a ubiquitous connection to flagellar/ciliary beating, and it is tempting to hypothesize that cross-talks between the incipient calcium signalling pathways and flagellar control were established early in evolution. However, the effects of calcium on cilia are highly taxa-specific and apparently fast-evolving, making ancestral reconstructions challenging.

In animals, calcium usually inhibits flagellar or ciliary motility: calcium induces ciliary arrest in mussel gill cilia, in ascidian gill slits and in embryonic epidermal cilia of sea urchins. In sperm cells of ascidians, sea urchins, siphonophores and snails, calcium bursts increase the asymmetry of flagellar beating and the swimming curvature, which serves to change direction during chemotaxis; in Ciona sperm cells, the calcium sensor has been shown to be calaxin, a protein that directly inhibits outer-arm dyneins, thus triggering beating asymmetry—showing that the response of sperm flagellar beating to calcium is inhibitory at the molecular level. Exceptions are known in vertebrates, such as the cilia of the vertebrate foregut (mammalian airways and frog oesophagus) or the flagellum of mammalian spermatozoa, which respond to calcium by increasing beating frequency. Another unique situation is known in ctenophores, where calcium induces ciliary reversal.

In other eukaryotes, calcium usually mediates a switch in the modalities of flagellar beating, but the details vary between groups. In the green alga Chlamydomonas, calcium induces a switch from asymmetric to symmetric beating—thus opposite to its effect in animal sperm. Confusingly, in two other green algae—Pterosperma and Cymbomonas—calcium induces an asymmetric-to-symmetric switch, similar to animal sperm. Sperm chemotaxis in the fungus Allomyces and the brown alga Ectocarpus requires calcium influx, like in metazoans, but it is unknown whether the mechanisms are comparable. Like ctenophores, Paramecium undergoes ciliary reversal in response to calcium. In the trypanosome Crithidia, calcium induces a switch in the direction of flagellar wave propagation, from tip-to-base (a trypanosome-specific propagation mode) to the (more canonical) base-to-tip direction. The molecules involved, when known, are equally disparate: the calcium sensor of the Ciona sperm flagellum, calaxin, is opisthokont-specific; conversely, the calcium sensor of Chlamydomonas, the light chain 4 of outer-arm dynein (LC4), is absent from opisthokont genomes.

This diversity of effects and mechanisms suggests that the ciliary response to calcium is relatively fast-evolving, which makes it difficult to deduce which effect (if any) calcium had on ciliary beating in the LECA. Possibly, in ancestral eukaryotes calcium induced a relatively simple switch (such as ciliary arrest, as still seen in many animal cells and in Chlamydomonas in response to high Ca2+ concentrations), which was then gradually modified into more subtle modulations of beating mode with a fast turnover of molecular actors mediated by differential addition, complementation and loss. Alternatively, control of cilia by calcium could have evolved convergently—but such convergence would then have been remarkably ubiquitous, as there seems to be no eukaryotic flagellum that is not controlled by calcium in one way or another. Testing these hypotheses will require better mechanistic understanding of ciliary control in the taxa already studied, as well as broader taxonomic sampling, for example including Naegleria, flagellated amoebozoa (such as Pelomyxa or Phalansterium) or flagellated fungi (Chytridiomycota).


The ciliary origin of action potentials

Ab initio, membrane depolarization by calcium influx was a gradual process. In excitable cells, however, the initial membrane depolarization is not immediately followed by homeostatic return to the setpoint; rather, depolarization is first actively amplified if it goes beyond a certain threshold, and then quickly terminated. This set of events is called an action potential. Action potentials are all-or-nothing electrical spiking events, which propagate in a regenerative and unidirectional fashion across the cellular membrane (or across the membrane segment that expresses the necessary channels, unidirectionality being due to channel inactivation)—thus allowing fast concerted responses to external signals. We propose here that the first context where this enhancement/binarization of depolarization evolved was the cilium.


Evolution of depolarization-activated calcium and sodium channels

Active amplification of depolarization requires the opening of voltage-gated channels permeant to external cations. The evolution of these channels was a prerequisite to the evolution of action potentials and, importantly, predated the LECA. The phylogenetic tree of voltage-gated-like ionic channels suggests that Na+- or Ca2+-permeant channels evolved by modification of the ancestral stock of voltage-buffering K+ channels, and that such modification happened twice: one lineage gave rise to the CNG and HCN families and another led to the emergence of the Trp channels, a family of mostly thermo- or mechanosensitive and calcium-permeant channels. Importantly, Trp channels represent the sister clade to the voltage-gated sodium and calcium channels (Nav and Cav) that are key to the generation of action potentials a). Nav/Cav channels have been identified in genomes of choanoflagellates, apusozoans (the sister-group of opisthokonts) and several bikont lineages, which makes a strong case that they existed in the LECA. The ancestral presence of voltage-gated Nav/Cav channels suggests that the LECA was able to support bona fide action potentials.


Evolution of voltage-gated ion channels

All transmembrane proteins of the VGL (voltage-gated-like) superfamily contain a central pore delimited by four identical domains. In the ancestral state, these four domains are made of distinct polypeptidic chains, and the channel thus forms by assembly of four subunits. It is assumed that the first ion channels were probably potassium-permeant channels of the Kir type (four subunits of a very simple structure: two transmembrane domains each). Indeed, similar channels are widespread in bacteria (KcsA) (a). Kir channels are ubiquitously expressed and respond to hyperpolarization by allowing potassium influx—so favouring reversal to the resting potential. Their voltage sensitivity appears indirect and due to voltage-dependent gating by Mg2+ and polyamines. The phylogenetic tree of voltage-gated-like channels suggests that, from these ancestral proteins, K+ channels with a more complex structures (four subunits of six transmembrane helices each) evolved, with direct voltage sensitivity (Kv) or sensitivity to calcium influx (KCa). Another branch led to the constitutively active and mechanosensitive channels of the two-pores K2P family (four transmembrane domains). Kv channels might predate eukaryotes, as candidate Kv channels are broadly detected in the genomes of both unikonts and bikonts (b)—as had long been assumed from electrophysiological evidence of voltage-dependent K+ currents in plants and protists. Moreover, similar (and possibly homologous) voltage-dependent potassium channels have been found in prokaryotes. It is likely that all these potassium channels ancestrally contributed to the same role: maintaining the resting potential and restoring it upon accidental or controlled depolarization (as in response to membrane damage or sensory calcium influx). This is indeed still the function of Kv channels in non-excitable cells such as lymphocytes. The sister-group of one Kv subfamily (Kv10–12) is a clade of influx cationic channels that acquired sodium/calcium permeability and gating by cyclic nucleotides or hyperpolarization (CNG and HCN families).

Sensory Trp channels have been reported in Chlamydomonas and one Piezo channel (of unknown function) is present in Arabidopsis, suggesting that their emergence predates the LECA.

The Nav and Cav channels acquired a peculiar one-domain structure (with all four domains joined into one unique polypeptidic chains instead of being distinct subunits) and have been proposed to be most closely related to the TPC family, a subset of Trp-like channels with an intermediate two-domain structure (thus suggesting a two-step tandem duplication history). (One voltage-dependent sodium channel detected in some bacteria, NaChBac, has a one-domain structure and might have evolved convergently to its eukaryotic equivalent).

The ancestral Nav/Cav channels were probably predominantly permeable to calcium, and functioned to amplify and propagate calcium influx upon excitation. Sodium permeability, once evolved, allowed spatial segregation of sodium and calcium channels: the sodium-permeant membrane portion specialized in propagating the signal (without undergoing the toxic and/or signalling effects of calcium), while the calcium-permeant portion specialized in responding. This is observed in bilaterian neurons, with Nav channels being preferentially localized along the axon and Cav channels being preferentially localized in the pre-synaptic active zone. The Nav and Cav families diverged before the last common ancestor of opisthokonts, as both can be detected in apusozoan genomes, together with mixed identity Nav/Cav channels apparently basal to the split. Early Nav family members were permeant to both sodium and calcium, and full specificity to sodium only evolved in bilaterians and in medusozoans, probably in line with more active lifestyles and faster movements.


The first action potentials and their function

Once Nav and Cav channels existed, action potentials were possible, and could spread in a regenerative fashion over the domain of the plasma membrane that contains these channels. Action potentials allow a fast, global binary response to depolarization over the whole membrane domain that expresses the right channel complement.

What could have been the ancestral function of action potentials? While amoeboid movement is probably ancient (as argued above), electrophysiological recordings of amoebae only indicate the involvement of graded potentials—unsurprisingly, as amoeboid movement relies on (graded) contractions of part of the cortex rather than a global binary response. Some cell-wide binary responses mediated by action potentials have been described in other protists—for example, the escape response of Stentor, Vorticella and Actinocoryne—but they involve highly specialized mechanisms and are probably derived. Action potentials of unknown function have also been detected in the green algae Chara, Eremosphaera and Acetabularia, and in the diatom Odontella.


Specialized calcium-controlled contractile systems.

In some eukaryotic lineages, the ancestral actomyosin system was complemented or replaced by other, more taxonomically restricted contractile modules that allowed even faster contractions. These are instrumental, for example, in escape response. Notably, in all known cases, control by calcium appears to have been retained. For example, many unicellular green algae, such as Platymonas, display a calcium-sensitive contractile protein, called centrin, as part of their striated ciliary rootlet, which, upon membrane depolarization and calcium influx, drives local membrane bending and flagellum protrusion/retraction. In Alveolata (a group which includes ciliates and dinoflagellates), the centrin-based system is hugely expanded into a cell-wide contractile apparatus, which is able to drive contraction of the entire cell in some ciliates (like Paramecium or Stentor), or of large specialized cellular structures—such as the piston of the dinoflagellate Erythropsidinium, or the stalk of the ciliate Vorticella which quickly retracts upon mechanical or photic stimulation. In fact, centrin has been discovered independently as part of the contractile apparatus of Vorticella, the spasmoneme, and given the name spasmin. Another mechanism for excitation- and calcium-dependent fast retraction evolved convergently in the rhizarian Actinocoryne and is mediated by catastrophic disassembly of microtubules. Both the centrin/spasmin system and the microtubule disassembly-based systems allow faster contractions during escape response than actomyosin. Both of these new mechanisms retained dependency on calcium, which might have facilitated continuous and stepwise complementation, and ultimately replacement, of actomyosin systems by these specialized mechanisms.

An interesting situation has been described in the green alga Chlamydomonas, where action potentials are exclusively detected in the flagellum, while the rest of the cell presents only graded potentials. Here, action potentials mediate a fast switch in flagellar beating. The Chlamydomonas voltage-dependent calcium-channel Cav 2 is restricted to the tip of the flagellum, while the mechanosensory TRP11 channel is present at its base. This peculiar organization explains the restriction of action potentials to the flagellum in Chlamydomonas and provides functional insights into the organization of the single-celled sensory–effector arc: external mechanical signals are detected at the flagellar base (where active bending is restricted), and action potentials spread quickly along the whole flagellum (but not the rest of the cell) to allow fast and coordinated beating reversal upon stimulation.

Several lines of evidence suggest that action potentials—and the corresponding Nav and Cav channels—evolved in the context of the flagellum. First, in Paramecium as in Chlamydomonas, Cav channels are exclusively detected within the membrane of the cilia. Second, and most important, loss of Nav/Cav channel has been prevalent during eukaryotic evolution—and almost perfectly correlates with cases of secondary loss of flagella. This strongly suggests that flagella are the primary locus of action potentials in most protists. (Note that electrophysiological recordings in some ciliated or flagellated protists, such as Paramecium (as shown in), only showed graded potentials, but that, like in Chlamydomonas, action potentials might be restricted to the flagellar or ciliary membrane, which has not always been recorded).


Towards the animal nervous system

We thus propose that, in ancestral eukaryotes, the cell body membrane only showed graded potentials, while action potentials were restricted to the cilia/flagella. However, in several eukaryotic lineages, regenerative propagation of action potentials has been described—for example, in protist escape responses and in groups forming unusually large colonies or syncytia (such as fungal hyphae and the vascular tissues of land plants), where action potentials appear to be specifically involved in long-range communication. Finally, in animals, action potentials spread from the cilium to a large part (or the totality) of the electrically excitable cell (neurons and myocytes).


The birth of mechanosensory–contractile cells

When did this shift in the spreading of action potentials from flagella to the cell body occur, which was key to the evolution of animal nervous systems? Choanoflagellate electrophysiology is undescribed, and it would be interesting to know whether action potentials are restricted to their flagellum or also invade the cell body. Regarding sponges, the data is equally scarce. Interestingly, functional assays suggest that cellular sponges lack action potentials, as well as the ability to stop the flagellar beating of choanocytes, and Kv and Nav channels appear lost from the Amphimedon genome (but some Cav are retained). This suggests that spreading of action potentials beyond the cilium may have only been acquired after the sponge lineage diverged from other animals—and that cellular sponges underwent some degree of loss of electric excitability when they lost the ability to control flagellar beating. The only exception appears to be the syncytial glass sponges, in which global arrest of flagellar beating is coordinated by action potential propagation along the syncytium.

In ctenophores, action potentials have been recorded from the cell bodies of the large ciliary comb cells as well as muscle cells (see below); and in most eumetazoans, action potentials are likewise detected in other cell parts beyond the cilium—most prominently, the neuronal axon or the whole sarcolemma of contractile cells. This has enabled global cellular responses such as concerted contraction, representing the birth of mechanosensory–contractile cells, that act in the context of a whole-tissue contraction (rather than in a cellular context as found during amoeboid movement, see above).

How did this spread occur? A tantalizing possibility (depicted in) is that, in early mechanosensory–contractile myoepithelial cells, the action potential was regeneratively propagating along the whole cell—across the entire apical and basolateral membranes until it reached the basal contractile process. Such cell-wide action potentials have indeed been proposed to exist, for example, in bipolar spider mechanoreceptors, where action potentials originate in a sensory dendrite, and are propagated to the soma and the axon. Alternatively, the electric signal might have been passively conducted across the soma and re-amplified in the basal contractile parts of the cell.


Evolution of neurons and myocytes by division of labour

In extant ctenophores, cnidarians and bilaterians, action potentials have been recorded from neuronal cell types as well as diverse myocytes, corroborating the idea that muscle cells and neurons arose from mechanosensory–contractile cells by division of labour. Following this scenario, various sensory, secretory and contractile modules and functions were segregated to different cell types, so that the depolarization–secretion and depolarization–contraction couplings became the functional core of neuron and myocyte physiology, respectively. Action potentials would have been selectively retained where there is a need for either cell-wide all-or-none response (such as muscle contraction) or long-range propagation (such as along axons).

Myocytes specialized on converting calcium signals into contractions. In line with that specialization, additional molecular actors have evolved in animals to confer heightened calcium sensitivity to myosin—including the myosin light-chain kinase (MLCK) controlled by calmodulin (at the base of Metazoa), troponin C (in the striated muscles of bilaterians) and caldesmon (in the smooth muscles of vertebrates). In vertebrates, these upstream regulators have entirely taken over, as direct sensitivity of myosin to calcium has been lost. Myosin evolution thus illustrates the frequent theme in molecular evolution of irreversible increase of complexity by evolution of redundant mechanisms within a pathway, followed by differential loss of function between its components.


Conclusion

A clear pattern is emerging that the complex electrical signalling mechanisms of animal neuromuscular circuits emerged from similar properties in single-celled eukaryotes, and that those ultimately derive from emergency responses to accidental events such as cell wounding. Over evolution, our cells acquired the ability to mimic these accidents, by letting in external calcium ions from the environment (or releasing them from internal stores). We argue that the choice of calcium as a ubiquitous ‘informational ion’ can be ultimately tracked down to its high toxicity, and to the necessity to exclude it from the cytoplasm.

Our scenario is testable in several important ways. The role of the DCS coupling in membrane repair should be generally conserved in eukaryotes, beyond plant and animals. Stretch-sensitive calcium channels would be expected to play a role in pressure-induced switch to amoeboid locomotion. Flagellum- or cilium-restricted action potentials, with corresponding restriction of Nav/Cav channels, should be present in more groups besides Chlamydomonas and Paramecium. Increased taxonomic sampling should continue to reveal calcium-regulated switches in flagellar or ciliary beating across eukaryotes, and might help to determine the ancestral nature of this switch.


Embodied artificial agents for understanding human social cognition

Agnieszka Wykowska, Thierry Chaminade, Gordon Cheng — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2016. PMC4843613, CC BY 4.0.

In this paper, we propose that experimental protocols involving artificial agents, in particular the embodied humanoid robots, provide insightful information regarding social cognitive mechanisms in the human brain. Using artificial agents allows for manipulation and control of various parameters of behaviour, appearance and expressiveness in one of the interaction partners (the artificial agent), and for examining effect of these parameters on the other interaction partner (the human). At the same time, using artificial agents means introducing the presence of artificial, yet human-like, systems into the human social sphere. This allows for testing in a controlled, but ecologically valid, manner human fundamental mechanisms of social cognition both at the behavioural and at the neural level. This paper will review existing literature that reports studies in which artificial embodied agents have been used to study social cognition and will address the question of whether various mechanisms of social cognition (ranging from lower- to higher-order cognitive processes) are evoked by artificial agents to the same extent as by natural agents, humans in particular. Increasing the understanding of how behavioural and neural mechanisms of social cognition respond to artificial anthropomorphic agents provides empirical answers to the conundrum ‘What is a social agent?’


Introduction

Numerous cognitive mechanisms are involved in human social interactions, illustrating the high social competence of our species. The mechanisms of social cognition are often subtle and implicit. The second-person approach of social interaction stresses the importance of natural social interaction protocols for understanding the way the human brain uses these mechanisms of social cognition. The challenge with using second-person perspective, however, is that the experimental protocols lose some of the experimental control offered by more traditional observational approaches. In this context, we postulate that using artificial agents, in particular embodied real-size humanoid robots such as CB, to study human social cognition offers a perfect compromise between ecological validity and experimental control. Artificial agents allow for manipulation of various characteristics of appearance and/or behaviour and for examining what impact those manipulations have on the mechanisms of human social cognition. In support of this idea, Sciutti et al. argued that using humanoid robots is beneficial for examining how observers understand intentions from movement patterns of the observed agents thanks to the ‘modularity of the control’ [p. 3]. Modularity of control means that it is possible to decompose precisely and reproducibly robot movements into elements, an impossible endeavour for a human, and to examine separately the contribution of each of the elements to how observers understand intentions.

Importantly, while allowing for experimental control and manipulation, artificial agents offer certain degrees of social presence and realism, in contrast to more abstract or simplified stimuli such as schematic faces.

Artificial (embodied) agents can be used in the study of social cognition in a twofold manner. They can play a role of ‘stimuli’, or agents that participants observe/interact with; or they can serve as embodied models of social cognition. In the first case, embodiment is critical for studying social cognition due to the fact that real-time interactive scenarios with an embodied agent are crucial for mechanisms of human social cognition, while in the second case, serving as models of social cognition in a naturalistic social environment, they also need to be embodied. This paper will focus only on the first case: artificial embodied agents used as ‘stimuli’ in studying social cognition.

The paper will review several behavioural and neural mechanisms of social cognition examined with the use of artificial agents and humanoid robots in particular. First, in §2, low-level mechanisms of social cognition (such as motor and perceptual resonance) will be reviewed in the context of whether they are evoked by interactions with artificial agents. In §§3–5, the paper will describe mechanisms gradually increasing in hierarchy, up to the level of higher-order cognition, such as mentalizing or adopting the intentional stance. Most importantly, the paper will attempt to answer the question: can we be ‘social’ with agents that are of different ‘kind’ than our own species, and in particular, if they are not a natural kind but man-made artefacts. The paper will conclude in §6 by summarizing the benefits of using artificial agents for the study of social cognition.


Action–perception coupling

One of the key mechanisms of social cognition is the ability to understand other agents' actions. Understanding others' actions is based—at least partially—on the activation of action representation by the observer. Therefore, perception and action systems are tightly coupled to allow for processing of perceptual information and motor control in an integrative manner. This has been postulated by theories inspired by the ideomotor perspective. For example, proponents of the ‘theory of event coding’ or the general ‘common-code’ perspective claim that action and perception share a common representational code. The discovery of mirror neurons tagged a common neural mechanism for action and perception domains and provided evidence for the common coding hypothesis, which posits that observing an action automatically triggers activation of action execution representations. Interestingly, mirror neurons are also active when the meaning of an action can be inferred from sounds or other hints. These findings have been taken to support the idea that the mirror neuron system plays a functional role for action understanding. Some authors have proposed that the mirror neuron system is responsible not only for action understanding, but also for imitative learning and may even provide a basis for communication and language acquisition. Because of common coding, action observation impacts activity in the motor system of the observer (motor resonance).


Motor resonance

A consequence of motor resonance is that seeing an action hinders the execution of a different action (motor interference) and facilitates the execution of the same one (automatic imitation). This property was used in two series of behavioural experiments using humanoid robots to investigate factors influencing motor resonance. In one series of experiments, participants performed continuous arm movements in one direction while observing another agent performing continuous arm movements in the same (congruent) or an orthogonal (incongruent) direction. Because of motor interference the movement was less stable in the latter condition, so that the ratio between movement variance in the incongruent and congruent conditions was used as a marker of motor resonance. Originally, this paradigm supported an absence of motor interference when the observed agent was a robotic arm. Using the humanoid robot DB instead of an industrial robotic arm, the same paradigm indicated that a humanoid robot actually triggered a motor interference effect, though reduced compared with a human. In a follow-up study, Chaminade & Cheng reported that the interference effect disappeared if the humanoid body was hidden by a cloth, therefore reproducing the original finding.

Another series of experiments used a hand-opening paradigm. Participants had to perform a hand-opening or -closing gesture and the onset of the movement was cued by the observation of a human hand or robotic claw opening or closing. Automatic imitation was evidenced by an increased reaction time when the observed and executed gestures were incongruent compared to congruent, and was larger for human than for the robotic stimuli. Manipulating participants' beliefs about the nature of the agent controlling the movement, showing a human hand while pretending it was a robot control, did not result in top-down influence on the interference effect. By contrast, repeated exposure to the robot in the congruent condition eliminated the increase of this effect for humans.


Action-related bias in perceptual selection

Wykowska and co-workers investigated how action planning influences early perceptual processes in the visual domain. A series of experiments consisted of a visual search task for size- or luminance-defined pop-out targets combined with two actions: grasping and pointing. The paradigm created two congruent perception–action pairs according to ideomotor theories: size-grasping and luminance-pointing. The results showed congruency effects in behaviour, with better search performance when size was coupled with grasping (as compared to pointing) and when luminance was combined with pointing (relative to grasping), as well as in event-related potentials (ERP) of the electroencephalogram (EEG), with action-related modulation of early attention-related ERP components. These results are in line with previous findings of Fagioli et al. in which processing of perceptual dimensions of size and location was biased with respect to pointing and reaching actions. Interestingly, in a later study, the authors showed that mere observation of an action performed by others (without execution of the action) is sufficient to elicit an effect of action-related bias on perceptual processing.

The congruency effects observed in as well as in were replicated when robot hands were used as stimuli. Participants were also asked to perform two tasks—a perceptual task (a visual search task for a target defined by size or luminance), and a movement task—grasping or pointing. Similarly to, the design created two action–perception congruent pairs: size was coupled with grasping while luminance was coupled with pointing. The to-be performed actions were signalled either by robot-like or human-like hand stimuli. Action–perception congruency effects were observed both with robotic hands as well as human hands, which is in line with previous results.

A perceptual phenomenon related to motor resonance is perceptual resonance, the effect of the action people are producing on their perception of others' actions. For example, if participants have to judge the weight of boxes lifted by other people while lifting boxes themselves, the observed weights are under- or over-estimated depending on the weight of the participant's own box. These effects were preserved when the humanoid robot iCub was performing the lifting actions.


Motor resonance network

Neuroimaging provides tools to investigate how parietal and premotor areas of the motor resonance network, that correspond physiologically to the human mirror system, respond to robotic actions and, in turn, what the features of visual stimuli are that affect their response. Interestingly, an fMRI experiment in awake macaque monkeys demonstrated a somehow reduced, but still large, response of an anterior premotor area buried in the arcuate sulcus, and supposedly homologous to the anterior part of Broca's area in humans, to a robotic hand performing a grasping movement compared with a human hand. This clearly shows that the quest for mirror system responses to humanoid robots in human inferior frontal and parietal cortices is warranted. Historically, the first neuroimaging experiment using positron emission tomography (PET) reported increased response for the human, compared with the robot, in the left premotor cortex and concluded that ‘the human premotor cortex is “mirror” only for biological actions'. This has been contradicted by subsequent fMRI studies, and is likely to have its explanations either in the technique used, PET reducing the number of conditions and contrasts that can be run, or in the robotic device used. Subsequent fMRI experiments using a similar stimulus (robotic hand grasping an object) found parietal and premotor response to both human and robotic stimuli, and an increase in the response of dorsal and ventral premotor as well as parietal cortices in the left hemisphere. Similarly, a Lego robot dancing was associated with increased response in inferior parietal lobules bilaterally. By contrast, an electrophysiological marker of motor resonance, the mü rhythm suppression, was shown to be reduced when observing a robot's versus a human's action. Interestingly in the two fMRI studies, participants were explicitly required to pay attention to the action being depicted, but only implicitly in the EEG experiment, in which they were to count the number of times the movie depicting the action stopped. Another result indeed suggests that motor resonance in inferior frontal cortices is sensitive to task demands: response in bilateral Brodmann area 45 was significantly more increased when judging the intention behind the observed action (in that case, an emotion) relative to a more superficial feature of the action (the quantity of movement) for robot compared with human actions. This was interpreted as an increased reliance on resonance when explicitly processing the robot's movements as an intentional action compared with mere artefact displacements (see §4).

Altogether, this line of research suggests that motor resonance responds to human-like artificial agents, albeit this effect being reduced compared with real humans in some cases. In other cases the motor/perceptual resonance effect was at the same level for a humanoid robot as for a human. Thus, whether the motor/perceptual resonance effect is reduced when observing a robot as compared to observing a human might depend on the type of robot, its kinematic profile or the type of task being performed. fMRI results not only confirmed a reduction of activity in an area associated with motor resonance, but also demonstrated that this reduction could be reversed by explicitly instructing the participant to process robot stimuli as ‘actions', therefore demonstrating a complex interplay between processing of sensory information and internal state of mind in motor resonance towards humanoid robots. In sum, the existing body of literature related to the low-level mechanism of social cognition, namely the motor- and perceptual resonance, suggests that observed actions of human-like artificial agents can indeed evoke resonance mechanisms. This suggests that low-level resonance mechanisms are not completely sensitive to whether the interacting agent is of a natural or artificial kind, as long as the observed actions can be mapped to one's own motor repertoire. As perceptual and motor resonance are among the fundamental mechanisms of social attunement in interactions, it seems that fundamental (and implicit) level of attunement is possible also with artificial agents. But is it the same also for other mechanisms of social cognition, such as perceptual processing and higher-order cognition?


Perceptual processing


Early perceptual processing

Observation of actions executed by a robot, whether a full body robot dancing, a humanoid torso depicting emotions or a simple robotic hand and arm grasping an object is systematically associated with increased response in early visual areas of the occipital cortex compared with observing a human, including areas supposedly responsive to human form such as the fusiform face area. Interestingly, this fits with the predictive coding account of visual processing, in which part of the feed-forward information is an error of the local prediction. This error is larger for robots because of their imperfect human-like static and dynamic visual features. Interestingly, this increased response in early visual areas was no longer present in integrative areas, such as the temporo-parietal junction, that might actually respond to congruence between stimuli dimensions rather than the dimensions themselves. The congruence between form and motion in particular could be the source of the hypothesized Uncanny Valley phenomenon, which states that an embodiment that resembles a human but in an imperfect manner causes negative emotional response. By comparing brain response to an android (human-like robot) to that of the human after whom the android was modelled, or of the corresponding humanoid (mechanical robot), Saygin, Chaminade and colleagues reported an increased repetition suppression effect to the android in visual areas and regions of the action–perception system associated with attention (intraparietal sulcus). The actions of the android used in this experiment presented a clear mismatch between human-like appearance and robotic-like movements, putatively triggering an increased error signal in visual areas associated with these dimensions of the stimulus (in particular in the lateral occipital cortex) that induced increase in attentional resources recruited to resolve this discrepancy.


Joint attention

Another fundamental perceptual mechanism of social cognition is joint attention: the triadic coordination between at least two individuals and their focus of attention, wherein the individuals attend to each other and also to the content of their attentional focus, thus sharing attention. A large body of evidence has demonstrated that humans attend to where others attend (joint attention), e.g.. Joint attention can be established through, for example, following others' gaze direction. Capacity for joint attention is an essential component of the ability to infer mental states of others, and helps establishing a common social context, e.g.. Joint attention has been extensively studied using the gaze-cueing paradigm in which a face is typically presented centrally prior to the onset of a target in the periphery. Subsequently, the eyes are directed towards one of the sides of the visual field—a potential target position. In a typical gaze-cueing study, processing of the target (detection, localization, or discrimination) is facilitated when the gaze direction and target position coincide (validly cued targets), relative to when the gaze is directed elsewhere (invalidly cued targets); the difference in performance towards validly cued versus invalidly cued targets constitutes the gaze-cueing effect. The gaze-cueing effect has been considered to rely on a reflexive mechanism, being unaffected by whether a stimulus depicted a human or a humanoid robot.

In contrast to the accounts postulating that gaze cueing is a reflexive mechanism, it has been suggested that attentional orienting in response to gaze direction is susceptible to top-down modulation, e.g.. For instance, Teufel and colleagues showed that information about whether an observed agent could or could not see through a pair of goggles influenced automatic components of the gaze-cueing effect. Similarly, Kawai observed gaze-cueing effects only when participants believed that a potential target was visible to the gazer. Wiese, Wykowska and co-workers showed that observing a robot face as a gazer in a gaze-cueing paradigm induces joint attention, but to a smaller extent (smaller gaze-cueing effects) than observing another human. This is presumably not so much due to the physical characteristics of the face, but rather attribution of mind to the observed agent (see also §4). Interestingly, when a sample of individuals diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) was tested in a similar gaze-cueing paradigm, the pattern was reverse relative to when healthy participants were tested. That is, joint attention was induced to a larger extent (larger gaze-cueing effects) by a robot face, as compared to a human face, which is in line with previous findings that demonstrated a stronger visuomotor priming effect in children with ASD when observing a reach-to-grasp action by a robotic arm, relative to observing a human. The larger joint attention effect for robot faces as compared to human faces in a sample of individuals diagnosed with ASD led to the idea that joint attention can possibly be trained in individuals diagnosed with ASD with robot-assisted therapy. Kajopoulos et al. report results speaking in favour of that idea, namely that children diagnosed with ASD improved in joint attention after several weeks of interactive games with a pet-like robot, in which the children needed to follow gaze of the robot in order to complete a task inherent to the game (i.e. naming the colour of an object towards which the robot turned its head and gazed).

In summary, the collection of results of studies in which artificial agents have been used to examine early sensory processing and the joint attention mechanism suggests that while the early sensory processes of social cognition are typically not influenced by whether an interaction partner is a natural or artificial agent, engagement in joint attention is highly modulated by various factors: beliefs about the intentional agency of the interaction partner, or individual differences and social aptitude. Thus, in contrast to the lower-level mechanisms of sensory and motor resonance, which were activated independently of the type of observed agent, the higher in the hierarchy of cognitive processes, the more the processes are sensitive to whether the interaction partner is of the same ‘kind’ or not. One of the highest-order mechanisms of social cognition is the mentalizing process, or adopting the intentional stance. Do humans engage mentalizing processes or adopt the intentional stance towards artificial agents?


Intentional stance

In order to interact with others, we need to know what they are going to do next. We predict others' behaviour through adopting the intentional stance. When we adopt an intentional stance towards others, we refer to their mental states such as beliefs, desires and intentions to explain and predict their behaviour. For example, when I see my best friend extending her arm with a glass of water in my direction, I assume that she intends to hand me that glass of water, because she believes that I am thirsty and she wants to ease my thirst. By the same token, when I see somebody pointing to an object, I infer that they want me to orient my attention to the object. Intentional stance is an efficient strategy for predicting behaviour of intentional systems. However, for non-intentional systems, other stances, such as the design stance, might work better. For example, when driving a car, the driver predicts that the car will reduce speed when the brake pedal is pushed. Therefore, intentional stance towards others is adopted under the assumption that the observed behaviour results from operations of the mind.


Adopting the intentional stance towards artificial agents?

Neuroimaging techniques have provided evidence for brain regions related to adopting the intentional stance: the anterior paracingulate cortex as well as the medial frontal cortex, left superior-frontal gyrus and right temporo-parietal junction, among others. Adopting the intentional stance is crucial for many cognitive and perceptual processes, even the most basic ones that are involved in social interactions. For example, Stanley et al. observed that the belief as to whether an observed movement pattern represents human or non-human behaviour modulated interference effects related tocongruency of self-performed movements with observed movements. Similarly, ocular tracking of a point-light motion was influenced by a belief regarding the agency underlying the observed motion. Previous research demonstrated that mentalizing, the active process of reasoning about mental states of an observed agent, influenced numerous social mechanisms including perception and attention.

An experimental paradigm designed to investigate the neural correlates associated with adopting the intentional stance was adapted to assess whether such a stance was adopted when interacting with a humanoid robot. Briefly, participants in the MRI scanner played a stone–paper–scissors game while believing they were interacting with agents differing in terms of intentional nature. In the original paradigm, participants believed they played against a fellow human, an algorithm using specific rules, or a random number generator. Importantly, brain responses were always analysed when, unbeknownst to them, participants were playing against a preprogrammed sequence, so that only their belief about the intentional nature of the other agent affected physiological changes. Interacting with an intentional agent compared with a computer was associated with activation in the medial anterior prefrontal cortex, identified as a correlate of adopting the intentional stance. In more recent works the computer was replaced by a humanoid robot, and a similar medial prefrontal area was found to be more active for the human than the robot or random number generator, with no differences between the two, as well as in another area involved in thinking about other intentional agents, the left temporo-parietal junction. Interestingly, using a similar manipulation with another social game, the Prisoner's Dilemma, resulted in the same finding: areas associated with adopting the intentional stance in the medial prefrontal and left temporo-parietal junction were not activated in response to artificial agents, whether or not they were embodied with a human-like appearance. This effect was reproduced in a sample of young adults with ASD, while differences from control were found in the subcortical hypothalamus. Therefore, although robots can be used to train joint attention in children in ASD, the present results indicate that robots do not naturally induce an intentional stance in the human interacting partner either in the overall population, or in patients diagnosed with ASD.


The impact of adopting the intentional stance on joint attention

Wiese et al. showed that joint attention is influenced by beliefs that humans hold regarding whether the behaviour of an observed agent is a result of mental operations or of only a mindless algorithm. In a gaze-cueing paradigm, pictures of human or robot faces were presented. Gaze-cueing effects were larger for the human faces, as compared to robot faces. However, the effect was not related to the physical characteristics of the faces, because in two follow-up studies, the authors showed that mere belief about intentional agency of the observed gazer (manipulated via instruction) influenced the gaze-cueing effects, independently of the physical appearance of the gazer. That is, when a robot's gaze behaviour was believed to be controlled by another human, gaze-cueing effects were as large as for the human face. By contrast, when the human face was believed to represent only a mannequin, gaze-cueing effects were at the equivalent level to the robot face. In a follow-up study, Wykowska et al. investigated the neural correlates of this behavioural effect with ERPs of an EEG signal. The findings indicated that early attention mechanisms were sensitive to adoption of the intentional stance. That is, the P1 component of the EEG signal observed at the parieto-occipital sites, within the time window of 100–140 ms was more positive for validly versus invalidly cued targets in the condition in which participants believed that the gazer's behaviour was controlled by a human. This effect was not observed in the condition in which participants were led to believe that the gazer's behaviour was pre-programmed. This provided strong support for the idea that very fundamental mechanisms involved in social cognition are influenced when adopting the intentional stance.

The authors proposed the Intentional Stance Model of social attention. According to the model, higher-order social cognition, such as adopting the intentional stance towards an agent influences the sensory gain mechanism through parietal attentional mechanisms. In other words, adopting the intentional stance biases attention, which in turn biases the way sensory information is processed. In that sense, higher-order cognition has far-reaching consequences for earlier stages of processing, all the way down to the level of sensory processing.

In sum, both neuroimaging as well as behavioural studies suggest that higher-order social cognition, mentalizing, and adopting the intentional stance in particular, are influenced by whether humans interact with or observe natural agents versus artificial agents. Importantly, it is not necessarily the physical appearance of an agent that plays a role in these mechanisms, but often mere belief regarding its nature. Future research will need to systematically compare the effect of actual presence of an embodied robot to experimental protocols in which embodied agents are presented on the screen as pictures or videos. According to Schilbach et al., the actual embodied presence should evoke the mechanisms of social cognition in humans more naturally (and more similarly to natural human–human interaction) as compared to stimuli observed on the screen. However, other parameters could play a more substantial role in evoking mechanisms of social cognition, such as contingency of behaviour of the observed agent upon the behaviour of the observer.

As higher-order social cognitive processes are influenced by whether an agent is believed to be of a natural kind or artificial, this belief has an impact on how natural social interaction with artificial agents will be. As appearance itself is not the key factor in mentalizing or adopting the intentional stance, it is perhaps possible to imitate human-like behaviour in artificial agents, and thereby make mentalizing or adopting the intentional stance towards the artificial agents more likely. Before one can take such an approach, it is important to answer the question of whether the human brain is actually sensitive to the subtle behavioural characteristics of an agent.


Sensitivity to human-like behaviour

Perceiving others as of ‘natural’ or ‘artificial’ kind might be related to subtle characteristics of their behaviour. Whether the human brain has sensitivity for human-like behavioural characteristics of others is intriguing given the rise of artificial agents, and artificial intelligence in general. The question of what are the unique human characteristics has been addressed by philosophers with different perspectives on how humanness is defined. A ‘comparative view’ states that characteristics of humanness are those that separate us from other species in a category boundary. On the contrary, a non-comparative perspective states that humanness is based on features essential to humans, but not necessarily unique for humans. Both these views point out, however, that humanness can be characterized by certain distinguishable features.

There is ample empirical evidence showing that humans are sensitive to discriminating biological from non-biological motion. In a typical study addressing this issue, simple point-light dots are presented to participants with movement patterns modelled either after a biological or non-biological motion. Already infants are able to discriminate biological motion, which suggests that this ability might be in-born in humans. In the context of using robots as stimuli for studying social cognition, it is important to note that the brain's sensitivity to biological motion affects motor contagion, i.e. imitation of an observed movement pattern. Here, we will focus on sensitivity to more subtle characteristics of human behaviour: predictability of action patterns and temporal variability.


Predictability of actions

Human movement patterns typically constitute a predictable sequence. According to Schubotz & von Cramon, each action sequence has a ‘syntax’: a basic schedule that is fixed and mandatory (though tolerating some level of flexibility). Goal-directed actions follow a largely predefined pattern: a coherent sequence of steps, which makes actions relatively predictable. This allows for successful anticipation of possible future events through recognition of others' action sequences. Interestingly, as subtle characteristics of a movement differ dependent on an intention an agent has (e.g. different finger kinematics during reach-to-grasp with the intention to pour versus displace or pass), movement kinematics can allow predictions regarding what an agent is going to do next and can also be informative regarding the agent's intentions.

Inference of intentions plays a pivotal role in understanding and recognizing actions of others. In this context, humanoid robots have been postulated to offer a unique opportunity to examine how intentions are inferred from movement patterns. Some researchers postulated that if a robot motor repertoire is similar to that of a human, and if a movement pattern is modelled after typical human-like movements, then it is likely that this movement will elicit the same reactions in a human as other humans would. In that context, an interesting observation was reported in where the authors found that participants observing the humanoid robot iCub transporting an object, anticipated the action patterns similarly to when they observed a human. Therefore, the robot evoked automatic ‘motor matching’ and ‘goal reading’ mechanisms in the observers [p. 4].


Behavioural variability

Human actions are highly variable: for example, if our task was to produce a repetition of identical actions (both in terms of motor patterns and timing), we would not be able to do so. Variability in behaviour might be evolutionarily adaptive. Evidence supports presence of an optimal state of variability for healthy and functional movement. This variability has a particular organization and is characterized by a chaotic structure. Deviations from this state can lead to biological systems that are either overly rigid, or noisy and unstable. Both extremes lead to less adaptability to perturbations, as in the case of unhealthy pathological states or absence of skilfulness.

Wykowska et al. examined how much sensitivity the human brain has for subtle (human-like) temporal variability in Turing test scenarios involving humanoid robots. In several studies, participants were seated opposite to an embodied robot. The robot was programmed to point to or to gaze towards a stimulus on a screen. In one condition, the onset of the pointing/gazing movement was programmed and set to a fixed temporal delay relative to the beginning of an experimental trial. In another condition, this delay was given either by an actual key press of an experimenter seated in a different room, or was based on pre-recorded key press times of a human. Participants had to discriminate the ‘human-controlled’ from ‘programmed’ conditions, and were not instructed with regard to the hint they should use. The results showed that participants had above-chance sensitivity to human-like behaviour, although they were not aware of the hints on which they based their judgement. Hence, the human brain is sensitive to subtle characteristics of human-like behaviour, although this sensitivity might be implicit (i.e. not reaching the conscious awareness) and is related to a general individual social aptitude.

As the results described in this paragraph suggest that the human brain has sensitivity to human-like characteristics of behaviour, it might make sense to implement such behaviours in robots to make them appear more human-like. A more human-like behaviour might affect higher-order social cognition in such a way that artificial agents will be treated similarly to other ‘natural’ agents, which will then affect lower-level mechanisms of social cognition. In end effect, through an appropriate design of their behaviour, artificial agents might be made to elicit mechanisms of social cognition similar to those of other humans. Whether this is a desired outcome remains to be answered, taking into account ethical considerations. Do we want to aim for artificial agents to be treated as social interaction partners of the same kind as other humans? This question falls outside of the scope of this paper, but is an important one to raise for future debate.


Conclusion

To conclude, we postulate that using artificial agents (and embodied humanoid robots in particular) to examine social cognition offers a unique opportunity for combining a high degree of experimental control on the one hand, and ecological validity on the other. The state-of-the-art research which has been conducted with the use of artificial agents has uniquely informed the social cognition community about several phenomena of the human social cognition: (i) low-level processing of social visual information, including motor resonance, is preserved when artificial agents are observed instead of natural humans; (ii) by contrast, higher-order social cognitive processes are influenced by whether an agent is of ‘natural’ or ‘artificial’ kind; (iii) higher-order assumptions that humans have regarding the agents with whom they interact have profound consequences for even most fundamental processes of sensing and perception in social contexts; (iv) humans are highly sensitive, although often at the implicit level, to subtle characteristics of appearance and behaviour that indicate humanness. Therefore, ‘emulating’ human-like behaviour in artificial agents might lead to social cognitive mechanisms being invoked to the same extent as other human interaction partners would do. In sum, we propose that agents should be considered social when they can evoke mechanisms of social cognition in humans to the same extent as other humans do during interaction. This entails that social cognitive neuroscience methods involving interaction protocols with humanoid robots should be the preferred avenue taken when the aim is to provide artificial agents with features that increase their social competence.


Effects of cortical damage on binocular depth perception

Holly Bridge — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2016. PMC4901448, CC BY 4.0.

Stereoscopic depth perception requires considerable neural computation, including the initial correspondence of the two retinal images, comparison across the local regions of the visual field and integration with other cues to depth. The most common cause for loss of stereoscopic vision is amblyopia, in which one eye has failed to form an adequate input to the visual cortex, usually due to strabismus (deviating eye) or anisometropia. However, the significant cortical processing required to produce the percept of depth means that, even when the retinal input is intact from both eyes, brain damage or dysfunction can interfere with stereoscopic vision. In this review, I examine the evidence for impairment of binocular vision and depth perception that can result from insults to the brain, including both discrete damage, temporal lobectomy and more systemic diseases such as posterior cortical atrophy.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘Vision in our three-dimensional world’.


Introduction

Animals with front facing eyes see the world through two retinal images that are horizontally shifted with respect to each other. The retinal image is only the very first step in a visual pathway that leads through multiple brain areas towards perception. This is particularly the case for depth perception, as monocular information remains segregated until the primary visual cortex (V1) where neurons first receive binocular input.

In V1, there are neurons that have spatially offset receptive fields in the two eyes, which can detect the differences in the retinal images. However, a series of experiments have shown that the responses of these V1 neurons do not reflect perceived depth, but rather compute a local correlation between the two images. For example V1 neurons respond to the disparity in random dot stereograms (RDS) even when the dots are anticorrelated, that is, white dots in one eye are matched to black dots in the other eye, a stimulus that does not lead to perception of depth.

This initial binocular match made in V1 is further processed in V2, with neurons in that area appearing to show a spatial organization for near to far disparities, in addition to a specialization for relative disparity processing. Neurophysiological studies in the non-human primate have consistently found that ventral visual areas in the inferotemporal cortex (IT) show neuronal responses corresponding to stereoscopic depth perception. Specifically, neurons in IT respond to correlated, but not anticorrelated, RDS, suggesting that the correspondence problem has been solved, and are selective to relative disparity. Dorsal areas V3 and V3a, in contrast, appear to be activated by absolute disparity, rather than relative disparity.

Unlike the neurophysiological studies, human brain imaging has not highlighted V2 as a region showing specialization for disparity, although this is likely due to the scale of neuronal organization in the area which, at around 1–3 mm, is significantly below the resolution of standard functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; 3 mm voxels). Indeed, human imaging studies have indicated that dorsal regions appear to be the most consistently activated by disparity-defined stimuli. However, binocular disparity is only one of several cues to determining depth, and for a full three-dimensional percept it is necessary to integrate other binocular cues (accommodation and vergence) and pictorial cues (e.g. perspective, shading, texture gradients, occlusion) to depth.

The cortical regions responding to depth cues differ according to the specific combination of cues, and the information afforded. Cues related to object perception, such as three-dimensional shape from texture, are represented in the lateral occipital cortex (LOC) while those related to shading include a range of dorsal and ventral regions. Similarly, an earlier study indicated that the lateral regions of visual cortex are involved in processing the combination of disparity and perspective cues. Furthermore, using motion as an additional cue to depth leads to stronger responses in the region around hMT+ and the kinetic occipital area, indicating that these dorsal areas are also involved in the integration of such cues.

Thus, there are a number of critical processing stages required to produce a normal stereoscopic depth percept: (i) both eyes aligned and functional; (ii) control over the eye muscles and vergence to bring the images into alignment; (iii) initial matching of retinal images; and (iv) integration of disparity information to produce depth percept. While amblyopia is the most common cause of abnormal binocular vision (see for a recent review), this article covers the much less common deficits in stereoscopic vision resulting from damage to the post-chiasmal visual pathway.


Effects of cortical damage on binocular vision

The numerous areas of the human visual system activated by binocular disparity and stereoscopic depth are highlighted in. The widespread activation illustrates the apparent absence of specialized cortical areas to binocular disparity. This observation contrasts with the more localized pattern in which other attributes of the visual world, such as colour or motion, have been found. Area hV4 (sometimes referred to as V8) and additional ventral regions VO1 and VO2 show specificity for chromatic compared to achromatic stimuli. Specialized regions also exist in other visual domains such as hMT+ for motion, fusiform and occipital face areas and LOC for objects. Evidence from patients with damage to the occipital cortex provides further support for this functional specialization of visual areas. Damage sustained to the ventral occipital cortex can lead to prosopagnosia, achromatopsia or both. Similarly, object agnosia, such as in the case of the much studied patient DF, can result from damage to LOC, but also damage to ventromedial occipital cortex. There are very few cases of deficits in motion perception, but the most famous case, resulting in static snapshots rather than smooth motion perception, includes the region around motion area hMT+. While this severe case of akinetopsia was associated with bilateral damage, a few recent reports have indicated that this type of deficit may also arise due to unilateral parietal damage, or in a more subtle form following unilateral damage to hMT+.

A critical question relates to the type of lesion that might impact upon stereoscopic depth perception in a comparable manner. As the first site of binocular integration, V1 is obviously critical for detecting binocular disparity. However, damage to this region leads to cortical blindness, so any binocular deficits will not be possible to determine, particularly when the lesion is large. A key test for depth perception is whether the deficit affects local (the matching of individual elements of an image) or global (depth across the whole image) disparity processing. To identify neural structures contributing to stereoscopic depth perception, Cowey & Porter tested the ability of macaque monkeys to detect global stereopsis, rather than local matches, following cortical lesions. They compared performance following lesions to five different occipital regions: V1, V2 and three different regions of the IT. While lesions corresponding to the central region of V1 and V2 had no effect on the animals’ depth performance, the animals with lesions in IT showed impairment of disparity detection. The lack of effect of V1 and V2 lesions is likely due to the relatively small size of the lesions, as much of the stimulus would have been in regions of the visual field unaffected by the lesion. Thus, this experiment suggests that, as might be predicted by the more recent neurophysiological data, high-level ventral visual regions are necessary for stereoscopic depth perception. Cowey & Wilkinson found that IT damage also raised stereoacuity thresholds for line stimuli presented on the vertical midline. Furthermore, in contrast to the global task, they found that foveal lesions of V2 severely affected the animal's ability to perform this depth task which requires local stereopsis. However, the authors state that they do not know how the animals performed the task, as they were unable to measure fixation or vergence state. Moreover, the extent of other visual deficits in these animals is unknown, so the specificity of this type of lesion to stereoscopic depth perception remains to be determined.

Related to this early non-human primate work, there have been several investigations of the effects on binocular stereopsis of temporal lobectomy performed to relieve intractable epilepsy. The most extensive study was that undertaken by Ptito & Zatorre in which, analogous to the work described above, a distinction was made between performance on local and global tests of stereopsis. There was no disruption of performance on the test of local stereopsis in patients with either left- or right-sided lesions compared with healthy control subjects. To determine the level of global stereopsis, the authors used RDS with different levels of correlated dots, from 40 to 100%. All participants (including healthy controls) performed at chance with 40% correlation and all were above 90% correct when the correlation was greater than or equal to 80%. The interesting stimulus range was 50–70% correlation in which the temporal lobectomy patients performed significantly worse than healthy controls. Furthermore, those with right-sided lesions were slightly worse than those with left-sided damage. Thus, it does appear that global stereoscopic depth performance is impaired by damage to the temporal lobe, consistent with findings in the non-human primate. Given these behavioural effects, it would be beneficial to use MRI, both structural and functional, to visualize the exact location of the damage to correlate with these behavioural impairments.

While neurophysiological studies in non-human primates highlight the importance of the ventral visual cortex for stereoscopic depth perception, in human (and non-human primate) fMRI studies, dorsal regions such as V3a and V7 are consistently activated by disparity-defined depth stimuli. Consistent with such a dorsal pathway, one of the earliest reports of a loss of depth perception was in a patient with parietal cortex damage studied by Holmes & Horrax. The report describes difficulty in judging the distance of objects (that the patient often walked into) and a percept of the world as ‘flat’. Subsequent cases in which depth perception has been affected by bilateral damage to the parietal lobes have also been described, although the world is not necessarily described as ‘flat’. In the case study of Berryhill and colleagues, a patient with bilateral parietal lesions had significant impairment on tests of stereoacuity, but additionally was unable to successfully use monocular cues to depth, such as shape from shading, perspective or size. Thus, this is suggestive of a high-level cue integration impairment, such that it is not possible to integrate the various cues to depth, leaving considerable impairment in visual performance in the depth plane.

A potential explanation of the loss of depth perception leading to a ‘flat’ world is that it is due to a disruption of fusion in the horizontal plane. Schaadt et al. presented a patient with an extensive lesion to the right occipito-parietal cortex, who described his world as ‘flat’ such that all objects appeared an equal distance away from him. The patient had normal stereoscopic vision, as assessed by standardized tests (Titmus test and TNO test) but deficits in binocular convergence, i.e. he could not use his two eyes together to focus at a particular depth. Using a training paradigm with prisms designed to improve convergence, the patient reported regaining perception of the third dimension after six sessions, with full-depth perception after 12 sessions. The training did not change the stereoscopic performance, which remained good. It would be interesting to know whether this patient was also impaired in judging depth from monocular cues, as it is of interest to understand whether recovery was due to the unilateral nature of the deficit or whether such training can aid all types of depth perception problems.

A further condition in which there have been several reports of loss of binocular depth perception is traumatic brain injury (TBI). An early report by Hart described a series of patients who had suffered TBI and reported loss of fusion. Of the patients who suffered total loss of fusion, around half showed a full recovery. It is not clear what determined the outcome, but the involvement of the cranial nerves section controlling the extra-ocular muscles (III, IV and VI) is likely to be problematic. A more recent study indicated that a loss of stereopsis resulted from a variety of different types of TBI including both focal parietal damage and more diffuse injury with no obvious focal pathology. However, the correlation between loss of stereoscopic depth perception and measures of recall indicate that cognitive factors may also interfere with this type of stereoscopic testing. If the stereoscopic difficulties following TBI are related to fusion, then it may be that a retraining programme could improve depth perception in such patients. In the study of Schaadt et al., fusion training using prismatic and dichoptic devices seemed to improve fusion and binocular stereopsis in around half of the patients with TBI. This suggests that it might be possible to provide improvement in binocular vision in those patients who do not spontaneously regain binocular depth perception following TBI.

In summary, consistent with those areas predicted from the pattern of neural activation to disparity-defined depth, there are regions of both the ventral and dorsal visual streams that can interfere with depth perception when damaged. The extent to which the deficits are due to fusional problems remains to be determined, but this is most likely in the case of involvement of the cranial nerves.


Effects of visual agnosia on binocular vision

There is a general consensus that the primate visual system consists of two parallel, yet highly interconnected, streams: dorsal and ventral. Goodale & Milner suggested that these streams could be considered as a dorsal pathway for action and ventral pathway for perception. The visual behaviour of agnosic patient DF was one of the factors leading to this interpretation, given her ability to use visual information to take action, but inability to recognize objects. Since depth information is required in both streams, for object identification and spatial location in space, one could predict that some aspects of stereoscopic depth perception might be affected, while others remain intact.

Given the potential insight that such a lesion could provide, stereoscopic depth performance was studied in great detail by Read et al. over several years. They presented a variety of tasks, specifically quantifying DF's ability to use absolute and relative disparity. Indeed, they found that while her performance using absolute disparity was equivalent, if not superior, to naive control participants, her performance did not improve when relative disparity information was available. DF's ability to determine absolute disparity was maintained even when stimulus presentation time was decreased to prevent vergence eye movements, which could aid in this task. Furthermore, patient DF was able to integrate motion and disparity information to determine the direction of rotation of a transparent rotating cylinder. This stimulus is constructed of two planes of dots with sinusoidal velocity profiles in opposite directions. While this is perceived as a rotating cylinder, the direction of rotation is ambiguous, unless a disparity signal of opposite sign is added to the two planes. Previous neurophysiological data have shown that neurons in macaque motion area MT are selective for the direction of rotation, and stimulation of MT neurons can influence choice of rotation direction. Thus, it seems reasonable that the less impaired dorsal visual stream in DF is able to use binocular disparity in a comparable way to healthy controls.

The psychophysical testing of DF therefore indicated that she could use both absolute disparity and the combination of motion with disparity to determine binocular depth. However, she was considerably impaired at using any type of reference stimulus to improve performance. Whereas those with normal binocular vision can improve their thresholds for detecting stereoscopic depth by the addition of a comparative region, in this form of relative disparity, she does not appear to show any benefit.

To determine whether the disparity processing ability of DF was reflected in the neural activation of the occipital cortex, Bridge et al. used fMRI during viewing of a disparity-defined checkerboard (a). The disparity of each checkerboard square changed independently to a new value every second during the ‘disparity’ condition and was contrasted to a zero-disparity plane. b shows the activation in an example control subject and, similar to the activity in, this resulted in activation across considerable regions of the occipital lobe. Interestingly, in patient DF, despite her relatively good disparity performance and the fact that she could describe the stimulus, there is very little neural activity. The activity is confined to a small region of the ventral occipital lobe. It is not clear why the level of activity should be so low; the activity to a moving stimulus was considerably higher than that to disparity-defined stimuli, suggesting a general loss of neural activity or vasculature was not the cause. However, it may be that the network for detecting binocular disparity is reduced in activity level, but still able to contribute to perception.

While agnosic patient DF has been tested extensively on depth perception from stereoscopic information, there is little data to determine the effects of other, pictorial cues, on her overall depth perception. Interestingly, another agnosic patient, DM, showed considerable impairment on extracting depth information from pictorial cues. In particular, the patient was unable to extract three-dimensional structure from line drawings to discriminate ‘possible’ and ‘impossible’ objects or to perform three-dimensional object rotation. Unfortunately, stereoscopic depth perception was not tested in this patient, so it is not possible to compare the findings directly to DF.


The contribution of the corpus callosum to stereoscopic depth perception

Binocular stereopsis, as laid out in most of this article, is based predominantly on the direct projections from the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus, where the information from the two eyes remains separate. By combining these inputs on binocular neurons with slightly spatially offset receptive fields or with a shift in receptive field shape, an initial calculation of absolute disparity can be made. However, when the object containing disparity is located on the vertical meridian, the images of the object fall onto either the nasal retina of both eyes (far disparities) or the temporal retina of both eyes (near disparities). Thus, the images are projected to opposite hemispheres, as shown in. In this case, communication between the hemispheres is required to determine the corresponding points in the two images. Indeed, Berlucchi & Rizzolatti showed that following section of the optic chiasm in cat (thus eliminating the binocular overlap of the visual fields) a small minority of V1 neurons could be activated by stimuli presented to the contralateral, as well as the ipsilateral, eye. The monocular receptive fields lay close to the vertical meridian, in comparable locations, suggesting that these binocular receptive fields could also detect binocular disparities.

If the corpus callosum is absent or split, it should be possible to identify deficits of midline disparities, with preservation of stereoscopic depth perception across the remainder of the visual field. An early case study by Blakemore & Mitchell investigated performance in tests of binocular stereopsis in a young patient who had undergone surgical callosal section. Although this participant appeared to be unable to determine the relative depth of slit stimuli containing disparity when they were presented to the central visual field, but not peripherally, only a few trials were undertaken and there were no control data. Later work by Jeeves investigated stereoscopic depth performance in four patients, two of whom had the congenital absence of the corpus callosum and two had partial callosal sections. All were compared to control subjects with normal binocular vision. The patients with complete section showed deficits in stereoscopic depth perception tasks at the midline, but not in the periphery. Similarly, the single patient with partial section affecting the splenium also showed deficits that were not present in the patient with anterior section of the corpus callosum. In these three patients, stimuli were rarely perceived as behind fixation, suggesting that even distinguishing near and far disparities was challenging.

The macaque study of Cowey & Wilkinson described earlier also investigated the effects of splenium section on their stereoacuity task. Interestingly, they found no increase in threshold even though the task was presented on the vertical midline. However, without measurements of vergence and fixation, it is not possible to know exactly where the images of the stimulus fell on the retina.

Thus, the early human literature suggested a role for the corpus callosum on midline stereoscopic depth perception, while animal experiments have been inconclusive. A more recent study used a dichoptic plaid stimulus that required binocular integration in order to correctly perceive drift direction. The tasks were performed by two acallosal patients and a healthy control group, and monocular and binocular presentation of the stimulus were used as control tasks. While the patients lacking the corpus callosum correctly perceived locations in depth away from the vertical meridian, performance with the dichoptic viewing (requiring binocular integration) was severely impaired on the vertical midline. When stimulus size was increased, the patients improved their performance, presumably as the stimulus could then be processed by binocular neurons in the contralateral hemisphere alone. The visual evoked potentials recorded from the patients also showed abnormal patterns when the small, dichoptic stimuli were presented, consistent with the perceptual deficit.


Depth perception in bitemporal hemianopia

Homonymous hemianopia is a loss of vision in one hemifield, usually due to damage to V1, but also the optic radiation or LGN. By contrast, bitemporal hemianopia arises from damage to the optic chiasm, such that the nasal fibres taking information from the temporal retinae are damaged. While the loss of visual field in this condition is relatively small, the outcome is that V1 in each hemisphere only receives information from a single eye (the ipsilateral one), as shown in. Therefore, the only potential source of binocular integration is across the corpus callosum as described in the previous section. However, even using this information, any images projecting to the nasal retinas will be lost as the nasal projections are severed at the chiasm. Therefore, the only region in which there is potential binocular input is the crossed ‘near’ disparities along the midline that project to the nasal portion of each eye.

Ablation of the chiasm in cats causes profound difficulties in discrimination of depth in RDS. Similarly, there have been a number of studies investigating patients who have either transient or permanent malfunction of the optic chiasm. In cases where the optic chiasm is compressed due to a tumour, such as a pituitary adenoma, stereoscopic depth perception can be severely disrupted. However, in many cases, surgery to relieve the pressure led to restoration of binocular function. Where the damage is permanent, however, patients are left with very little binocular function. There are very few studies in which stereoscopic depth perception has been systematically studied, although a recent study investigated the deficits in two patients with bitemporal hemianopia. Under normal binocular viewing, mismatched images in the two eyes can stimulate fusional eye movements to align the images. However, in bitemporal hemianopia, the two eyes see different regions of the visual field, so patients can have difficulty establishing fusion. Any eye misalignment will cause double vision if the images overlap (in the case of esotropia) or a vertical scotoma in the case of exotropia. To help the two patients who reported double vision, Peli and Satgunam exploited the intact midline stereopsis (via the corpus callosum) to design a stereo-typoscope that could be used for reading.

A final word on depth perception related to the vertical meridian is the consequences of complete homonymous hemianopia on depth perception in this region. In this case, V1 is damaged on one side, while the unaffected hemisphere will receive binocular information from the contralateral visual field, allowing for stereoscopic depth perception. However, in the absence of macular sparing, one would predict a deficit in computing ‘near’ and ‘far’ binocular disparities on the midline as there are no neurons to communicate via the corpus callosum. While this phenomenon was investigated almost a century ago, and gave a hint that patients with hemianopia did show abnormal stereoscopic performance close to fixation, it remains largely unexplored and would be an interesting question to explore with modern psychophysical and imaging methods.


Depth perception in posterior cortical atrophy and Alzheimer's disease

While the typical presentation of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is memory loss and personality changes, atypical AD, also known as posterior cortical atrophy (PCA) can present with visual difficulties, such as reading, judging distances and identifying objects. As with the typical presentation, PCA is a neurodegenerative condition, such that the initial visuospatial dysfunction can eventually progress to affect the medial temporal lobe primarily affected in AD. There have been suggestions of different PCA subtypes that might differentially affect either the dorsal or ventral visual systems, or even the striate cortex. Thus, the effects on the stereoscopic depth system are difficult to predict. A recent study compared performance on psychophysical tests of depth perception in patients with PCA and typical AD. They also included patients with diffuse Lewy body dementia (DLBD), because it is known to lead to disruption of visual perception. In particular, this study aimed to investigate the specific effects of the diseases on different types of depth cue: three-dimensional shape from disparity, texture, shading or motion. Interestingly, the PCA group showed no deficit compared with healthy controls in perceiving three-dimensional shape from disparity, but the three monocular cue conditions were all relatively impaired. However, these patients did not differ from the DLBD patients for any stimulus, and were worse than AD patients only in the shape from texture condition. Although the PCA patients were also impaired at discriminating the basic features of the stimuli, the level of impairment was not sufficient to account for the three-dimensional shape deficit.

There was considerable variability in the performance of the PCA patients within the group, which might reflect the different pattern of damage that has been seen in previous studies. To take account of this variability, the authors correlated the performance on each of the three-dimensional tasks with grey matter volume across the group. Interestingly, these correlation analyses identified distinct ventral occipital regions for two of the three-dimensional tasks. The shape from disparity performance correlated with grey matter loss in a region of right inferior temporal cortex; the region correlating with performance in shape from disparity was more posterior and superior. The neural response to depth from disparity in healthy control subjects, shown in, includes significant activation in this damaged area, also seen in other studies.

Investigating stereoscopic depth perception in dementia is particularly challenging since the patients need to understand the nature of the task. Thus, rather than just being compared to healthy older participants, non-depth visual tasks are required to establish that there is not a general visual or comprehension deficit. Thus, some early studies found AD patients to be impaired on stereoscopic depth perception but did not fully control for a general decline in visual function. A more recent study asked patients with AD and Parkinson's disease to rate a three-dimensional movie on how good the depth looked, but this type of approach is likely to be challenging for patients experiencing memory problems. By contrast, the study described earlier used typical AD patients as a control group and concluded that, although there was some impairment of extracting three-dimensional shape, this was likely as a result of downstream processes, potentially at the level of decision-making.


Concluding remarks

The most common cause of dysfunctional stereoscopic depth perception is amblyopia, generally affecting visual regions at the level of V1 and the anterior visual pathway. However, while this type of dysfunction occurs at the level of integration of binocular information, damage to higher cortical visual areas can also interfere with depth perception. While training in fusional techniques may improve some aspects of depth perception, these techniques are unlikely to account for all cases, particularly those in which the deficit appears to be at the level of integration of monocular and binocular cues to depth.


Neural architectures for stereo vision

Andrew J. Parker, Jackson E. T. Smith, Kristine Krug — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2016. PMC4901455, CC BY 4.0.

Stereoscopic vision delivers a sense of depth based on binocular information but additionally acts as a mechanism for achieving correspondence between patterns arriving at the left and right eyes. We analyse quantitatively the cortical architecture for stereoscopic vision in two areas of macaque visual cortex. For primary visual cortex V1, the result is consistent with a module that is isotropic in cortical space with a diameter of at least 3 mm in surface extent. This implies that the module for stereo is larger than the repeat distance between ocular dominance columns in V1. By contrast, in the extrastriate cortical area V5/MT, which has a specialized architecture for stereo depth, the module for representation of stereo is about 1 mm in surface extent, so the representation of stereo in V5/MT is more compressed than V1 in terms of neural wiring of the neocortex. The surface extent estimated for stereo in V5/MT is consistent with measurements of its specialized domains for binocular disparity. Within V1, we suggest that long-range horizontal, anatomical connections form functional modules that serve both binocular and monocular pattern recognition: this common function may explain the distortion and disruption of monocular pattern vision observed in amblyopia.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘Vision in our three-dimensional world’.


Introduction

Binocular stereoscopic vision is wholly dependent on the ability of the nervous system to register the presence of small differences in the exact positioning of visual features on the left and right retinae. These differences are created by the horizontal separation of the eyes in the head. Julesz recognized that binocular stereoscopic vision consists of two distinct processes. There is the familiar use of stereoscopic vision to deliver a sense of depth, but there is also an initial prior stage. Before the binocular disparities in a pair of images can be transformed into a representation of depth, there must be some assignment of which features in the left image correspond to which features in the right image.

In a,b, these two processes in stereoscopic vision are illustrated. Triangulation from the eyes (a) can be used to recover the depth of objects in the scene. b shows the requirement for pattern matching between the left and right eyes’ neural signals. In a crowded set of features with multiple similar features, the brain must find the correct matches between pairs of features (shown by the linking arrow between the left and right eye images in b), otherwise depth cannot be recovered accurately. Julesz highlighted this ‘correspondence problem’, as it became subsequently known, with his invention of the random-dot stereogram. c shows such a stereogram suitable for viewing with red–green stereo glasses.

The relationship that defines the presence of correspondence in stereoscopic vision is essentially structural and mathematical. The formal requirement is to establish the mapping from one field of pattern elements to another. Unless the neural mechanisms can establish this local matching, the brain will be unable to detect any higher-order structural relationships, which in the case of stereo vision reveal the size and shape of the figure defined by the differences in binocular disparity, as well as the figure's depth profile.

Considering the relationship as a mathematical abstraction is useful because it highlights the problem in the form in which it is presented to a network of neurons in the visual cortex. These neurons receive signals from various sources, rearrange the signals according to the connectivity within the network and pass these rearranged signals onward to further neurons. If the connectivity of the network has been set by learning rules or processes of developmental plasticity that are local to the neurons in the network, then, in many ways, the source of the input signals does not really matter. Locally, the neurons just receive signals from multiple sources, respond to the consistent, common components of those signals and then pass the result onward to other neurons. Regarded in this way, there is nothing special or unique about the sources of the signals being processed. Whether or not the common components happen to derive from stereoscopic correspondence is incidental.

Julesz understood the logic behind this point: in his 1960 paper [p. 1151], he hypothesizes a ‘binocular pattern recognition [which] we regard as being identical to ordinary (monocular) pattern recognition’. Since that time, a great deal has been learnt about the neural mechanisms underlying binocular stereoscopic vision. This paper will analyse the architecture and neural connections of the visual cortex that underlie the establishment of stereoscopic correspondence in binocular vision.


Neural processing of binocular stereoscopic vision

For isolated visual features, the question of how the nervous system matches features in the left and right eye's images is potentially explicable at the neuronal level, as a result of the discovery of neurons in the primary visual cortex with specific binocular properties. These binocular cortical neurons receive input from both left and right eyes via the visual thalamus, with the inputs to the cortex arranged such that the strongest responses of the neuron are produced by visual inputs of similar orientation and contrast polarity presented simultaneously to the left and right eyes. These neurons are also highly sensitive to the exact positioning of the stimulus in the left and right eyes, leading to a potential explanation of the high performance in behavioural measures of stereoscopic acuity. The difference in position in the left and right eyes is termed binocular disparity: across a population of these neurons, it is found that neurons differ in their preferences for the size of binocular disparity, which is equivalent to these neurons being most responsive at different binocular depths.

While isolated contours are certainly encountered from time to time in our everyday visual environment, our stereo system must also operate in a different kind of visual scene, which is rich in many overlapping contours and features. Helmholtz noted the ability of stereoscopic vision to contribute to the analysis of these complex binocular scenes, referring to the vividness with which cracks, cavities and surfaces could be resolved in stereoscopic photographs of glacial ice. Julesz was the first to bring this aspect of binocular vision under rigorous experimental study and he was also the first to articulate the need for a computational approach to resolving complex binocular scenes with multiple potential matches, arising from the presence of multiple similar features in the left and right eyes’ images.

If we look in detail at a pair of image regions (one from the left eye, the other from the right) arising from one of Julesz's random-dot figures (b), they consist of a pair of micropatterns with locally corresponding features across the grid of dots. In the construction of these patterns, whether a particular dot is black or white is the outcome of sampling a random process, but once it is determined that a dot in the left eye's image is black, then the corresponding dot in the right eye's image must be black also. Hence, the relationship of the dots when comparing the eyes’ images with each other is fixed rather than random. The pair of arrows linked together in b shows the correct correspondence between a pair of white dots, one from each eye. Julesz pointed out that this pairing must be established in the presence of multiple alternative possible pairings, which in b are available by pairing with one of the other two nearby white dots.


Visual cortical areas that potentially contribute to stereoscopic processing

Neurophysiological studies in visual areas of the macaque monkey have shown the presence of neurons tuned selectively for binocular disparity (see Parker for review). One of the most striking observations about how the cortex responds to binocular depth is the widespread nature of these responses, which cover many identifiable areas of visual cortex and beyond. Human imaging studies also confirm this feature of the cortical response to binocular depth: shows an example from such a study that compares the response to stimuli containing stereoscopic depth (sinusoidal spatial modulation of the disparity field) with the response to a stimulus in which all dots lie in a flat zero disparity plane. The activations of cerebral cortex are extensive, including many visual areas and also out from the occipital cortex to parietal regions such as DIPSM, DIPSA and phAIP (see figure legend for definitions).

Nonetheless, there is differentiation among the responses of these multiple cortical regions. The strongest evidence for this comes from neurophysiological studies, conducted in rhesus macaques. Neurons in the macaque extrastriate cortical areas exhibit a range of more advanced stimulus preferences that indicate a transformation of information about binocular depth, as signals move from the primary visual cortex out into extrastriate cortex. The responses of V1 are dominated by simple matching between binocular features from left and right eyes but, beyond V1, neurons acquire new signals: extrastriate neurons carry information about relative depth as well as absolute depth, they acquire choice probabilities for depth-related visual tasks and the neuronal response to binocular anti-correlated depth stimuli is suppressed as signals penetrate into deeper layers of cortical processing. All these observations suggest that neurons in visual cortex outside V1 are more closely involved in perceptual judgements about binocular depth. An aim of this paper is to compare the neural architecture for processing of binocular depth within and outside the primary visual cortex.


Cortical architectures in V1 for binocular vision

When input arrives from the left and right eyes into the primary visual cortex (area 17), the initial locations in which the thalamic axons lie are strongly segregated, with some locations being dominated by the left eye and others by the right eye. The segregation of the thalamic axons by eye of origin is also accompanied by a generalized retinotopic ordering of the projection of thalamic axons across the cortical surface, such that the axonal map aligns with the retinotopic organization of the responses of the cortical neurons themselves. This alignment is sustained by vertical neuronal connections, which are aligned normal to the cortex's multiple layers. This retinotopic organization extends across the entire surface of V1 and the boundary between one retinotopic map and the next defines the separateness of individual cortical areas within visual cortex as a whole. Putting together binocular inputs with retinotopy means the retinotopic map must break regularly to accommodate the axons arriving from each eye. These breaks occur where the cortex switches from being dominated by one eye to being dominated by the other eye, so they mark the boundaries of the ocular dominance (OD) columns.

Hubel and Wiesel first identified these structures, which are especially prominent in layer 4 of V1. They conceived that within a single OD column there might be a small but steady progressive change in the retinotopic location of the neuronal receptive fields across the width of one column. At the column boundary, the neural signals switch to being dominated by the other eye and at the same time the preferred position shifts back, against the previous progression, by about half the spatial distance traversed in the neighbouring column devoted to the other eye. With this sequence of interlocking and ratcheted steps, each eye's input gains a fair share of cortical resources, yet the topographic progression of the retinotopic organization is consistent across the cortical sheet of V1.

The above description was very much derived from work with Old World monkeys, chiefly macaque. Different forms of visual cortical mapping are found in other species, with even a vigorous debate about the arrangements in other non-human primates. However, the evidence appears to be that human cortex is similar to that of Old World monkeys. This connectivity supports an initial sampling of the inputs from the left and right eyes, which could potentially form the basis of disparity selectivity. For example, a pair of inputs from left and right eyes that lie near a column boundary would be spatially offset by the distance traversed in the topographic map across a single OD column. This offset would be enough to generate a spatial difference in monocular locations for disparity signalling (as in Yeshurun & Schwartz). To generate this limited form of disparity selectivity, it would be sufficient to have a pair of short-range connections from eye-specific neurons in layer 4, running vertically across the cortical layers, to a single neuron in layer 2/3, where many binocular neurons are thought to reside.

This highly local wiring to form binocular neurons mandates a maximum offset between left and right eye signals, which is the size of an OD column projected back out into the spatial world. If the spatial separation of inputs that is required to serve stereoscopic vision proved to be greater than the size of a single OD column, then this suggests that the relevant anatomical connections must be established by lateral neural connections that pass horizontally across the cortex.

The idea under discussion here is that stereoscopic disparity might be processed by neural connectivity structured by the neighbourhood relationships of OD columns. A distinct and separate proposal is that the OD characteristics of individual cortical neurons, including those outside layer 4, are directly linked to their disparity selectivity. In this case, the pattern of a neuron's disparity selectivity would be predictable from monocular measurements of the relative strength of inputs to that neuron from the left and right eyes taken separately. The presence of this link at the level of individual neurons in V1 in macaque has been questioned by a number of quantitative studies. It is hard to prove conclusively the absence of such relationships, but for present purposes, it is sufficient to note that the question of a role for OD columns in forming stereoscopic sensitivity is a distinct hypothesis.

Evidence that lateral connections passing horizontally across the cortex may be important for binocular vision is available from the observations with injections of the anterograde tracer biocytin, either targeted into the centre of an OD column or avoiding the centres of these columns. Injections into the centre of an OD column send connections dominantly to the nearest OD column responsive to the same eye and weaker connections further away; injections of biocytin that target sites in the cortex away from the centres of OD columns result in a spread and spatial distribution of tracer similar in form to the monocular injection sites, but avoiding the centres of OD columns. It was assumed that injections that avoid the centres of OD columns are targeting binocular sites in V1, so that the neural projections from those sites are also presumably targeting neighbouring binocular sites. However, there were no experimental measures of disparity selectivity or binocular summation available to correlate with the anatomical data. The binocular interconnections appear to have a narrower spread, given that the monocular horizontal connections ‘skip’ over an OD column belonging to the other eye, whereas binocular interconnections appear simply to connect immediately neighbouring sites. Later studies with injections of cholera-toxin B (CTB) show a wider range for all types of lateral connection, up to 6 mm in V1, presumably reflecting improved sensitivity in the methodology.


Measures of interaction distances for stereoscopic vision across the macaque visual system

Most of the above discussion has concentrated around the cortical organization for disparity selectivity in V1. Signalling of disparity by V1 neurons is simply an initial stage in the generation of neuronal responses that can potentially explain the behavioural and perceptual responses to stereoscopic depth. While the multiple relationships between V1 and the many extrastriate cortical areas potentially offer a large number of comparisons, in this paper we consider the cortical connectivity required to support neuronal responses specific for binocular disparity, comparing the organization of V1 with the extrastriate cortical area V5/MT.

This comparison is potentially revealing as V5/MT neurons possess a range of properties which indicate that this stage of processing is closer to the requirements to explain perceptual behaviour. Unlike V1, V5/MT contains neurons with many characteristics that are predictive of performance in binocular depth tasks. Crucially, injection of small amounts of electrical current into the cortical network of V5/MT at functionally identified locations can bias the monkey's decision in binocular depth tasks. This result suggests that neurons in V5/MT are located along the causal pathway for the types of binocular depth task explored in these studies. Here, we focus specifically on the lateral range of local, intrinsic cortical connections that must be required to build a representation of stereoscopic disparity in these two distinct cortical areas.


Cortical area V1

For cortical area V1, we need to establish the relevant range over which binocular disparities are computed, which may be derived from earlier work from our laboratory. shows a contour sensitivity plot of a single, disparity-selective neuron recorded in V1, together with a schematic interpretation of the binocular, disparity-sensitive receptive field of the neuron. The same receptive field is represented in two ways. In the uppermost panel, a, the receptive field is drawn in angular coordinates, whereas in the bottom panel, c, the receptive field is drawn in spatial coordinates with respect to the position of the monkey's interocular baseline. The latter gives us a scale version of how disparity selective neurons signal the presence of features in the three-dimensional scene before the observer.

To build the picture of how the receptive fields of single neurons relate to cortical architecture, we need to consider how these neurons pool signals for horizontal disparity across their receptive fields. b introduces a schematic for the interpretation of the quantitative measurements of selectivity for binocular disparity (shown as D-max in b) and the spatial extent over which these disparity-specific responses are pooled (shown as the binocular integration zone). Based upon the analysis of responses in single neurons, we then form a population response for a group of neurons that have been recorded from a distinct subregion of V1. We consider the population response in conjunction with the cortical magnification factor to estimate what these population responses must mean in terms of lateral neural connections across the neocortical surface.


Integration zone of single V1 neurons for horizontal stereo disparities

The range of disparities encoded by a neuron's receptive field gives us the range of sensitivity to binocular depth, projected back onto the retinotopic coordinate frame of the eyes and the visual cortex. b gives this schematically. Neural activity from points in the left and the right eyes (green and red dots, respectively) arrive within the binocular receptive field of the neuron (large pale green disc). The horizontal separation of the green and red dots represents binocular disparity and is indicated by the length of the black horizontal arrows. The largest disparity that the neuron can encode is here termed D-max, by analogy with the measure used in human perceptual studies.

Disparity-sensitive neurons do not simply respond to binocular disparity at a single point in the retinotopic coordinate system. Rather they pool or integrate visual signals over a lateral extent in the same frame of retinotopic coordinates. This is a different dimension that we also need to estimate. The size of this pooling region is termed the binocular integration zone in b. Although this zone extends both horizontally and vertically, it is specifically the integration zone for horizontal binocular disparity. Unlike Cumming, there is no consideration here of the range over which vertical disparities are signalled. In terms of b, a vertical disparity would be equivalent to a vertical, rather than a horizontal, offset in the positions of green and red dots representing the inputs from the eyes. It is already established that the binocular integration zone cannot be estimated directly from the receptive field size measured with simple luminance stimuli, such as bars, spots and gratings. We need to use stimuli that specifically isolate the disparity-sensitive component of the cortical neuron's response.

The size of the binocular integration zone for pooling of horizontal disparity can be measured quantitatively by testing the cortical neurons with a field of random dots whose disparity varies with a sinusoidal waveform as a function of spatial position. This spatial waveform is arranged to have peak and trough disparities whose difference causes substantial modulation of the neuron's firing rate as the waveform is drifted across the receptive field (a). A roughly sinusoidal modulation of firing rate results, which declines in amplitude as the spatial frequency of the waveform is increased (b). Quantification of the point at which the modulation falls to two-third of its peak is both a measure of the acuity of the neuron for detecting spatial modulation of disparity (c) and a measure of the size of the integration zone over which the neuron gathers information about horizontal disparity.

The estimates of receptive field integration size for a set of 55 V1 neurons (d) were interpreted using a single Gaussian weighting function (as in c) to describe the size and shape of the binocular integration zone. Use of a single Gaussian is acceptable, given that almost all measurements of the response of neurons to disparity modulation give low-pass, rather than band-pass, tuning curves as a function of disparity modulation frequency (similar to those shown in c). The average high-frequency cut-off for the disparity modulation was 0.5 cycles per degree (d), much lower than the high-frequency cut-off for detection of sinusoidal modulations of luminance in the same neurons.


Population response

In order to gain a measure of the capacity of the population to signal stereo disparity, signals from individual neurons are pooled to gain an estimate of the responses of the population to stereo disparities. The range of the population response for stereoscopic disparity, as estimated by Prince et al., is shown in a as a function of eccentricities near the fovea. There is not a great deal of variation as a function of eccentricity over this range, so the population response can be approximated by a single Gaussian curve with a spread (σ) of 0.5°. For the dimension of depth away from the head, a Gaussian function with this spread is plotted in c, after being transformed into coordinates of spatial distance relative to the interocular baseline.

This can be combined with the population estimate of the binocular integration zone for stereoscopic disparity. This is derived from the average high-frequency cut-off for disparity modulation in V1 neurons as shown in d. In terms of a Gaussian weighting, this is equivalent to a standard deviation (σ) of 0.32°. The schematic of the V1 population response for eccentricities in the range 1–4° is shown in spatial coordinates in c. In total, this is the product of two Gaussian functions, one describing the range of disparities encoded by V1 neurons (from a) and the other describing the binocular integration zone (from disparity modulation measures in d).


Magnification factor in macaque V1

In order to estimate the cortical distance that is implied by interactions on this scale in visual field coordinates, it is necessary to make use of measurements of the cortical magnification factor: in linear terms, this is the distance in mm across the cortical surface that is devoted to the analysis of 1° of visual angle within the visual field. The magnification factor of macaques and humans varies substantially across the visual field, reflecting the dominance of foveal central vision in the primate visual system. Numerically, magnification factor is large in central foveal vision and declines away from the fovea.

Gaining a quantitative estimate of the cortical magnification factor is not straightforward. Measurements within the foveal region are hard to achieve and published data provide some divergence of estimates. For juvenile monkeys (Macaca fascicularis), an early estimate indicated values of 3 mm degree−1 at an eccentricity of 2.5°, the closest position with respect to the fovea at which estimates were reliable. This work was based on electrophysiological recording of cells sequentially with a microelectrode and subsequent reconstruction of electrode tracks from histological material.

As an alternative, the visual cortical areas have been mapped in anaesthetized macaque monkeys with measurements of cortical activations using magnetic resonance imaging. These data suggest a somewhat finer representation of the central part of the visual field than the earlier work, with the linear dimensions devoted to the central 11° of the visual field being 25% greater than in Van Essen et al.. The difficulty of measuring the magnification factor in the centre of the visual field has been highlighted in human imaging work.

The general view is that the representation of primary visual cortex in the macaque is coarser by a factor of two in comparison with estimates from human imaging data. However, the region close to the centre of the field, at eccentricities less than 2.5°, is more uncertain. Accurate measurement in this area requires highly cooperative subjects who can hold their fixation well, so that eye movements do not blur the measurement of the neural image. Accurate measurements also need a high signal-to-noise ratio from the imaging data, which can be hard to achieve with the submillimetre voxel sizes that are ideally needed for measurements in visual cortex. Critically, the retinotopic organization of the cortical maps for visual areas V1–V3 all converge anatomically near this region. A correct assignment of this part of cortex to each visual area needs to be achieved before any meaningful measures of magnification factor may be extracted. The importance of this region to the assessment of binocular vision is apparent from the fact that some 30% of the total area of human V1 is dedicated to analysing the visual signals from the central 3° of the visual field.

The measurements of magnification factor in humans that reach into the central 3° suggest values that rise steadily from about 6.5 mm degree−1 at 3° to 13 mm degree−1 at 0.75°. The extrapolation of the curve fitting the early macaque data fits neatly under this line, with the macaque data being approximately twice as coarse as the human data, much as earlier work suggested. Using this approach gives a range of values between 6.5 and 2.5 mm degree−1 for the macaque cortical magnification for eccentricities from 1.5° to 4.0°, respectively, with the caveat that these figures could be 25% greater in monkeys of the size and weight used for the disparity tuning measurements. As argued later in the paper, a conservative estimate of the magnification factor is sufficient to sustain the conclusions developed here, so for now we adopt a canonical value of 3 mm degree−1 for the region of V1 from which the recordings were made (shown in figures –).

This scaling factor can be applied to the measures of disparity range and binocular integration zone. If a neuron receiving input from one eye at a particular location is to communicate with other neurons receiving input from the other eye, then this may require connections that deliver up to 0.5° of visual angle in either direction (to build neurons selective at the extremes of the V1 disparity range). This implies lateral connections in the cortex of 1.5 mm, reasonably consistent with estimates for V1 derived from anterograde tracing with biocytin and well within the range for later studies with CTB. The lateral connectivity for horizontal disparity is considerably greater than the canonical size of 0.4–0.7 mm for a single OD column in macaque V1. Some caution is however needed in moving immediately between the measures of receptive field size, cortical magnification factor and size of columnar architecture. It has also been observed that there is variability in the size of OD columns, so that a substantial portion of the 0.4–0.7 mm range quoted above arises owing to differences between individual macaques.

A second observation is that the size of OD columns is greater in the neighbourhood of the fovea than elsewhere, with again some individual differences between animals. In both cases, individual differences of the same type are manifest in the analysis of histology from the left and right cortical hemispheres of the same animal, suggesting that the measurement and analysis techniques are sufficiently refined to be able to make firm statements. For regions of V1 very close to the vertical midline, there is also an interhemispheric group of callosal connections to be accommodated. These appear to extend as much as 2 mm from the V1/V2 border in the region of the fovea but this narrows to 1 mm away from the fovea. The expansion of OD columns in the region of the fovea might be linked to the presence of these callosal afferents.

a shows the extent of population sensitivity for stereoscopic vision as laid out on the cortical surface of V1. The contour plot is transformed by the size of the cortical magnification factor from the sensitivity profile in angular coordinates (as shown for a single neuron's receptive field in a). The dimensions in the vertical (y-axis) for disparity are derived from the population profiles for disparity range in a. The dimensions in the horizontal (x-axis) are the estimated size of the binocular integration zone, summarized schematically in b and measured quantitatively in d.

There are two important conclusions that can be drawn from a. — First, the disparity range and binocular integration zone are reasonably matched to each other size and are therefore consistent with a roughly isotropic set of horizontal cortical connections running laterally across the surface of V1.— Second, contrary to Prince et al., the disparity range and the binocular integration zone for horizontal disparity are both greater than the size of the OD architecture.Both these conclusions can be sustained under the conservative assumption that the V1 magnification factor is 3 mm degree−1 for the region of the visual field from which the neurons were recorded. If the true magnification factor were larger, then the second conclusion would be more strongly upheld. Note that these conclusions apply to the way in which the cortex processes horizontal disparities: neurons in V1 show a strong degree of specialization for horizontal, rather than vertical, disparity.

In summary, the data suggest that a single wiring principle may underlie cortical connectivity for two aspects of stereoscopic vision in V1. There are neural connections that run across visual cortex to build sensitivity to the range of horizontal binocular disparities (shown as D-max in b) encoded within the neuronal population. To deal with the largest horizontal disparities encoded in V1, these connections need to stretch over about 3–4 mm of cortex. Connections running over a similar distance are also responsible for integrating laterally (shown as the binocular integration zone in b), thereby pooling signals about horizontal disparity from nearby horizontal and vertical points in the visual field.

Another way of stating this conclusion is to say that foveal V1 is concerned fundamentally with the representation of space in angular coordinates. Movements in space within the fixation plane and movements in binocular depth orthogonal to that plane traverse the same distance across the cortical surface, when considered in terms of the representation of visual angle in cortical coordinates.

This conclusion is also consistent with earlier findings that the physiological classification of neurons by their OD properties appears to have little significance for the neurons’ responses to binocular disparity. The size of the integration zone for binocular stereoscopic vision seems to span multiple hypercolumns, and presumably relies in part upon the network of lateral connections that spread horizontally across the visual cortex. It is interesting to note that the integration size estimated here for binocular vision is about 3 mm, which coincides well with the integration zone of lateral connections estimated from biocytin tracer injections and optical imaging of macaque primary visual cortex with monocular visual stimulation.


Cortical area V5/MT

The relationship between the scale of visual receptive field properties and visual eccentricity is much shallower in cortical area V5/MT compared with V1. In the macaque, area V5/MT is smaller than V1 by a factor of 10–20× measured in area, such that the entire visual hemi-field is estimated to occupy a region with dimensions between 40 and 150 mm2 in extent. However, the three papers quoted all use diverse techniques (single unit mapping, fMRI mapping and histological identification), and there is some divergence in the estimated size of V5/MT, even taking account of differences in body weight and species. It has also been asserted that the mapping of the visual field onto V5/MT may be non-uniform, with an expanded representation of the inferior quadrant in each hemisphere. For these reasons, we decided to re-estimate the cortical magnification factor from our own recordings from V5/MT, as these recordings are most directly relevant for the interpretation of the disparity tuning data obtained during these recordings.

The detailed arrangements for recording from V5/MT used in our laboratory have been previously reported. The data presented were recorded from two male macaque monkeys, comprising a dataset of 140 neurons that all showed significant tuning for binocular disparity of both random-dot planar stimuli and rotating cylinder stimuli. The analyses here use only the response to binocularly correlated, planar random-dot stereograms. For each neuron recorded, the location of its receptive field centre in visual space was determined with respect to the animal's fixation point, while at all times monitoring carefully the animal's eye position, including checks on vergence position.

Each neuronal recording site was accessed using an oblique approach to area V5/MT, using a guide tube that was directed towards V5/MT approaching the target from the posterior side. The guide tubes were inserted through a rectangular grid of locations, organized around a reference point defined by the recording chamber that was chronically implanted by surgery at a fixed location on the skull. The verification of the V5/MT recording site was made on the basis of the sequence of grey matter and white matter boundaries encountered during the advance of the electrode, the high proportion of neurons selective for the direction of visual movement, the consistent organization of receptive fields from different recording sites in forming a map and, at the end of the procedure, histological verification.

An example of histology is shown in a. This shows the location of V5/MT in one macaque monkey on the posterior bank of the superior temporal sulcus. The angle of the cortical layers of area V5/MT with respect to the approaching angle of the electrode (20°) can be seen by reference to the planned orientation of the recording chamber with respect to the cortical surface and the direct measurement from one of the electrode tracks visible in the histology. All other electrode insertions were made within the plane of the cortical section shown in a or in planes parallel to it.

The spacing of these electrode tracks with respect to location across the surface of V5/MT is given by the relative angle between the grid and the cortical surface and the spacing of the insertion points across the grid. There will also be some inevitable variation in the exact trajectory of the electrode, even if it is inserted into precisely the same grid location, because the electrodes themselves may flex or bend a little as they move through the cortical tissue. For these reasons, the analysis of receptive field locations with respect to the cortical surface is based on the averaged value of many estimates of receptive field location from sequential electrode penetrations at the same grid points.

Paired estimates of receptive field locations from different grid positions were referenced to the corresponding pairs of cortical locations in area V5/MT. Each pair of differences contributes one estimate to the calculation of cortical magnification factor (linear distance in mm across the cortex divided by degrees of visual angle separation between the receptive fields). The raw data are shown in electronic supplementary material, figure S1, where they are plotted in cortical coordinates (left–right and dorsal–ventral) and eccentricity in the visual field. The left–right and dorsal–ventral plots confirm the expected topography on the cortical map with higher values of magnification factor towards the fovea being represented as lateral and ventral on the cortical surface. The eccentricity plot shows that cortical magnification factor decreases as eccentricity increases. There is considerable scatter in these data, so a surface smoothing procedure was used to extract the estimates of cortical magnification factor. The resulting values are within the range 0.3–0.7 mm degree−1 over most of the area of V5/MT from which recordings were made, with only a few outliers. For the present purposes, we adopt a median estimate of 0.5 mm degree−1.

This value of cortical magnification factor was applied to V5/MT measurements in the same way as earlier for V1. First, we took the range of horizontal disparities encoded in V5/MT as plotted in angular coordinates in b and in coordinates of three-dimensional space in d. The data for V5/MT show a slight over-representation of near disparities, as reported previously, so that the peak sensitivity in terms of depth from the head is slightly nearer than the fixation point in d. It must be acknowledged that there is less certainty about the estimation of the other dimension considered for V1, which is the lateral extent of pooling for horizontal disparity in V5/MT. There are no quantitative estimates based on corrugation sensitivity for V5/MT neurons, as there are for V1 neurons. The V5/MT population response along the axis of horizontal distance as plotted in d is based on the differences in classical receptive field size measurements between V5/MT and V1, under the assumption that the binocular integration zone for horizontal disparity scales proportionately with classical receptive field size between V1 and V5/MT.

In spatial terms, comparing c,d, the representation of disparity in V5/MT is somewhat broader than that in the primary visual cortex V1. b shows the transformation of the population response of d into estimates of cortical distances across V5/MT using the magnification factor derived earlier. Although there is a moderate broadening of the angular size of the population receptive fields between V1 and V5/MT, the representation in cortical distance in b shows that there is actually an anatomical convergence. Thus, based on this analysis, a wide area of V1 anatomically converges to a smaller area of V5/MT (compare a,b, noting especially the difference in scales on the axes).

The size of the disparity-processing domain is such that the entire range of disparities can be accommodated within an average distance of 1 mm across the cortical surface of V5/MT. The variation in our estimate of magnification factor might raise this to 1.4 mm or lower it to 0.6 mm at different locations within V5/MT. De Angelis & Newsome conducted a series of recording experiments in V5/MT that identified regions with high disparity sensitivity as the electrode moved through long penetrations of several mm across the V5/MT surface. They concluded that the map of disparity is orderly within these regions. The average size of a module processing both near and far disparities was estimated to be about 1 mm in diameter. The correspondence between that estimate and the one in this paper is further evidence that these disparity domains within V5/MT may comprise a functionally significant level of organization of the cortical architecture.

In comparison with the organization of OD columns in V1, there is of course no exactly equivalent structure for V5/MT, as V5/MT does not possess OD columns. However, anatomical tracing of intrinsic connections in V5/MT does suggest connectivity extending over many millimetres of cortex with repeat patch-like connectivity at approximately 2 mm distances. The functional significance of this repeat distance remains unclear but may be related to conjoint signalling of binocular disparity and direction of motion. Connections on a distance of 2 mm might link domains of cortex that are processing both the same disparity (near or far) and the same direction of visual motion (leftwards rather than rightward motion). Thus, for example, domains processing combinations of leftward motion and near disparities might be specifically connected to each other and similarly for other combinations.


Perceptual measures of interaction distances

It is important to understand whether the measures of interaction distance developed here are applicable to the explanation of perceptual phenomena. With sparse, isolated features, human observers are able to perform a near–far discrimination over wider ranges than maximum range of interaction distance measured here with random-dot patterns. Therefore, the most direct comparison is with perceptual thresholds that are measured with random element stimuli, specifically designed to probe the fine ‘pattern matching’ aspect of stereoscopic vision.

For two of the animals from which the V1 recordings were obtained, behavioural tests of their perception are available. Using the dynamic random-dot stereoscopic stimuli employed in the recording experiments, one animal could discriminate between near and far disparities of ±0.6°, whereas the other's range was slightly more limited. This disparity range represents the perceptual D-max for the animals, while performing discriminations with dynamic random-dot figures of the same stimulus characteristics as were used for the neuronal recording. There are always potential limitations on the quality of performance working with non-human subjects, so it is reassuring that measurements with human observers resulted in similar upper limits of disparity discrimination, although the human data represent the outcome of considerably fewer trials.


Discussion

On the basis of the measurements of sensitivity to horizontal disparity in cortical area V1, we suggest that V1 is organized for stereoscopic processing into a functional module about 3–4 mm across. This is several times larger than the size of an OD column. The same calculations for V5/MT suggest a domain that is about 1 mm across, in agreement with the estimates for mapping disparity-specific regions of this cortical area. Anatomically, therefore, a spatially extensive region of V1 must send its output to a region of V5/MT that is substantially compressed in terms of cortical coordinates. This is in contrast to the pattern of intrinsic connectivity, where horizontal connections become more extensive in cortical dimensions as one moves further away from V1. Understanding these relationships is essential for interpreting the density and topography of anatomical projecting fibres that join one region of the cortex to another.

There are further differences in the arrangements for encoding of stereoscopic disparity in these two cortical regions. Within V1, there is a wide range of selectivity for disparity, even locally at the same neurophysiological recording site. When recording with a single electrode, it is possible to extract the activity of single, isolated neurons for comparison with the activity of a cluster of more poorly isolated neurons simultaneously recorded at the same site. In V1, the tuning of single neuron activity for disparity is only weakly related to the tuning of the neighbouring neurons, assessed either in terms of selectivity for disparity or in terms of the preferred disparity of the neuron. This contrasts with the organization of V5/MT for stereoscopic disparity (see fig. 11 in Prince et al. for a side by side comparison of V1 and V5/MT). This suggests that encoding for disparity in V1 is embedded within a more broadly specified network that is concerned with encoding other properties of the visual image, as well as disparity. By contrast, the clustering of the domains and the tighter spatial organization of disparity within the cortical architecture of V5/MT is consistent with an important functional role for disparity processing in these domains.

For the case of V1, the data analysed in this paper indicate that the cortical organization for processing of binocular disparity is isotropic, which is a novel aspect that has not been previously identified. We have analysed the disparity range encoded by the population of V1 neurons and the integration zone over which these horizontal binocular disparities are pooled. When these ranges are expressed in terms of cortical representation (scaling retinal angle by the cortical magnification factor), these ranges are matched to one another in cortical distance. We suggest that this reflects a more fundamental feature of the underlying cortical anatomy, which is that the functional module for disparity processing in V1 is defined anatomically by local horizontal connectivity of 3–6 mm in cortical extent. Connectivity on this scale means that each eye-specific, thalamic afferent arriving in layer 4 would exert a direct influence on cortical signalling over this zone of cortex. Clearly, developmental processes such as synaptic plasticity have the capacity to boost or eliminate neuronal connectivity within this isotropic zone. We suggest however that the connectivity identified by Angelucci et al. may set an upper limit on the range over which stereoscopic correspondence can be achieved within the V1 network. As such, the anatomical connections that travel horizontally across the cortical surface should be equivalent in extent to the green disc in c that denotes the functional connectivity of the binocular integration zone.

Earlier in the paper, we referred to Julesz’ conception that there might be a binocular pattern recognition system ‘identical to’ the monocular pattern recognition system. We consider further here the idea that this identity between binocular and monocular pattern recognition systems might be fulfilled in part by this highly specialized network of V1 neurons serving foveal vision. Recall that in humans the central 3° of visual field are served by something close to 30% of the primary visual cortex. We examine two different lines of evidence: one from characterizing the consequences of the clinical condition of amblyopia, the other from the disruption of pattern recognition systems by the reversal of contrast signals.


Amblyopia

Amblyopia is characterized by weaker or disrupted pattern vision, which persists in the absence of obvious pathology in the eye or central nervous system. Amblyopia is strongly associated with abnormal visual experience early in life and is relatively common, affecting some 3–5% of children. Amblyopia is typically monocular, although bilateral amblyopia is recognized clinically. The precipitating factor is the temporary loss of a clear image in one eye, for a variety of reasons ranging from opacity in the eye's optical system or refractive errors of the eye over to wearing of an eye patch during a period of recovering from a trauma to the eye. Another major cause is a deviation of the optic axes of the two eyes, manifest as a strabismus.

An eye that exhibits unilateral amblyopia is often referred to colloquially as a weaker or lazy eye. In animal studies that model amblyopia by imposing a period of unilateral deprivation of input to one eye, the synaptic connections from that eye to cortex are reduced. Orthoptic therapy is often targeted at improving the weaker eye by requiring the child to wear a patch over the stronger eye to give the weaker eye a chance to increase the strength of its connections with the visual brain.

However, the concept of the weaker eye is not the whole story. It has been recognized for a long time that the visual symptoms of amblyopia are not simply described by a veil of reduced visibility over one eye. Even when visual stimuli are readily visible, substantially above the detection threshold, many amblyopes report the appearance of distortions in pattern perception in their weaker eye and can be demonstrated to have poor performance in making discriminations of the spatial configuration of patterns. For example, sets of evenly spaced straight lines may have a cracked or distorted appearance and the performance of amblyopes in reading small high-contrast letters is unusually sensitive to the presence of nearby contours.

The contribution of typical binocular development to the establishment of accurate monocular pattern vision is highlighted in a large-scale screening of visual function in a group of more than 400 adults who either had measurable amblyopia or exhibited risk factors for its development. This study found that the preservation of binocular function is associated with better monocular pattern vision in the amblyopic eye, as measured by letter-chart acuity or Vernier acuity. Moreover, this association is distinct from any reductions of sensitivity of one eye's input to the cortex. The interesting aspect of amblyopia is that disturbances of binocular vision give rise to problems with monocular form vision.


Pattern matching in stereoscopic vision

Julesz's pioneering work revealed the close relationship between pattern analysis and stereoscopic vision, especially in regard to the ability of stereo vision to break camouflage. There is a range of other neural processes involving fine-scale pattern matching in vision, all of which have the common characteristic that the highest sensitivity is achieved when there is a close match in size, shape and contrast polarity of the pattern elements that need to be matched. Examples other than stereo are short-range apparent motion, symmetry and repetition detection. The comparison of these other pattern detection tasks with stereo reveals some intriguing parallels. First, amblyopia disrupts the perception of mirror symmetry and motion perception; second, there are some similarities of the effect of contrast inversion on the ability to register correspondence in stereoscopic vision and mirror symmetry (inverted contrast stimuli are often referred to as possessing antisymmetry), although inverted contrast in motion processing leads to reverse phi motion.

The disruption of stereo with spatially dense random-dot stereo figures by inversion of the contrast relationship between the dots in the left and right eyes was noted by Julesz. The reader with access to a pair of red–green stereo spectacles can experience this collapse of stereo depth perception for themselves in the electronic supplementary material. The movie displays a dynamic random-dot stereogram that has the normal arrangement of matching dot contrasts in left and right eyes in one time period, followed by a second time period in which the contrast relationship between left and right eyes is inverted. The periods with matched contrast are referred to as binocular correlated (as in) and those with the inverted relationship as binocularly anti-correlated. There is a loss of stereopsis in the time periods of binocular anti-correlation.

Absence of stereopsis with anti-correlated random-dot figures is most complete when a region with disparities programmed into the anti-correlated random dots is embedded within a surround region that is also anti-correlated. Observers are however able to distinguish between anti-correlated random-dot stimuli and a completely random relationship between dots in the left eye and dots in the right eye (binocular uncorrelation), with perceptual reports suggesting a reliance on the appearance of binocular lustre.

If we are looking for an explanation of these results in the responses of neurons tuned to binocular disparity recorded from the visual cortex, then there is a striking discrepancy between the perceptual reports and the responses of neurons in primary visual cortex. In awake, behaving monkeys, Cumming & Parker found that the disparity selectivity of V1 neurons was inverted when they were tested with dynamic anti-correlated random-dot stimuli. Crucially, like humans, the monkeys could not discriminate the depth within these patterns, notwithstanding the fact that the same figures created a disparity-specific response in V1 neurons. This certainly does not fit with the idea of a direct correspondence between responses in a network of V1 neurons and a fully formed stereoscopic percept. Rather it underlines the point that V1 contains a module of neurons specialized for the processing of fine-scale binocular pattern matching, based on similarity between the luminance profiles of features in the left and right eyes. Neurons within a module that is fundamentally sensitive to these luminance profiles will show inverted disparity tuning functions under binocular anti-correlation.

Cortical area V5/MT of the macaque has been more strongly associated with the perception of stereoscopic depth. Nonetheless, the neurons of this area show substantial modulations to the disparity content of anti-correlated figures. Moreover, even neurons with a measurable decision-related response in a depth task may show modulation to the equivalent anti-correlated stimulus, implying no simple conjunction of different criteria for the role of the neurons in binocular depth perception. The only cortical area so far discovered whose neurons appear to suppress fully the inverted stereo signal is in temporal cortex, although area V4 in the ventral stream appears to suppress the inverted response partially, as do the neurons in V1 to a lesser degree. Overall, this suggests that further research into ventral stream function is needed to resolve these questions.


Multilocus inference of species trees and DNA barcoding

Diego Mallo, David Posada — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2016. PMC4971187, CC BY 4.0.

The unprecedented amount of data resulting from next-generation sequencing has opened a new era in phylogenetic estimation. Although large datasets should, in theory, increase phylogenetic resolution, massive, multilocus datasets have uncovered a great deal of phylogenetic incongruence among different genomic regions, due both to stochastic error and to the action of different evolutionary process such as incomplete lineage sorting, gene duplication and loss and horizontal gene transfer. This incongruence violates one of the fundamental assumptions of the DNA barcoding approach, which assumes that gene history and species history are identical. In this review, we explain some of the most important challenges we will have to face to reconstruct the history of species, and the advantages and disadvantages of different strategies for the phylogenetic analysis of multilocus data. In particular, we describe the evolutionary events that can generate species tree—gene tree discordance, compare the most popular methods for species tree reconstruction, highlight the challenges we need to face when using them and discuss their potential utility in barcoding. Current barcoding methods sacrifice a great amount of statistical power by only considering one locus, and a transition to multilocus barcodes would not only improve current barcoding methods, but also facilitate an eventual transition to species-tree-based barcoding strategies, which could better accommodate scenarios where the barcode gap is too small or inexistent.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘From DNA barcodes to biomes’.

Keywords: species tree reconstruction, incomplete lineage sorting, multilocus barcoding, phylogenetic incongruence, multispecies coalescent, barcode gap


Introduction

Gene trees based on single markers have been used as proxies for species phylogenies since the late 1970s. While the distinction between species and gene trees has been known for decades, the difficulty in obtaining multiple molecular markers delayed its explicit acknowledgement until very recently. The discordance between gene trees and species trees can be explained by both systematic—due to model misspecification—and stochastic—inherent to the finite amount of data and sampling process—error, but more importantly, this incongruence can also be the result of different evolutionary processes, mainly incomplete lineage sorting (ILS, collects all acronyms), gene duplication and loss (GDL) and horizontal gene transfer (HGT), but also hybrid speciation and gene flow. Nowadays, advances in sequencing technologies have facilitated the acquisition of large multilocus datasets, unveiling extensive phylogenomic incongruence, and bringing back the species tree—gene tree dichotomy to the spotlight. In consequence, a plethora of species tree reconstruction methods have been developed in the last decade. While all of these methods aim for the same target, the species tree, they conform to a broad variety in terms of input data, model assumptions, estimation strategy and computational complexity. It is therefore important to take into account the characteristics of the data at hand in order to choose the most appropriate species tree methodology; or even better, to design the research project and the sequencing strategy taking into account the expected evolutionary processes involved and the most appropriate methods to analyse the data.

DNA barcoding consists of identifying the species at which a given sample pertains (either catalogued or new) and is usually carried out using a DNA sequence obtained from a single locus. These marker sequences or barcodes are not necessarily unique for a given species—because of intraspecific variability—and, therefore, most barcoding methods rely on the identifiability of two different ranges of variability, intraspecific and interspecific. This characteristic identifies the ‘barcode gap’, defined by the separation between the maximum within-species genetic distance and the minimum between-species genetic distance. Its existence is subject not only to genetic divergence among species, but also to the absence of deep coalescences (scenario where the most recent common ancestor for a given gene of all individuals from the same species precedes the speciation time) and gene flow, and, therefore, it is sensitive to the distinction between species and gene trees. Even in absence of these events, different clades can have different ranges of intraspecific and interspecific variability, cancelling the barcode gap when considering the reference tree as a whole. There are at least four different methodological strategies for species assignment using barcodes: tree-based, sequence-similarity-based, statistical and diagnostic methods. Tree-based strategies use any classic phylogenetic method to estimate the phylogeny (gene tree) of the reference barcodes together with the query sequence. The query is assigned to the species it clusters within. Therefore, these strategies rely on the barcode gap and assume that gene tree and species tree are topologically equivalent. Sequence-similarity methods look for the closest sequence among the references using similarity scores (e.g. BLAST), assigning the species label of the closest reference to the query. Therefore, they also rely on the barcode gap because they assume that the intraspecific similarity is bigger than the interspecific. Statistical methods try to better exploit all the signals present in the data, accommodating uncertainty and yielding confidence measures of the assignment, at the expense of requiring extensive intraspecific sampling, population-size estimates and big computational efforts. Finally, diagnostic methods analyse the reference looking for specific nucleotides that are able to assign potential queries to given species, neglecting the rest of the information. Thus, they are less prone to be confounded by the absence of the barcode gap, whereas they strongly depend on the existence of a diagnostic combination of nucleotides.

Related to both species trees and DNA barcoding, species delimitation methods aim to determine the number of species present in a set of individual samples and their boundaries, and therefore generalizes the species assignment problem. Most single-locus species-delimitation methods rely on the distinction of the intra- and interspecific ranges of variability, and therefore are affected by the absence of the barcode gap in a similar manner to DNA barcoding. There are at least four different methodological strategies for species delimitation: genetic-distance-based, phylogenetic-based, divergence-based and allelic-exclusivity-based. Genetic-distance-based methods directly rely on the barcode gap to delimitate species, using a user-specified fixed threshold of genetic distance (e.g. jMOTU) or estimating it (e.g. ABGD). Phylogenetic-based methods are based on the phylogenetic species concept and therefore rely on modelling two evolutionary branching patterns—intra- and interspecific—and detecting the transition between them. GMYC and related methods model speciations under a Yule model and intraspecific variation with a coalescent process, whereas PTP models two different Poisson branching processes (avoiding the need of ultrametric trees). The divergence-based method K/θ looks for clades that diverged significatively more than expected by genetic drift, identifying them as different species. It uses both a sequence-distance matrix and a phylogenetic tree to compare the mean sequence diversity among clades (K) and the population mutation rate (θ), and it is intended for asexual organisms. Allelic-exclusivity-based methods (e.g. Haplowebs) look for clusters of individuals that share alleles that are mutually exclusive with other individuals, gathering the information from the co-occurrence of haplotypes in heterozygous individuals.

In this paper, we review the evolutionary events that generate species tree—gene tree discordance, methods for species tree reconstruction, the challenges we face when using them and their potential role in barcoding.


Species trees, population trees and gene trees

Species trees, the focus of this review, depict the evolutionary history of the sampled organisms. The nodes of a species tree represent speciation events, whereas the branches reflect the population history between speciations. The width of a branch in a species tree represents the effective population size (Ne), whereas its lengths represent time, usually in years or number of generations. Population trees are similar to species trees, but consider the history of conspecific populations. Finally, gene trees represent the evolutionary history of the sampled gene copies. The nodes of a gene tree indicate coalescent events, which correspond, looking forward in time, to the process of DNA replication and divergence. Coalescent events can occur right before the speciation time, well before (deep coalescence) or right afterwards (gene flow). The length of the branches in a gene tree usually represents the amount of substitutions per site. Importantly, tree-based barcoding refers to the use of gene trees.


Evolutionary processes that generate species tree/gene tree discordance

In spite of being conceptually different, species and gene trees are expected to be topologically equivalent under many evolutionary scenarios. Nevertheless, certain evolutionary processes disrupt this equivalence, decoupling their histories.


Incomplete lineage sorting

ILS, also known as deep coalescence or ancestral polymorphism, is the result of the retention of a genetic polymorphism along several speciation events. The posterior sorting of polymorphic lineages can make gene and species trees incongruent. Therefore, ILS is a special case of the consideration of how alleles evolve and sort within populations. ILS is usually modelled using the multispecies coalescent (MSC) model, which expands coalescent theory to be applied on species trees. The discordance due to ILS increases with effective population size and decreases with species tree branch length. In consequence, ILS is mostly associated with closely related species, although it is not exclusive of them, as short branches can also occur deeper in time. Because of this, ILS is probably the most relevant source, together with hybrid speciation and gene flow, of gene tree—species tree incongruence for DNA barcoding.


Gene duplication and loss

GDL describes the copy of a locus into a different genomic location and its loss, the primary source of new genetic material driving the evolution of gene families. GDL is the result of several known molecular mechanisms such as unequal crossing-over and retroposition. Traditionally, before phylogenetic estimation, duplicated gene copies—and, therefore, the signature of GDL—are removed from the data in order to only consider orthologous gene copies (orthology prediction methods are reviewed in). Most species tree reconstruction methods considering GDL follow a gene tree parsimony (GTP) approach in which the parsimony score for a species tree is the minimum number of duplications that this implies given a collection of gene trees.


Horizontal gene transfer

HGT or lateral gene transfer corresponds to the integration in the genome of a portion of genetic material coming from a different species in a non-sexual fashion, thus disrupting species boundaries and vertical inheritance. This evolutionary process is widespread in non-eukaryotic organisms, although it is not restricted to them. HGT can be modelled as a Poisson-distributed series of events, but most species tree methods considering it are based on GTP. As in the case of GDL, the signature of HGT is often detected and removed from the data based on phylogenetic incongruence, patchy distribution (presence or absence patterns) or compositional anomalies.


Hybrid speciation

Hybrid speciation corresponds to a speciation through interbreeding between members of two different species. The new species is therefore originated from two ancestral species, generating a reticulated history or species network. The new species may have the same number of chromosomes as its parent species (homoploid hybridization) or their sum (polyploid hybridization). This evolutionary process is fairly common in plants, but not restricted to them. Although this process can mislead DNA barcoding, we are not aware of specific DNA barcoding strategies to tackle it.


Gene flow

Gene flow is the acquisition of genetic material through interbreeding across species boundaries. Unlike HGT, during gene flow, full genomes are transferred from one species to another via sex. Afterwards, introgressed genomes can be broken up by recombination, and different loci can follow alternative histories, eventually getting fixed in the new species or drifting away. Population trees are strongly affected by gene flow, whereas in species trees (as long as the biological species concept holds), gene flow can only occur during speciation or immediately after, a process represented by the isolation with migration model (IM). Gene flow is currently neglected by species tree reconstruction methods.


Species tree reconstruction methods

There is a broad variety of species tree reconstruction methods that follow different methodological approaches in terms of evolutionary model, input data and computational requirements, making it difficult to choose a single criterion to arrange them into categories. Here, we classify them considering their input data, because the data determine most of their main assumptions and basic characteristics.


Supermatrix (concatenation)

The supermatrix or concatenation approach relies on joining all single-locus alignments into a multilocus alignment, which is used as input data for a standard phylogenetic estimation methodology (e.g. maximum-parsimony, maximum-likelihood, Bayesian inference and distance methods). The underlying assumption is that either all gene trees share the species history or the discordant phylogenetic signals cancel out when all the histories are considered together. If any of these assumptions holds, then the concatenated tree should be a reasonable proxy of the species tree phylogeny.


Supertree

The supertree approach consists of two steps. First, gene trees are estimated independently with any standard phylogenetic reconstruction method. Second, the resulting gene trees are combined into a single species tree or supertree. Most species tree reconstruction methods are supertree methods, although they can follow completely different strategies.


Disagreement reduction

These methods do not model any evolutionary process. Instead, they try to find the supertree(s) that minimize(s) the disagreement among gene trees. This category includes consensus and concordance methods such as BUCKy, ASTRAL and ASTRAL-II. Consensus methods build a tree with compatible gene tree bipartitions weighted by their frequencies while BUCKy does so using concordance factors. ASTRAL and ASTRAL-II maximize the number of quartets induced by the input gene trees. Matrix representation using parsimony or likelihood summarize gene tree topologies into a matrix representing the absence/presence of given nodes across the gene trees, which is then used to reconstruct the species tree under the corresponding optimality criterion. Finally, other methods try to minimize topological distances among gene trees, such as the RF and MulRF supertree approaches.


Single evolutionary process

Many species tree reconstruction methods explicitly consider a single evolutionary process. Some rely on the optimization of a gene tree–species tree reconciliation cost (GTP). These methods compute the number of deep coalescences, GDLs or HGTs necessary to explain the gene tree–species tree discordance, returning the species tree that minimizes them. The iGTP program implements the reconciliation models for either ILS or GDL, whereas SPRSupertrees does the same for HGT. Other types of methods that are focused on ILS calculate distance trees using coalescent times as speciation upper bounds, as orthologous gene copies in different species that obligatorily had to diverge before the speciation event. Here, we can include programs such as GLASS, STEAC, SD, MAC, STAR, NJst or ASTRID (most of them reviewed in). STEM algorithmically estimates the GLASS species tree under a likelihood framework. Finally, other methods also based on the MSC model use fast heuristic optimization procedures on a likelihood-like function in order to find the most likely species tree, such as MP-EST and STELLS.


Multiple evolutionary processes

A few species tree reconstruction methods can consider multiple evolutionary processes at once. Models considering ILS and hybridization have been implemented in the program Phylonet, which can reconstruct species networks under parsimony, maximum-likelihood and pseudo-likelihood criteria. De Oliveira Martins et al. proposed a Bayesian supertree method—implemented in the program Guenomu—that considers ILS, GDL, HGT and gene tree—species tree discordance. This method is based on a hierarchical Bayesian model, and calculates the posterior probability of the species tree given the gene trees upon several reconciliation costs and distances. This program takes as input posterior gene tree distributions estimated by any Bayesian gene tree estimation software (e.g. MrBayes).


Full data

A small family of species tree methods directly analyse the sequence data, thus using all the available information contained in the individual alignments.


Modelling incomplete lineage sorting

SVDquartets estimates the best topology for quartets of taxa based on the singular value decomposition of a matrix of site-pattern frequencies. Subsequently, the reconstructed quartets are assembled into a species tree using, for example, a tool such as Quartet MaxCut. The SVDquartets method has been intended for single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data, but simulation studies suggest that it can perform well with multilocus datasets. Other ILS-aware methods use full probabilistic approaches in a Bayesian framework. Thus, SNAPP—implemented in BEAST2—estimates species trees, divergence times and population sizes on SNP or amplified fragment-length polymorphism (AFLP) data, integrating over all possible gene (SNP/AFLP) trees (thus not estimating them). BEST and *BEAST implement an MSC model in order to co-estimate gene and species trees from sequence data, providing estimates of not only distributions of gene trees and species trees, but also of other important parameters such as population sizes under complex population dynamics and divergence times using relaxed-clock models.


Modelling gene duplication and loss

PHYLDOG relies on a birth–death probabilistic approach to jointly reconstruct species and gene trees from multiple gene family alignments.


Species tree accuracy

Most species tree reconstruction methods rely either directly or indirectly on estimated gene trees. Therefore, every condition able to mislead gene tree reconstruction will, to a greater or lesser extent, also affect final species tree accuracy. Bayzid & Warnow conducted a simulation study showing a great correlation between gene tree and species tree accuracies, claiming that the advantage of the most accurate species tree reconstruction method in their experiments, *BEAST, was due to estimating much better gene trees. Therefore, different factors that affect the accuracy of gene tree estimation can also influence the accuracy of the resulting species trees.

Gene tree reconstruction methods are considered robust to missing data as long as the amount of phylogenetic signal is enough to obtain a reliable tree. In fact, including taxa with a lot of missing data can improve the overall phylogenetic accuracy. Nevertheless, new discussions on this topic have arisen recently. When considering the species tree reconstruction step, we add one layer of complexity, because different genes can cover different taxa (incomplete taxon coverage). This situation can generate indecisive scenarios characterized by extensive tree terraces that complicate phylogenetic analysis. Very recently, Xi et al. showed that at least concatenation and supertree methods (disagreement-based and ILS-based) are robust to random missing data provided a sufficiently large dataset, whereas non-randomly distributed missing data become more problematic. Thus, concatenation is misled by non-randomly distributed missing data in combination with substitution-rate heterogeneity, and even worse with additional high levels of ILS. Supertree methods respond in different ways. Disagreement-based methods (ASTRAL and MRP at least) and MP-EST are quite robust to missing data, whereas STAR (and potentially other distance-based ILS supertree methods) is strongly misled by it.

Intralocus recombination splits genes into regions with different evolutionary histories, misleading gene tree estimation at different levels. Nevertheless, according to Lanier & Knowles, species tree reconstruction methods—at least STEM—are robust to the effect of intralocus recombination. Moreover, in their simulations, the confounding effect of recombination was reduced by adding loci and/or individuals per species.

Conversely, gene flow can be an important misleading force for species tree estimation, depending on the migration model. Eckert & Carstens showed that supertree ILS-based methods are robust to historical gene flow models (parapatric and allopatric), whereas the concatenation approach is not. Nevertheless, their results suggest that stepping-stone and, more importantly, n-island models of gene flow can strongly mislead supertree and concatenation approaches. Leaché et al. further studied the effect of gene flow on both ILS-based supertree and full probabilistic Bayesian methods, showing that gene flow between sister species increases species tree topological accuracy, whereas gene flow between non-sister species strongly bias species tree estimation. Moreover, gene flow induces over-compression (species tree-branch length underestimation) and dilatation (population-size overestimation) to a different extent depending on the exact gene-flow model assumed.

The amount of HGT, GDL and ILS affects species tree accuracy even when these processes are explicitly considered by the model. While the accuracy of ILS-based methods decays with the amount of ILS, both high and low GDL or HGT rates mislead the inference of species trees. In spite of not being explicitly considered, moderate levels of ILS do not worsen by much the accuracy of PHYLDOG's species trees, although they induce an overestimation of the number of duplications and losses. Randomly distributed HGT does not dramatically decrease the accuracy of ILS-based fully probabilistic methods, although its accuracy drops when HGT is focused on a specific species tree branch. The relative robustness under low and moderate levels of random HGT is also shared with quartet-based disagreement-reduction supertree methods—ASTRAL-II and wQMC—concatenation and ILS-based supertree methods (NJst), whereas under high levels of HGT, quartet-based methods stand out in terms of accuracy (especially ASTRAL-II).

The supermatrix approach is the most accurate species tree reconstruction method when the effect of ILS or HGT is low and/or the amount of phylogenetic signals per loci is small (e.g. short sequences). This advantage is due to the reduction of the noise/signal ratio by considering together all the phylogenetic information. The accuracy of non-supermatrix approaches is strongly depleted by loci with low phylogenetic signal (usually short genes) due to increased gene tree error. Several related strategies based on combining groups of loci to generate so-called supergenes have been proposed in order to diminish this issue. These solutions constitute a compromise between concatenation and supertree methods that try to improve the noise/signal ratio for each supergene without assuming that gene and species trees are topologically equivalent. The latest of these methods—weighted statistical binning—has shown interesting improvements on the accuracy of different species tree reconstruction methods.

Full probabilistic species tree reconstruction methods stand out as the most accurate in most benchmarks that take them into consideration. Nevertheless, these types of methods are only suitable for small datasets because of computational constraints. Among faster alternatives considering ILS, ASTRAL II and NJst/ASTRID are usually the most accurate. MP-EST shows also very good performance in computer simulations, and in spite of being slower, is probably the most popular species tree method nowadays. The program Guenomu is so far the only one capable of taking into account ILS, GDL and HGT simultaneously—using a non-parametric model—avoiding the need for an orthology-assignment step.


Multilocus species-delimitation methods

Multilocus species-delimitation methods share most models and strategies with species-tree reconstruction methods, but extend them in order to estimate the number of species, species assignment and species boundaries in the sample. These methods also take into consideration the species tree–gene tree dichotomy, usually relying on the MSC model to deal with ILS. Some species delimitation methods co-estimate both the species tree and the species delimitation, whereas others need pre-estimated species trees as input. Species delimitation methods are very relevant to DNA barcoding, because they could be used as a basal framework to develop new DNA barcoding strategies or could be directly applied to that purpose.

Several multilocus species-delimitation approaches have been proposed in recent years. According to their input data, they conform to either the supertree or the full-data approach. At least three recently published methods pertain to the former. O'Meara developed a GTP-based species-delimitation strategy that minimizes both gene tree conflict in interspecific regions (calculating a gene duplication cost) and excess of structure in within-species regions (using a cost of excess of triplet-overlapping, calculated using coalescent simulations). Ence & Carstens developed a multilocus species-delimitation method (SpedeSTEM) that uses STEM to calculate the likelihood of alternative-delimitation hypothesis (species trees)—generated by hierarchical permutation of putative intraspecific groups—which are afterwards evaluated using information theory statistics such as the Akaike information criterion. KC delimitation is another ILS-based species-delimitation method, which estimates the species tree and delimitation that maximize gene tree probability under the simulations using MSC.

The remaining methods use sequence alignments as input, taking advantage of the full data in Bayesian full-probabilistic approaches. Grummer et al. and Leaché et al. proposed the use of a model-selection strategy (Bayes factors) to select the best-fit species assignment based on the comparison of marginal likelihoods. The species assignments are proposed by the user, and the marginal likelihoods estimated using *BEAST or SNAPP, respectively. BPP expands the strategy used by *BEAST to carry out species delimitation, and is capable of co-estimating both the species tree and the species delimitation or any of them given the other. This method explicitly explores the delimitation space by considering different combinations of pre-specified populations as the candidate species using a reversible jump Markov chain Monte Carlo (rjMCMC). BPP has been expanded recently (iBPP) in order to consider not only molecular data, but also phenotypic traits. Finally, DISSECT avoids the usage of the rjMCMC—which is computationally expensive—by considering each individual as a single species and modifying the node height prior to estimate branch/node collapsibility in *BEAST.


Species trees and barcoding

Barcoding methods try to identify the species at which a given DNA sample pertains, and therefore are related to species trees by the very nature of its purpose. Nevertheless, for practical reasons, the species tree–gene tree dilemma has been so far neglected, and most barcoding methods are based on a single locus. Nevertheless, the species tree–gene tree incongruence directly disturbs barcoding by modifying the extent of the barcode gap across the tree of life, getting even to vanishing it in certain clades. In the light of this problem and the latest advances on species tree reconstruction and multilocus species delimitation methods, Dowton et al. encouraged to extend the current barcoding framework. Thus, they proposed a multilocus alternative based on the MSC model, which relies on *BEAST for the species tree estimation and on BPP for the subsequent species-delimitation step. Nonetheless, Collins & Cruickshank demonstrated that for the data used by Dowton et al., appropriately adjusting a classical method for the existing barcode gap is enough to equate the accuracies of the two frameworks. In light of these results, the authors discouraged the adoption of MSC-based multilocus methods until the current framework is comprehensively shown not to work, arguing that the new alternative is too costly in terms of computation and sequencing. Collins & Cruickshank argued that focusing on comprehensive sampling, complete reference libraries and developing further single locus methods would improve DNA barcode identification success in a more extensive way, avoiding the need for re-sequencing and curating new reference genes. Nevertheless, Yang & Rannala very recently conducted a simulation study in which single-threshold barcode methods performed poorly, being largely outcompeted by BPP. They also show that the increase in sequencing costs of the proposed framework shift would not be so dramatic, because BPP obtains reasonable results even with a single locus; and 10 loci are enough to get high accuracy and precision. While BPP is computationally intensive, Yang & Rannala propose to alleviate the computational burden by reducing the size of the problem, analysing divergent groups of species as separate datasets. New alternative single-locus barcoding methods have also arisen recently, based on different strategies such as coalescent theory, machine learning, neural networks, fuzzy-set theory and character-based logic. Among them excel character-based barcoding methods, which are more accurate than the classical tree and similarity barcoding methods in scenarios with recent speciations (including situations in which a barcoding gap does not exist) and therefore could constitute an appropriate compromise between classical and MSC-based barcoding. Nevertheless, in spite of being more robust to a barcoding overlap, character-based methods still require groups of nucleotides with diagnostic power, which may simply not exist for certain species for a given locus due to a relatively small sequence length or to a low substitution rate.

Current barcoding methods sacrifice a great amount of statistical power by considering only one locus, and the transition to multilocus barcodes might not be that expensive, because sample collection, DNA isolation and (partially) PCR would not require a large additional investment. Most current single-locus barcoding strategies would benefit from the addition of extra loci: multilocus character-based methods could increase their accuracy by adding more diagnostic characters; statistical barcoding methods would gain additional power from the use of multiple, independent evidence; and tree-based methods could use concatenated loci to improve phylogenetic accuracy for clades with poor phylogenetic signal. Moreover, the use of multiple loci would facilitate the transition to species tree-based strategies, which accommodate better possible barcoding overlaps. While full-probabilistic MSC-based barcoding approaches such as the one proposed by Dowton et al. might be too computationally intensive—although they could become feasible by using a small number of loci and analysing well-diverged groups separately, future strategies could extend the current tree-based barcoding framework by using any of the fastest (but still accurate) species tree reconstruction methods reviewed in this paper (e.g. ASTRAL II, MP-EST or ASTRID) on multilocus barcodes, extending the current tree-based barcoding strategy to a species tree-based barcoding framework.


Authors' contributions

D.M. and D.P. conceived, wrote and revised the manuscript.


Uses, misuses, new uses and fundamental limitations of magnetic resonance imaging in cognitive science

Robert Turner — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2016. PMC5003851, CC BY 4.0.

When blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) contrast functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was discovered in the early 1990s, it provoked an explosion of interest in exploring human cognition, using brain mapping techniques based on MRI. Standards for data acquisition and analysis were rapidly put in place, in order to assist comparison of results across laboratories. Recently, MRI data acquisition capabilities have improved dramatically, inviting a rethink of strategies for relating functional brain activity at the systems level with its neuronal substrates and functional connections. This paper reviews the established capabilities of BOLD contrast fMRI, the perceived weaknesses of major methods of analysis, and current results that may provide insights into improved brain modelling. These results have inspired the use of in vivo myeloarchitecture for localizing brain activity, individual subject analysis without spatial smoothing and mapping of changes in cerebral blood volume instead of BOLD activation changes. The apparent fundamental limitations of all methods based on nuclear magnetic resonance are also discussed.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘Interpreting BOLD: a dialogue between cognitive and cellular neuroscience’.


Introduction

‘Activity maps are of limited value unless they intersect with detailed neuroanatomical information’Randlett et al..

In the early 1990s, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scientists discovered that the already-known difference in magnetic susceptibility between oxygenated and deoxygenated haemoglobin could be used as an index of local brain activity. Although the effect, whose amplitude depends both on changes in blood oxygenation and on regional cerebral blood volume (CBV), must still be considered to be somewhat empirical, considerable insight has been achieved in the past 20 years into its origins in neurovascular coupling, and its relevance to modelling of brain operations.

Because MRI is remarkably free from harmful side effects up to static field strengths of at least 8 T, the blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) effect was very rapidly adopted by brain scientists who previously had access only to the somewhat invasive and spatially rather imprecise technique of positron emission tomography (PET), with its unavoidable radiation dose.

In the early years of fMRI, most cognitive neuroscience studies involving imaging were performed using MRI scanners with a field strength of 1.5 T, equipped with gradient coils capable of producing gradients of only about 10 mT m−1, single-channel radiofrequency (RF) receiver coils and with comparatively poor temporal stability. To make the most effective use of such equipment, researchers widely adopted strategies for data analysis that in hindsight can be seen as misleading. This has become clear with the introduction of much higher field MRI scanners for human studies, up to 7 T, which have stronger magnetic field gradient coils, up to 64 channels of RF reception, and greatly improved temporal stability. The much higher signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) now makes it possible to localize brain functional activity in vivo within identifiable neural substrates, with reasonably well-known networks of axonal connections, allowing a game-changing approach to cognitive science and cognitive psychology.

This short review discusses the following questions: 1. What can be learned about cognition from structural and functional BOLD MRI that other techniques cannot provide?2. What are the major flaws in current uses of fMRI?3. Are there other ways of analysing MRI/fMRI data that provide deeper insight?4. Are there developments in MRI and fMRI methodology that minimize the assumptions needed?5. What are the likely fundamental limitations of all MRI methods?6. What are the poorly explored questions relevant to fMRI?7. What are the most synergetic other techniques?


What can be learned about cognition from structural and functional blood oxygenation level-dependent magnetic resonance imaging that other techniques cannot provide?

Many researchers take the word ‘cognition’ to mean the processes internal to the brain that culminate in the encoding of memories, planning of action or directly as immediate actions. The work involved in these processes is performed by neurons assisted by glial cells, and requires energy, which is supplied almost entirely by oxidative phosphorylation, the glucose and oxygen coming mostly from the capillaries and terminal arterioles that perfuse brain tissue. During neuronal activity, substances are released—notably nitric oxide—that have a direct effect on local blood volume and blood flow. Although the increased metabolic demand associated with neural work results in a higher extraction of oxygen from the blood, the molecules released during synaptic activity cause expansion of the cortical arterioles and capillaries, which normally overcompensates for this increased oxygen extraction. The end result is that the blood oxygenation typically increases, giving rise to the increase in BOLD signal observed in MRI conventionally associated with ‘brain activity’.

It is fair to claim that no other experimental technique can provide such detailed maps of human brain activity, with reasonably uniform sensitivity throughout the brain volume. The anatomical location of functional activity can be assigned by referring to structural brain images, usually so-called T1-weighted images, which can be obtained from the same subject's brain, or as an average across the brains of a group of subjects, nonlinearly warped into a suitable template brain. Reproducibility of the basic effect is well established, and the application of diffusion-weighting magnetic field gradients to associated MRI acquisitions allows approximate estimation of axonal connections. In principle, brain structure, function and connectivity can be investigated at a spatial scale of better than 1 mm in individual human subjects. Thus, one can argue that if cognitive neuroscience is defined as the development of explanatory models of brain function based on known neuroanatomy and connectivity, BOLD fMRI is the best tool that we currently have.

However, an important question remains: what exactly do we mean by ‘brain activity’? There is now strong evidence that the amplitude of BOLD signal is well correlated with local field potential and increases in gamma-band electrical activity, and it is quite often correlated with spike frequency. However, as yet there is no unambiguous way to discriminate whether a positive BOLD signal in a given brain location arises from excitatory or inhibitory outputs from that location. The spatial localization of increases in BOLD signal is consistent with electrocorticographic (ECoG) recordings within millimetre accuracy. However, ever since the discovery of BOLD contrast it has been noted that changes in blood oxygenation owing to local changes in oxygen uptake and blood volume are carried downstream. This entails that BOLD contrast, when obtained with the most usual technique of gradient-echo MRI, is maximal at the cortical surface and in discrete pial veins. Nevertheless, there is wide agreement that the BOLD signal provides fairly reliable information regarding the location of changes in brain electrical activity.

However, it is still very unclear what level of granularity needs to be considered in order to ensure the plausibility of proposed models. Over the years from 1980 until about 2010, cognitive neuroscience studies that employed neuroimaging mostly adopted a broad-brush, coarse-grain approach, inspired largely by analysis methods first developed for PET. From this perspective, typically described as statistical parametric mapping, the practice of spatially smoothing the raw BOLD fMRI data (acquired at approx. 3 mm resolution) to roughly the spatial resolution of processed PET data (approx. 10 mm resolution), before further analysis, was regarded as unproblematic, and indeed offered advantages in regard to sensitivity and reproducibility. At this spatial scale, useful conclusions could be drawn regarding which gyrus of the brain played a more important role in a particular brain task. Claims still continue to be made for much more precise localization within each lobe, resulting from a strategy of statistical thresholding that can deceptively produce what appear to be highly localized apparent regions of activity even when the images have been highly smoothed before analysis.

Regarding cognitive studies, strong objection has been raised to the practice of statistical mapping of heavily smoothed and thresholded functional brain imaging data, labelling its findings as ‘neo-phrenology’ and committing the mereological fallacy —that is, ascribing to parts of a system attributes that can only be coherently ascribed to the entire system. A recent very well-informed critique of many aspects of current practice can be found in Shifferman. It is outside the scope of this review to elaborate further on this point.

At the most general level, however, fMRI has done much to support the idea of cortical segregation, that specific brain functions can be assigned to relatively compact cortical areas that can be labelled with a description of the function. Thus, we have visual areas, auditory areas, motor and somatosensory areas and many others, which are becoming progressively subdivided as experimental designs become more subtle and imaging techniques improve. Over the past 20 years, fMRI has been able uniquely to demonstrate the fine structure of such maps, notably in elucidating the spatial structure of responses to objects at different positions in the visual field, touch and motion of different parts of the body, numerosity of visual objects and variations of auditory pitch. Such studies have invariably attempted to use all the spatial resolution that fMRI can provide, avoiding spatial smoothing except for cosmetic reasons at a final stage of analysis. The data obtained from such mapping experiments are likely to be important in the formulation and testing of theories of perception and motor control.

Furthermore, the concept of neuronal receptive fields has recently been extended to posit the existence of population receptive fields, and a kindred concept, that of brain voxel encoding. Such methods, reviewed by Poldrack & Farah, which can involve rich, quasi-naturalistic batteries of stimuli and a small number of subjects, provide us with detailed cortical maps that can be surprisingly extensive, throwing into question simplistic functional parcellations based on simpler experimental paradigms, drastic spatial smoothing and rigorous statistical thresholding. This strategy is discussed further in §3.


What are the major flaws in current uses of functional magnetic resonance imaging?

In the early days of BOLD fMRI (1990s), leading imaging neuroscience laboratories, such as the Functional Imaging Laboratory in Queen Square, London, developed the still-current methodology, which attempts to link brain location, neuroanatomy and function at a spatial scale of no better than 8 mm—about as close as anyone dared to expect that corresponding cortical areas could be located across brains. Standard practice included spatial smoothing of functional images by 8 mm, and group averaging. Among several strong reasons for this procedure, smoothing allowed for the residual mismatch of actual cortical areas after structural brain images had been spatially normalized into a standard template brain registered within MNI space, so that positive results could be anticipated from group averaging across normalized brains. Spatial location of activity was usually identified on a maximum probability atlas of Brodmann areas derived from the cytoarchitecture of 10 cadaver brains. Very few researchers were then aware that MRI could already be made quite sensitive to myeloarchitectural details.

The general linear model was used to quantify the correlation between the time course of the signal change in each voxel of the smoothed images with the applied functional paradigm. The resulting analysis packages of SPM (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/), FSL (http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/), Brain Voyager (http://www.brainvoyager.com/) and AFNI (http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni) continue to dominate the field of imaging-based cognitive neuroscience, with SPM still the most popular.

However, this analysis strategy entails several poorly justified assumptions, few of which are discussed in the cognitive science literature. These inevitably exclude the possibility of identifying neural competence with neuroanatomical substrate, and hence the formulation of systems neuroscience models that can benefit from prior cellular neuroscience knowledge.

In principle, the components of a system should be clearly definable, and themselves well understood. Turner discusses this topic in detail, arguing that in vivo parcellated maps of cortex and subcortex, which can be acquired even at 3 T using quantitative MRI, will provide a more reliable and reproducible guide to brain components than those currently used, giving models of brain function that use our remarkably rich knowledge of neuroanatomy. A further viable addition to this may be the distinction between input and output cortical layers, probably achievable with fMRI spatial resolution of 0.5 mm or better (see §4 below).


Are there other ways of analysing magnetic resonance imaging/functional magnetic resonance imaging data that provide deeper insight?


Multivoxel pattern analysis

One way to avoid the pitfalls of premature spatial smoothing, specifically the merging together of neighbouring activations that should remain distinct because they result from different neural operations, is to use machine learning techniques to discriminate spatial patterns of brain activity specific to a particular stimulus or task from other related stimuli. This approach, termed multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA), does not require spatial smoothing, and thus avoids the mistaken assumptions mentioned above. Although the ‘searchlight’ approach to MVPA of Kriegeskorte effectively smooths the image data, this drawback can be avoided, as pointed out by Stelzer, by the use of feature weight mapping.


Voxel encoding and population receptive field mapping

One recent approach for modelling fMRI data begins with providing the experimental subject with a very large number of related stimuli or tasks, often naturalistic. These are analysed into a large set of features. The goal is to determine the functional repertoire of each grey matter voxel, as encompassed by a model that characterizes the ‘feature space’ of the stimuli. The correctness and completeness of the model in predicting brain activity to new stimuli can be tested on a separate validation dataset. Such models are called encoding models, because they describe how information about the sensory stimulus is encoded in measured brain activity. Remarkable cortical maps, for instance depicting the space of semantic categories, have been generated using these methods. For such purposes, spatial smoothing would be quite unacceptable. Hence, this technique avoids earlier questionable assumptions, and lends itself to research in which myeloarchitecture, cytoarchitecture and functional repertoire can be directly compared.

Results using this approach reveal that specific features of experience often have widely distributed spatial representations in the brain. However, clustering can also be noted, often in accordance with linguistic or common-sense categorization of experience and action. Cognitive neuroscience may benefit from deeper understanding of these data-driven insights into the categorization of experience, which may avoid the Procrustean tendency to force our experience into predefined inherited conceptual frameworks that may have little affinity with how brains actually operate.

The population receptive field mapping approach estimates a model of the population receptive field for voxels in visual cortex that best explains measured fMRI responses resulting from a series of various visual stimuli. This can be regarded as a special case of voxel encoding, applying specifically to visual stimuli and visual cortex.


Can novel magnetic resonance imaging and functional magnetic resonance imaging methods minimize the assumptions needed?

Recent developments in MRI using the new generation of whole-body scanners at field strengths of 7 T and above have shown conclusively that submillimetre spatial resolution is now achievable for structural, functional and connectivity imaging. For functional BOLD and structural imaging, submillimetre resolution has even been achieved with the latest generation of 3 T scanners. Such a resolution, consistent with the size of cortical columns, may constitute a critical threshold regarding realistic mechanistic explanations of brain function. Furthermore, the recognition that quantitative MRI enables assessment of myelin and iron density within the living brain offers a fresh outlook on systems neuroanatomy, in which a renewed study of myeloarchitecture will play a major role, and the interaction between brain iron, dopamine and neuromelanin can be explored in the context of brain function.


Brain structure

Use of high-field MRI in human brain, particularly at 7 T, enables in vivo individual-specific maps of genuine cortical microstructure, which can be correlated with cortical function in the same brain. Quantitative structural maps of the longitudinal relaxation time T1 of entire brains can be obtained with better than 0.5 mm isotropic resolution, which closely resemble myelin-stained histological sections at low-resolution. High-quality structural data revealing myelin content can also be achieved at 3 T, but with correspondingly lower spatial resolution. Cécile & Oskar Vogt, pioneers in myeloarchitecture research in the first half of the twentieth century, showed that there is good concordance between structural parcellations of the cortex based on myeloarchitecture and on cytoarchitecture.

Hence, ‘in vivo Brodmann mapping’ can be performed using MRI-observable differences in grey matter myelination. Cortical areas known from post-mortem studies to be heavily myelinated such as primary motor, somatosensory, auditory, visual cortex and area V5-MT are easily discriminated from surrounding less-myelinated regions. Moreover, surface registration across subjects of T1 maps of the cortex can be achieved efficiently and precisely, impressively matching corresponding cortical areas. Using the high spatial resolution available at 7 T, and a realistic algorithm modelling the effect of cortical folding on layer position, this matching provides cortical profiles of myelination comparable to the Vogt histological findings. The higher spatial resolution available using prospective motion correction, together with precise averaging of individual subject brains across multiple imaging sessions, will enable still finer discriminations of cortical areas. MRI techniques that can measure dendritic density and capillary density will also assist in this endeavour.

De Martino has recently shown that functional and structural data for auditory cortex can be elegantly combined, to suggest that primary auditory cortex can be pragmatically defined as the region of high myelination (short T1) on the crown of Heschl's gyrus in the temporal lobe. Thus, like can now be compared with like in group studies—averaging of structural and functional results can be performed in an area-wise manner, without spatial smoothing. This matching of function and structure also offers the potential to integrate the findings of systems neuroscience with those of cellular neuroscience, for instance to explain the functional competence of a cortical area in terms of its neuronal makeup and configuration.

The rebirth of scientific interest in myeloarchitecture holds the promise of deeper insights into principles of cortical organization. Once the location of changes in brain activity in a given subject's brain can be identified via their own native myelin-based cortical atlas, the corresponding cytoarchitecture can be looked up in a concordance atlas. When combined with high-quality crossing-fibre dMRI tractography such information could greatly assist mechanistic explanation of brain function. With the achievable isotropic resolution of 300 µm in structural MR images, there are no more than a few thousand pyramidal neurons within each voxel. In brain locations showing columnar structure, many of such neurons are likely to participate in network activity cooperatively.

The high spatial resolution of long echo-time gradient-echo structural phase images at 7 T has an additional benefit. In the form of neuromelanin in the basal ganglia, iron provides excellent contrast-to-noise ratio, and hence their precise delineation. Quantitative maps of magnetic susceptibility give even clearer pictures of these under-researched structures, vital to human life.


Brain function

As mentioned above, work at 7 T in recent years has produced remarkable improvements in functional imaging (reviewed by Van der Zwaag), to the level of 0.5 mm isotropic resolution. Use of T2-weighted three-dimensional gradient-recalled echo and spin-echo imaging has become an option for very high spatial resolution, owing to its high SNR per unit time and relative insensitivity to larger draining veins. Parallel acquisition, both in-plane and simultaneous multislice has been the mainstay of 7 T fMRI, allowing images of high spatial resolution and good image quality to be obtained with remarkable speed. Functional studies are proceeding even with small deep structures such as the subthalamic nucleus.

However, perhaps the most exciting development in fMRI at high field is the implementation of high-sensitivity methods for measuring changes in regional CBV. These methods use a preparatory inversion pulse to null the MRI signal from the blood, leaving a signal from brain tissue alone which varies linearly with the blood volume, and thus with the state of brain activity. A modification of this technique enables submillimetre resolution at 7 T. CBV appears to be locally controlled by pericytes responsive to activity in neighbouring neurons within the thickness of the cortex. Thus, the ability to monitor CBV non-invasively in real time may greatly improve investigation of variations of neural activity at the resolution of the cortical layer. Further evidence for the layer-specificity of CBV mapping comes from a study of the olfactory bulb in rat brain, which shows good separation of CBV response for stimuli which differentially excite neurons in specific cortical layers.


Brain connectivity

Brain connectivity can be approximately evaluated using diffusion-weighted imaging and by analysing spatial correlations in task-absent BOLD signal (so-called resting state). Diffusion-weighted imaging uses large magnetic field gradient pulses between spin excitation and data acquisition to label water molecular motions. Work at 7 T with gradients of 80 mT m−1 gives excellent delineation of fibre orientations, with spatial resolution up to 0.8 mm isotropic. Here, fibre tracts can be seen to bend into the sulcal banks, as they should, in contrast with the more standard spatial resolution of 3 mm, where computed tracts appear to terminate on the gyral crowns. However, diffusion imaging has important limitations in depicting brain connections (see the critical papers of Jones and Thomas et al.).

Functional connectivity studies at 7 T, which benefit greatly from the improved SNR and resolution, are increasing in number. For an excellent primer, see Power, and for current examples, see Raemakers. There is still considerable controversy regarding optimal methods for extracting connectivity information and the neural processes underlying the observable resting state networks remain somewhat obscure. However, their patterns are considered to be useful heuristic guides to brain connectivity, even to the point of providing an alternative method for cortical parcellation.


Layer-dependent functional magnetic resonance imaging

The submillimetre spatial resolution available at 7 T for functional imaging of human brain allows investigation of variations of BOLD contrast across the thickness of the cortex. In a pioneering study in 2011, Trampel et al. measured activation in the hand area of human primary motor cortex. They used gradient-echo BOLD fMRI to study activation for three motor tasks: finger tapping, finger movement without touch and motor imagery. The primary motor cortex was unambiguously identified by its anatomical location and high myelin content, as indicated by its characteristically short T1. At 7 T, structural data were obtained with 0.5 mm isotropic resolution, and fMRI data with 0.75 mm isotropic resolution. Cortical activation profiles specific to each motor condition were computed, and averaged across the activated area at four different cortical depths, and across nine human volunteer subjects. During the motor imagery condition, lacking motor output from layer V of the primary motor cortex, the BOLD signal at a depth corresponding to this cortical layer was found to be reduced, by comparison with the signal from other cortical layers in this condition.

As mentioned in §1, however, the BOLD signal represents the history of blood oxygenation changes as blood travels from the pial arteries into the diving arterioles and thence into capillaries and veins. As such, this signal cannot provide a precise layer-specific indication of oxygen extraction. In the study just described, the statistically highly significant difference found in cortical profiles between the tapping and motor imagery conditions is noteworthy, but should not be over-interpreted. (See further discussion in §5a(ii) below.)


What are the likely fundamental limitations of all magnetic resonance imaging methods?

Most MRI acquisitions depend on the interaction of the minute magnetic moments of the protons comprising the nuclei of hydrogen atoms in water molecules with feasible applied magnetic fields—static, audiofrequency and radiofrequency. It is only the vast abundance of these protons in brain tissue that enables any NMR signal to be observable.

Increasing the static field incurs increasingly severe problems of RF engineering, RF safety, perceptible physiological effects, subject acceptability, high gradient strength requirements and expense. At 7 T, where several of these problems now have adequate solutions, the best structural whole-brain spatial resolution achievable in a scanning session of 1 h is likely to be about 300 µm isotropic. Higher resolution may be achieved with part-brain acquisition, with averaging across sessions to achieve adequate SNRs. Prospective motion correction will be required to ensure image quality.

In regard to functional studies, the magnetic fields associated with coherent neural activity, while easily observable using magnetoencephalography techniques, are too small to be localized using MRI methods. So the only currently practical way that MRI can contribute to studies of brain function is via its sensitivity for the vascular response to neural activity.

The MR signal associated with this vascular response can depend on the blood's velocity, volume fraction and oxygenation. MRI sequences can be designed to be sensitive to one or more of these parameters, but there are fundamental limitations.


Specific limitations of blood oxygenation level-dependent


Ambiguity

The BOLD signal is a non-quantitative index of changes in both blood volume and oxygen extraction. A quantitative measure of changes in oxygen utilization, or brain work, would be more desirable. While this can be estimated by combining BOLD measurements with cerebral blood flow measurements, following Davis, the weak link is the poor sensitivity of CBF measurement by MRI. The sensitivity is improved at 7 T, but at this field strength another fully quantitative measure of brain activity becomes feasible, non-invasive measurement of CBV using a modification of vascular space occupancy (VASO).


Poor layer-specificity

Blood volume is apparently controlled by resistance arterioles and pericytes, with little functional change in pial veins, and is thus spatially quite well matched to demand, but changes in blood oxygenation and blood flow are more non-local. Gradient-echo (GE) BOLD changes are maximal at the cortical surface, and may even be detected in pial veins several millimetres downstream from the active grey matter. To minimize this problem, some researchers advocate spin-echo BOLD, but its sensitivity is much lower than GE-BOLD, even at 7 T; and even with spin-echo acquisition, much BOLD signal arises from principal intracortical veins. Because most of the signal arises from larger venules and surface veins, the effective GE-BOLD resolution in the plane of the cortex cannot be better than the spacing of principal intracortical veins (about 0.7 mm). In addition, the cortical profile of BOLD signal represents a spatial convolution of task-driven changes in oxygen extraction with local blood flow, modulated by changes in blood volume, which blurs out the layer-dependence of underlying neural activity. Capillary perfusion, as measured using arterial spin labelling (ASL), should, in principle, be well localized to neural activity, but the relatively low sensitivity of this technique in humans has deterred its widespread usage.

A recent simplified model of the blurring effect predicts a cortical depth effect that roughly fits experimental data, confirming that the cortical profile of the BOLD signal cannot be naively interpreted as a profile of neuronal activity. An fMRI study concerning layer-specific feedback in visual cortex suggests that where sufficient spatial separation exists between top-down and bottom-up input layers, BOLD contrast may still be enough to discriminate their characteristic patterns of activity.


What are the poorly explored questions relevant to functional magnetic resonance imaging?


Direction of causation

Graph or network models of brain function can only make testable predictions if they include a measurable variable describing the direction of causation between separate cortical or subcortical areas. This is accessible neuroanatomically only in cadaver brain, using anterograde and retrograde tracer methods.

The graph theory-based dynamic causal modelling approach attempted to simplify the causality problem by invoking neural mass modelling, but lacks neuroanatomical realism. Sadly, the experimental variance explained by the best-fitting graph rarely exceeds only a few per cent. Hence, the results have very little predictive power, and consequently little scientific value.

As an alternative approach to the causality question, some researchers advocate the use of prior neuroanatomical knowledge of neuronal circuitry. Histology and animal brain research can define the specific cortical layers in which input and output pathways terminate. In principle, activity in input layers can be driven by experimental conditions, and the behavioural effects of activity in output layers can be experimentally observed. Where input and output cortical layers are distinguishable by fMRI, causal relationships between brain areas could thus be empirically validated. Similarly, where the input layers of top-down and bottom-up afferents are spatially separated, a causal direction could be established for the neural activity corresponding to a given task. The Trampel et al. study summarized above relies on the fact that the output to the corticospinal tract of motor nerves from agranular primary motor cortex M1 arises almost entirely from large pyramidal neurons in layer V. Thus, in the motor imagery condition, with no motor output, one might expect a comparatively lower activation signal from layer V—as was indeed observed. Fortunately, the cortical thickness in M1 is unusually large, about 4 mm, which facilitated the discrimination of specific cortical layers using fMRI.

Other experimental paradigms offer themselves for this type of study. For instance, primary auditory cortex is well known to be activated by auditory input, but also strongly modulated by auditory imagery. Sensory input to auditory cortex arrives in layer IV, whereas top-down modulation involves neurons in layers I and VI. Similar mismatches of input and output layers are found in other primary sensory areas. Research with human subjects is particularly valuable in this context, because of our remarkable compliance and proficiency with the type of laboratory tasks required to tease out differential activity across the cortical thickness.

However, as noted previously, BOLD fMRI can provide at best a blurry, smeared-out account of layer-dependent activity, because of the cross-layer ‘bleed’ of oxygenation changes. The recent work of Huber, enabling enhanced sensitivity of CBV measurements at high field, offers an alternative form of functional imaging in which the variation of the signal with cortical depth more closely matches the expected neuronal activity, without the maximum at the cortical surface found with BOLD imaging. As commented in §4(b), this is consistent with local control of blood volume, as suggested by the intracortical distribution of pericytes.


Prevalence of columnar organization

Moon et al. compared the spatial specificity of BOLD and CBV measurements in studies of columnar structure in feline cortex, showing clear benefits for CBV. A recent fMRI study of cortical columns in auditory cortex further encourages a more detailed exploration of the granularity of the human cortex, which may vary with brain area and function. Is columnar organization a universal principle? Or does experience-driven cortical self-organization result in columnar organization only in specific areas in which this wiring strategy is optimal? In order to focus efforts using MRI to investigate such questions, a deeper understanding of cortical functional anatomy, based on animal studies and post-mortem human brain histology, would be helpful.


Sparse encoding versus population encoding

ECoG studies in entorhinal cortex show that individual neurons, each responsive to a wide range of visually presented examples of a single object or person, are sparsely distributed within this cortical area. Even if a BOLD signal from such an area could be obtained from presentation of a particular object, this does not mean that the entire area represents that object, or even class of objects. By contrast, spatially mapped cortical areas such as retinotopic areas conversely use population encoding as an important computational principle. Research with invasive techniques on animal models will surely reveal many more instances of each type of encoding—which ultimately might be found to correlate with the distinctive cyto- and myeloarchitecture of specific brain regions.


What are the most synergetic other techniques?

Currently, in the view of the author, the most exciting non-invasive technique for quantitative studies of cognition in human brain is the measurement of CBV, using MRI blood-nulling techniques. With the adequate SNR available at high magnetic field, this offers the hope of layer-specific identification of induced neural activity. Careful comparisons with spin-echo BOLD and three-dimensional gradient and spin-echo BOLD are urgently needed, together with combined electrocorticographic and VASO animal brain studies with multicontact electrodes.

Advanced histological studies may also shed light on the optimal functional MRI technique for exploring layer-dependent activity. The key question is: is there a correlation between the distributions of pericytes, which locally control blood flow and hence blood volume, and mitochondria, which generate the ATP molecules essential for the various neurochemical and neuroelectrical processes that constitute functional activity?

Cadaver brain cortical sections can be selectively stained to reveal these components. Mitochondrial density can be inferred quite well using stains for cytochrome oxidase, and pericytes can be selectively stained. Good spatial correlation would suggest that cortical profiles of changes in CBV map the layer dependence of neuronal function. Here, ‘neuronal activity’ would be compactly defined as activity that costs energy (see discussion in §5a(i) above). Early work by Borowsky showed good qualitative correlation between capillary density and cytochrome oxidase staining in several regions of rat brain. This suggests the need for much more comprehensive studies in cadaver human brain, in which cortical profiles of pericyte density, cytochrome oxidase density and capillary density are all compared.


Summary and conclusions

This review has described some of the historical development of MRI-based neuroimaging techniques currently used in cognitive science research. Weaknesses in the most popular analysis strategies are identified. Game-changing developments in MRI and fMRI capabilities are then discussed that show great promise for bridging the gap between cellular and systems neuroscience. At magnetic field strengths of 7 T and above, data with submillimetre resolution can be acquired in scan times consistent with using human subjects. To depict the human cerebral cortex in such detail with MRI can be considered a threshold that allows cortical areas to be structurally discriminated, layer-dependence of functional activity to be determined, and much-improved characterization of axonal pathways to be estimated. Novel methods for analysis are tracking these technical improvements, enabling new penetrating questions regarding the organization of brain function.

Layer-specific fMRI offers promise in defining the directions of causation between brain areas in specific tasks. This aim requires the use of prior histological knowledge of neural circuitry in each cortical area involved, and carefully defined hypotheses and experimental protocols. The optimal acquisition technique for layer-specific fMRI is not yet fully established. Histological studies comparing pericyte and mitochondrial distributions should offer insight regarding the value of high-resolution mapping of CBV changes.

Ultimately, because feasible fMRI techniques all depend on the neurovascular response, still deeper understanding will be needed of the geometry of the cortical and subcortical microvasculature, the molecular signals relating neural electrical activity to vasodilation and vasoconstriction, the spatial distribution of pericytes, the details of oxygen extraction and the integration of the control mechanisms of the cerebral circulation.


Repetition suppression: a means to index neural representations using BOLD?

Helen C Barron, Mona M Garvert, Timothy E J Behrens — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2016. PMC5003856, CC BY 4.0.

Understanding how the human brain gives rise to complex cognitive processes remains one of the biggest challenges of contemporary neuroscience. While invasive recording in animal models can provide insight into neural processes that are conserved across species, our understanding of cognition more broadly relies upon investigation of the human brain itself. There is therefore an imperative to establish non-invasive tools that allow human brain activity to be measured at high spatial and temporal resolution. In recent years, various attempts have been made to refine the coarse signal available in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), providing a means to investigate neural activity at the meso-scale, i.e. at the level of neural populations. The most widely used techniques include repetition suppression and multivariate pattern analysis. Human neuroscience can now use these techniques to investigate how representations are encoded across neural populations and transformed by relevant computations. Here, we review the physiological basis, applications and limitations of fMRI repetition suppression with a brief comparison to multivariate techniques. By doing so, we show how fMRI repetition suppression holds promise as a tool to reveal complex neural mechanisms that underlie human cognitive function.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘Interpreting BOLD: a dialogue between cognitive and cellular neuroscience’.

Keywords: repetition suppression, functional magnetic resonance imaging adaptation, neural representation, neural computation


Introduction

Neural activity is responsible for our perception, thoughts and ideas, and the behaviours that we execute. However, the means by which the brain uses neural activity to encode and translate information into complex cognitive processes remains one of the most important challenges for contemporary neuroscience. Over the last few decades, large-scale electrophysiological recordings in animal models have allowed for descriptions of neural activity at high spatio-temporal resolution. This has provided important insight into some of the underlying principles and mechanisms of neural coding, allowing representations to be reasonably well characterized and computations inferred. For example, large-scale recordings have contributed to our understanding of the population dynamics underlying motor responses, choice and memory consolidation. In addition, methods of perturbation (such as optogenetics) and sophisticated correlational analyses have together been used to further establish the neural circuit mechanisms that underlie behavioural control.

However, such invasive recording is largely restricted to investigation in animal models, except under unusual circumstances such as pre-operative recording in epilepsy patients. This limits its utility as a tool to understand the human brain because we cannot necessarily assume that information is encoded in the same manner across species, nor ignore the contribution of brain regions that exist in humans but may be absent in other species. These issues are therefore particularly pertinent when investigating complex cognitive processes and neuropsychiatric pathology, which cannot be modelled in animals.

Rather, we must develop ways to indirectly measure neural activity in the human brain using non-invasive techniques. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) constitutes one of the principal tools for recording neural activity non-invasively in humans. Compared with other non-invasive recording techniques, such as electroencephalography (EEG) or magnetoencephalography (MEG), fMRI allows for relatively high spatial resolution measurements of human brain activity. It can therefore be used to localize neural activity to particular brain regions and map specialized psychological functions, such as face-, body- and place-related processing. More recently, model-based fMRI studies have been used to identify signatures of neural activity, which contribute to particular computations, such as reward prediction error and value computations.

While these seminal fMRI studies have provided insight into the functional specialization of areas within the human brain, our ability to directly measure the response of individual neurons is severely compromised by the fact that a typical 3 mm3 voxel contains more than 105 neurons. Together these neurons contribute to the average activation profile of a voxel, making it difficult to infer the functions and computations performed by subpopulations of neurons. Nevertheless, there are now well-validated strategies that can be used to refine the coarse resolution of the fMRI signal which provide a means to investigate neural activity at the meso-scale, the level of neural representations.

Two fMRI techniques are currently being widely used to access neural information in humans at a more precise spatial resolution, namely repetition suppression and multivariate pattern analysis. fMRI repetition suppression (also termed fMRI adaptation) relies on the fact that neurons show suppression in their response to repeated presentation of stimuli or information to which they are sensitive (see the following for existing reviews:). This phenomenon is robustly observed across brain regions and species, in wake and sleep, and using a range of different measurement techniques.

fMRI multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA), on the other hand, takes advantage of small biases in the distribution of functionally specific neurons across neighbouring voxels. Such biases give rise to variation in the activation pattern across voxels, which can be used to infer underlying neural representations (see the following for existing reviews:). Multivariate approaches are powerful when applied to brain regions such as visual and temporal cortex where neurons with similar functional selectivity are organized into cortical columns of several hundred micrometres of width. The uneven distribution of functionally selective columns across neighbouring voxels, or ‘clustering’, provides a coarse activation pattern, which allows visual features to be successfully classified.

However, not all brain regions display a columnar organization or show an uneven distribution of functionally selective neurons across neighbouring voxels. Regions such as the prefrontal cortex, which lack large columnar organization and show heterogeneous neural response profiles with nonlinear, mixed-selectivity to various task features, may be less amenable to MVPA. Nevertheless, multivariate techniques have been used to decode complex brain states and memory retrieval from frontal brain areas.

There are currently few direct comparisons between fMRI adaptation and MVPA, however those investigators that have used both methods in the same experimental paradigm suggest that the two approaches are highly correlated. When assessing the relative merits of these two techniques, it is worth remembering that they each measure different aspects of the BOLD signal, and consequently differ in their sensitivity to particular features of the neural code. While repetition suppression has a direct neurophysiological correlate which can facilitate comparison with electrophysiological measures of neural activity, MVPA can provide greater sensitivity when decoding neural representations, particularly in situations where the response selectivity of neurons introduces fine-grained microstructure across voxels.

In this review, we focus on fMRI repetition suppression as a tool to infer neural representations in the human brain. We provide a detailed account of the relationship between single neuron activity and fMRI repetition suppression, and assess evidence for the underlying mechanisms that support the phenomenon. We then discuss the merits and limitations of using fMRI repetition suppression to infer neural computations in the human brain before discussing implications for experimental design.


Characterizing repetition suppression at a single-cell level

Repetition suppression was first reported from single-unit recordings in the primate inferotemporal (IT) cortex. In response to repeated presentation of a light stimulus (a), neurons in the IT cortex initially showed a large response (b), but with repeated exposure to the stimulus the response waned (c–d). When the stimulus was presented again, after it had been turned off for 15 min, the response of the neuron was fully recovered (e).

Repetition suppression has since been observed in single-unit activity across a large number of different experimental conditions and brain regions, including the IT cortex, V1, somatosensory cortex, prefrontal cortex (PFC), rhinal cortex, entorhinal and perirhinal cortex (see f–h for example repetition suppression in the entorhinal cortex). Repetition suppression can occur across a range of repetition time lags, including when multiple interleaving stimuli are presented in between the repeating stimulus. In a small portion of neurons, the repetition suppression has been observed for a time-lag of up to 24 h.

Repetition suppression therefore appears to be a general property of neurons. Suppression occurs relative to how recently a stimulus was presented and can therefore be described as an automatic short-term memory mechanism. Typically, release from adaptation occurs following presentation of a stimulus that does not repeat features or information to which a neuron is sensitive. Therefore, repetition suppression is more likely to reveal stimulus selectivity rather than novelty detection, and may provide a measure of neural tuning. For example, in the IT cortex, repetition suppression is maintained even when the location or the size of the presented stimulus is varied, suggesting that the tuning of IT neurons is invariant to both stimulus location and size.

While intrinsic adaptation effects can be used to infer neural tuning, as with all neural measures, it is not always possible to isolate intrinsic adaptation from inherited effects. As discussed in detail in other reviews, inherited adaptation from upstream brain regions can contaminate intrinsic adaptation and compromise the accuracy with which neural selectivity can be localized. For example, direction selectivity can emerge in area V4 when adaptation in MT affects the balance of the received inputs. In the visual stream, the relative contribution of inherited and intrinsic adaptation can be determined by exploiting the difference in the receptive field size of neurons across the processing hierarchy. Once the contribution of inherited effects have been accounted for intrinsic adaptation to visual motion can appear altogether absent in area MT if the time-lag between the test and adapting stimulus is too large. Critically, however, when the appropriate time interval between the test and adapting stimulus is employed, intrinsic adaptation in MT is revealed and the magnitude of suppression effects shows positive correlation with the neurons' tuning curve. This shows that adaptation can be used to measure neural selectivity when appropriate experimental parameters are chosen.

In other brain regions, inherited adaptation effects appear to have little or no influence. For example, neural tuning in area IT does not appear to be affected by adaptation per se and adaptation to face stimuli is observed selectively in fusiform face area (FFA) despite the expectation of orientation specific adaptation in upstream areas. Overall, functional selectivity may be carefully inferred using neural adaptation, when the possibility of inherited effects are acknowledged within the context of the neural circuit.


Repetition suppression in fMRI

Taking advantage of this neural phenomenon, repetition suppression can also be observed using fMRI, thereby providing a means to access the information content of neurons in the human brain. To measure repetition suppression using fMRI, tasks have been designed to detect reduced BOLD response in situations where a stimulus or information feature is repeated (e.g. X preceded by X), relative to situations in which the preceding stimulus or information feature is different (e.g. X preceded by Y). fMRI repetition suppression effects were first observed in the human visual cortex. For example, it has been shown that cortical area MT (V5) adapts to stimuli moving in a single direction, the primary visual cortex (V1) adapts to the orientation of visual gratings, with progressively smaller adaptation to increasingly orthogonal gratings, and the extrastriate and IT cortices adapt to repeated presentation of an object.

Among these early studies, fMRI repetition suppression was also used to investigate neural representations in the lateral occipital complex (LOC), demonstrating invariance to object size, position and illumination in this brain region. These results suggest that the LOC represents perceived shape as opposed to simple image features, in a similar manner to the IT cortex in the macaque. Indeed, the fMRI repetition suppression effects observed in the human LOC were later found to be comparable to fMRI repetition suppression observed in the IT cortex in the macaque.


The relationship between the BOLD signal, single-cell firing and repetition suppression

While fMRI repetition suppression effects measured in humans reflect those measured with single-unit recording in monkeys, before considering fMRI repetition suppression a suitable tool to access the information content of neural populations it is worth considering the relationship between the BOLD response and neural firing more closely. Notably, simultaneous measurement of BOLD (4.7T), single unit, multiunit and local field potential (LFP) measurements in the primate primary visual cortex suggest that both the BOLD signal and fMRI repetition suppression effects more closely reflect LFPs as opposed to spiking activity per se. The BOLD signal may therefore be best understood to reflect integrative synaptic and dendro-somatic processes within the local network.

However, when considering this potentially unfortunate state of affairs, it is important to remember that in the cortex intra-regional connectivity dominates over inter-regional connectivity. Indeed, most afferent inputs are received from neighbouring neurons 1–2 mm in distance away. Therefore, even if the BOLD response is best attributed to an integrative measure of pre- or post-synaptic processes, in many instances it probably reflects functional effects within the imaged voxel. This may explain the close correspondence between recorded BOLD and electrophysiological signals in both humans and macaques.

Ambiguity in the spatial localization of the BOLD signal may therefore, at least in part, be mitigated by high intra-regional connectivity. However, the indirect relationship between neural firing and the BOLD signal remains pertinent when interpreting fMRI adaptation effects. The BOLD signal depends on the ratio between blood flow and oxygen metabolism, two components of the neurovascular response that are differentially modulated by adaptation: while changes in oxygen metabolism faithfully reflect neural adaptation effects in V1, blood flow adaptation is observed to a lesser extent. As a consequence, haemodynamic adaptation may underestimate adaptation at the neural level.

Despite good reason to believe that the relationship between neural and fMRI adaptation is complex, recorded data nevertheless show close correspondence between fMRI repetition suppression effects in humans and those measured with single-unit recording in monkeys. This suggests that the degree to which haemodynamic adaptation underestimates neural repetition suppression does not preclude fMRI repetition suppression as a tool to investigate brain activity at the meso-scale. Furthermore, recent evidence from the human brain shows that fMRI repetition suppression in the LOC co-occurs with a decrease in the concentration of glutamate in the same brain region, supporting the conclusion that the fMRI adaptation signal faithfully reflects repetition suppression at the neural circuit level. Broadly, it seems reasonable to consider fMRI repetition suppression a suitable correlate of neural suppression effects in the voxels to which suppression is localized if interpretation is executed with caution.


Mechanisms of repetition suppression

Having characterized the BOLD signal in terms of perisynaptic activity as opposed to action-potential firing rate per se, this raises questions about the underlying mechanism responsible for repetition suppression, which is still a matter of debate.

An early proposal suggested that repetition suppression reflects ‘facilitation’ in neural signal processing. Mechanistically, the facilitation model comprises a shift in the peak latency of the neural response, which accounts for a reduction in overall BOLD response. This model also provides a neural explanation for behavioural priming effects which can be observed under similar conditions to repetition suppression and manifests as a change in behavioural performance in response to repeated stimulus exposure. For example, priming can improve reaction time and accuracy for repeated stimuli.

Although priming effects and repetition suppression have together been observed under the same experimental conditions, establishing a causal relationship between the two has proven difficult. For example, in non-human primates when repetition suppression and priming are observed under the same conditions, the two effects do not correlate. In humans, although some studies have found a positive relationship between priming and repetition suppression, the literature is littered with inconsistencies. While one study showed that both fMRI repetition suppression and behavioural priming are disrupted with application of trans-magnetic stimulation (TMS) to the left frontal cortex, others have failed to find evidence for a positive relationship. One possible explanation for the discrepancies is that although repetition suppression and behavioural priming often co-occur, repetition suppression may not necessarily causally underlie behavioural priming. Indeed, single-unit recordings in both humans and non-human primates show that repetition does not lead to faster neural responses or narrower tuning curves. This suggests that the ‘facilitation’ model does not suffice as a mechanistic explanation for repetition suppression.

Single-unit data have inspired alternative mechanistic accounts for repetition suppression. For example, the ‘sharpening’ model proposed that repetition affects the selectivity or sparseness of the neural response. Under this model, stimulus repetition leads to attenuation in neurons that are less selective and less well tuned, while highly selective neurons continue to respond. Although a sharpening effect has been observed when previously novel stimuli become highly familiar, this model fails to explain suppression effects observed following less familiar repetitions. Indeed, in response to repetition, single-unit measurements show that the greatest attenuation is observed in the most selective neurons as opposed to the least selective neurons.

These single-unit measurements in fact speak to a third hypothesis which explains repetition suppression as a fatigue effect, attributed to either reduced action-potential firing in neurons that are selective to a given stimulus, or attenuation in the efficacy of received inputs. Evidence from macaque IT suggests that suppression speaks to the latter of these two possibilities, attenuation in the received inputs. IT neurons that respond equally to two different stimuli (e.g. stimuli A and B) suppress to presentation of A followed by B, but this repetition suppression effect is not as substantial as that observed following repeated presentation of stimulus A. This result implies that repetition suppression of a single cell cannot be entirely action-potential dependent, and must also, at least partly, reflect the attenuation of received inputs. Not all neurons selective to stimuli A and B therefore show cross-stimulus adaptation in proportion to neural selectivity. Notably, however this does not necessarily compromise the ability to use fMRI adaptation to index neural selectivity within a voxel because much of the received input comes from other neurons within the voxel. A relevant question for future investigation concerns whether, with an unbiased selection of neurons, average suppression is equal to average selectivity across the population. However, even with the data provided in, it is likely that with the appropriate controls, bulk suppression effects can provide information about population selectivity.

Mechanisms for repetition suppression derived from single-unit measurements can therefore be used to guide interpretation of fMRI repetition suppression effects. However, by imaging the whole brain at once, human brain imaging provides an opportunity to test alternative explanations for repetition suppression, most notably the hypothesis that repetition suppression can be accounted for by predictive coding. Inspired by models of perceptual inference, predictive coding describes how the brain anticipates upcoming events and generates an error signal when predictions are violated. ‘Top-down’ predictions are therefore received from downstream brain regions and iteratively matched against ‘bottom-up’ evidence processed within the cortical hierarchy. The mismatch between the prediction and the evidence provides an index for expectation or surprise, and constitutes a prediction-error signal. Assuming that repeated stimuli are predictable, the prediction-error signal is eliminated with repetition, attenuating the cortical response.

Theories relating repetition suppression to predictive coding motivated Summerfield and co-workers to test whether fMRI repetition suppression in FFA was modulated by the frequency at which face stimuli are repeated. They observed greater repetition suppression effects when the probability of encountering a repeated trial was high (75% of trials) compared with when it was low (25% of trials). This result suggests that repetition suppression reflects a reduction in perceptual prediction error, a consequence of repeated stimuli becoming expected. This result has since been replicated using EEG, and when using a range of other stimuli, including auditory tones, simple shapes, voices, somatosensory stimulation and objects. Expectation suppression can also be observed using single-unit recording, where neurons in IT cortex show larger responses when sequences violate transition rules between visual stimuli that were learned during training. These results appeal to a long line of literature showing heightened responses in scalp-evoked potentials and neuroimaging measurements when stimuli are unexpected or novel.

Although these results appear to suggest a common mechanism for repetition suppression and stimulus expectation, there is increasing evidence to suggest that these two phenomena are in fact mediated by distinct processes. Firstly, in macaque IT, expectation suppression can be observed with single-unit and LFP measurements when learned transition statistics are violated, but repetition suppression is not modulated by expectation. Similarly, in humans, expectation does not modulate repetition suppression in LOC when repetition frequency is more subtly modulated (60%:40% repetition frequency). Therefore, expectation suppression is not necessarily observed in concert with repetition suppression.

Secondly, when attention is explicitly modulated in an fMRI study, expectation suppression is only observed when participants are attending, while repetition suppression is observed even when attention is diverted away.

Thirdly, when auditory stimulus repetition and expectation are orthogonally manipulated, auditory evoked potentials measured using MEG show repetition suppression 40–60 ms after the tone, and expectation suppression 100–200 ms after the tone. The difference in timing between repetition and expectation suppression effects suggests that these phenomena may be mediated by two distinct processes. Within a predictive coding framework, it has been suggested that these two processes may correspond to prediction-error signals at different levels of the cortical hierarchy.

Human brain imaging has therefore provided insight into the mechanism underlying repetition suppression, characterizing the phenomenon within an elegant theoretical framework. This complements data from invasive animal recording which explains how repetition suppression may be biologically realized. Importantly, if concerns over localization are kept in mind and stimulus expectations and attention appropriately controlled, fMRI repetition suppression signals can be predicted irrespective of the precise underlying mechanism. Therefore, fMRI adaptation can be applied to investigate the nature of neural representations despite ambiguity in the underlying biophysical mechanism.


Repetition enhancement—how should we interpret it?

Repetition of a stimulus feature reliably leads to suppression in the neural signal, but there have also been reports of repetition enhancement in both single-unit recording and fMRI. In single-unit recordings, enhancement effects are usually observed as a smaller fraction of recorded neurons. Similarly, in the imaging literature enhancement effects are reported less frequently than suppression effects.

By directly comparing repetition suppression with enhancement, it has been shown that enhancement effects tend to coexist within the same cortical regions as suppression, but predominantly occur within different voxels, with distinct connectivity profiles. Voxels that predominately display repetition suppression preferentially correlate with activity in early brain regions and show earlier responses, while those voxels that display repetition enhancement receive information from less specific brain regions and respond later. This suggests that repetition suppression and enhancement may play distinct functional roles. Within a predictive coding framework, it has been suggested that these phenomena may map onto the prediction-error and prediction signals, respectively.

The underlying mechanism for repetition enhancement does, however, remains elusive, despite attempts to establish which cognitive variables lead to enhancement effects. One possibility is that repetition enhancement is observed when inhibitory normalization signals are disinhibited. Such release from inhibition has been observed in neurons in the visual cortex when a stimulus falls within the inhibitory surround of a neuron's receptive field. For example, in V1 repeated exposure to a large visual grating, covering both the centre and surround of a cell's receptive field can give rise to repetition enhancement in neurons with orientation preferences similar to the adapting orientation while smaller gratings give rise to repetition suppression. Repetition enhancement by disinhibition critically depends on the local circuit connectivity and the relationship between the adapting stimulus and a neurons receptive field. While it is possible to discern these features in the visual system, attributing enhancement effects to disinhibition may be more challenging in higher cognitive areas where neural dynamics may arise from a more complex interplay between excitatory and inhibitory activity.

A second possibility is that repetition enhancement is an intrinsic biophysical feature of the neural response which is simply less permissive than repetition suppression. In support of this second suggestion, one recent study has shown that when the principal whisker of an anaesthetized rat is repeatedly stimulated, 30% of the adapting neurons in the barrel cortex show significant enhancement during the first few hundred milliseconds after adaptation. This post-adaptation enhancement effect can be accounted for by delayed recovery of inhibition relative to excitation, which is precisely balanced at rest. This explanation is consistent with observations mentioned above which show that repetition suppression and enhancement coexist within the same cortical regions with enhancement delayed relative to suppression.

Although repetition suppression may reduce sensitivity to fMRI adaptation effects by cancelling suppression effects that occur within the same voxel, relative to suppression repetition enhancement occurs only in a small proportion of neurons. While it is therefore important to keep interactions between excitatory and inhibitory parts of a neural circuitry in mind, repetition enhancement is unlikely to preclude the use of repetition suppression for inferring neural selectivity.


Repetition suppression as a tool for indexing neural computations in the human brain

While early studies predominantly used repetition suppression as a tool to study sensory processing in the human brain, the technique has since been used to measure more abstract neural representations such as number representations. Furthermore, by combining fMRI repetition suppression with careful experimental design, investigators have also begun to use fMRI repetition suppression to provide mechanistic insight into neuronal computations that subserve complex human cognition. Here, we review a subset of these studies to provide a brief and non-exhaustive overview of the modern use of fMRI repetition suppression.

Firstly, repetition suppression can be used to infer representational overlap by assessing the relative suppression between two different stimuli. For example, neurons that contribute to the representations of both stimuli X and Z should show suppression to presentation of stimulus X preceded by Z (b). By contrast, suppression should not be observed when X is preceded by a stimulus Y, if stimulus Y activates a non-overlapping neural representation (b). Using repetition suppression to index the relative representational overlap of different stimuli in this manner can be described as ‘cross-stimulus adaptation’. This phenomenon is comparable with multivariate ‘cross-stimulus decoding’ techniques, where a classifier is trained on one set of stimuli, and tested on a different set of stimuli which are associated with or share a feature with the first set, or where the relative representational similarity of two associated stimuli is assessed using correlational measures.

At the single neuron level, cross-stimulus adaptation has been observed in neurons sensitive to two different stimuli in macaque area IT. As discussed above, this effect does not occur in proportion to the neuron's response to each stimulus, as has been assumed in some models of repetition suppression, but is instead best explained by the similarity between the adaptor and test stimuli and by the strength of response to the adaptor stimulus. Given that synaptic fatigue likely accounts for repetition suppression effects, cross-stimulus adaptation between two stimuli may be considered a function of the shared input or number of synapses common to processing the two stimuli.

Information regarding representational overlap cannot easily be inferred from the raw BOLD signal measured in conventional fMRI paradigms where only the mean response to a stimulus is assessed (a). However, by taking advantage of cross-stimulus adaptation, it becomes possible to index associative memories in the human brain. As memory formation increases the strength of cortical connections between associated cell-assemblies, the increase in representational overlap can be indexed using cross-stimulus suppression. Therefore, by contrasting the BOLD response to consecutive presentation of two associated stimuli with the BOLD response to two unrelated stimuli, the representational overlap of neural representations measured using cross-stimulus adaptation can be used as a putative index for associative memory (b). For example, after two stimuli are repeatedly imagined together, plasticity between the supporting neural representations can be assessed, and ongoing plasticity between a stimulus and reward representation can be tracked over time.

Assessing repetition suppression between different stimuli can also be used to index neural computations that underlie cognitive processing. For example, fMRI repetition suppression can be used to infer the mechanism responsible for the construction of a new neural representation. It can also be used to measure computations previously observed in animal models. One particularly striking example is the investigation of grid cells in the human brain. Grid cells were first discovered in the rodent entorhinal cortex, and are characterized by hexagonally arranged firing fields, which allow spatial knowledge to be organized into a map (a). Remarkably, the orientation of grid cells are aligned which can be exploited using fMRI repetition suppression in the human brain. When subjects navigate through a virtual environment (b), the entorhinal cortex, medial PFC, parietal cortex and temporal cortex show suppression as a function of running direction, modulated by running speed (here shown for the entorhinal cortex, c). Crucially, this adaptation effect is selective to a running direction of 60° (d), consistent with the predicted population response of grid cells and corresponding sixfold rotational symmetry of the raw BOLD signal (e,f) and the predicted population response of grid cells.

fMRI repetition suppression also brings a new level of mechanistic experimentation to social neuroscience. In addition to providing the first evidence for mirror neurons in the human IT cortex, fMRI repetition suppression has been used to index neural computations that allow social influence to affect the choices we make. For example, it was used to demonstrate that neural representation of the similar, but not dissimilar, traits of others overlap with the representation of our own traits. Furthermore, repetition suppression can be used to show that the prediction errors caused by learning about another person's preferences can increase the representational overlap of value representations for self and other, which in turn predicts changes in behavioural preference. Without representational techniques, such complex social mechanisms are difficult to infer in situations where single-unit data cannot be collected.

Together these studies illustrate how fMRI repetition suppression can be used to assess representational overlap between neural representations, which can provide a measure for associative memories and complex computations that underlie cognitive processes in the human brain.


Experimental design for fMRI repetition suppression experiments

When using fMRI repetition suppression to infer neural representations and computations in the human brain it is critical to employ an appropriate experimental design. Typically, event-related rather than block designs are used, to allow repetition suppression to be measured flexibly while controlling for the potential confounding effect of expectation suppression, fluctuations in attention, and changes in baseline BOLD signal between sessions. The relative expectation of experiencing a given trial may be minimized by ensuring that each trial type of interest is presented equally often in a fully randomized manner. It is important to note that a trial here is defined as a stimulus transition (e.g. trial type 1: X preceded by X, trial type 2: X preceded by Y; b) which are typically modelled separately within a general linear model (GLM). The magnitude of repetition suppression may then be quantified by contrasting the BOLD response measured in adapting trials (e.g. X preceded by X) against the BOLD response measured in non-adapting trials (e.g. X preceded by Y).

To optimize the sensitivity of an event-related design for detection of repetition suppression, a number of additional factors must be considered. Firstly, of particular importance is the time-lag between the initial presentation of a stimulus and its repeat. In single-unit recordings, repetition sensitive neurons show a reduction in suppression as a function of repetition time-lag, with an upper limit for the majority of neurons of the order of seconds to minutes (for example, TE, perirhinal and entorhinal neurons). Indeed, only a small proportion of neurons show suppression effects following repetition at longer time-lags, leading to the suggestion that lag-sensitive repetition suppression can provide a recency trace, a measure of the relative familiarity of a stimulus. Consistent with these single-cell observations, fMRI measures are also more sensitive to repetition suppression when there is a short time-lag between initial and adapting stimuli, or when there are few intervening stimuli between each repetition. Notably, the upper limit for the fMRI repetition time-lag is typically of the order of seconds, somewhat lower than that typically observed in single-unit data.

The appropriate choice of fMRI repetition time-lag may depend on the precise brain region of interest. Indeed, as the time-lag between an adapting and a test stimulus is increased, repetition suppression effects appear to be sustained for longer in anterior compared with posterior brain regions. This anterior–posterior dissociation has been illustrated by direct comparison between suppression in visual cortex to repeated visual stimuli and suppression in lateral orbitofrontal cortex to repeated stimulus-reward associations. While suppression effects in the visual cortex were observed at short (400 ms) but not long (6000 ms) repetition time-lags, suppression effects in the orbitofrontal cortex were observed at both short and long time-lags (a,b). This interaction between repetition time-lag and brain region is consistent with reports of robust orientation adaptation in V1 at short time lags, of the order of a few hundred milliseconds, but not long time lags, of the order of seconds.

The appropriate time-lag for a given brain region is likely to be determined by the neural dynamics and recurrent processing of the region in question. While neurons in primate and rodent orbitofrontal cortex typically show sustained responses, holding information in ‘working memory’, much shorter responses are observed in visual cortex and other more posterior brain regions. Furthermore, the size of an fMRI adaptation effect may also depend on the duration of the adapting stimulus, whereby longer stimulus presentations result in more pronounced adaptation effects, particularly in early visual areas. The optimal repetition time-lag and stimulus duration for obtaining fMRI suppression effects may therefore be determined by how long neural representations are typically sustained within the adapting brain region in question. It is therefore advisable to choose these parameters carefully by referring to previously published repetition suppression effects in the brain region of interest. In addition, when making inferences that concern the regional specificity of adaptation effects, it is important to be aware that different brain regions show varying sensitivity to different repetition time-lags. Null results should therefore not be taken as evidence for a lack of sensitivity to a stimulus feature, and inferences about regional specialization must be drawn with care.

A second factor that modulates repetition suppression effects is the relative familiarity of the stimuli. A progressive decrease in both neural firing and the fMRI response signal is observed as a function of the number of repetitions of a new stimulus (c) or the length of exposure to the initial stimulus. To avoid potential confounds relating to familiarity modulation, it is necessary to ensure that stimuli implemented in both adapting and non-adapting control trials are equally familiar. This allows repetition suppression to be measured regardless of the number of repetitions.

When designing an event-related fMRI repetition suppression study, a sufficient number of adapting trials (and equivalent number of control trials) must be included to obtain a reliable measure. To determine the appropriate number of trials, it is worth considering factors that affect the signal-to-noise ratio of the BOLD signal more generally but also the anticipated sensitivity to repetition suppression. Sensitivity to suppression is probably influenced by the degree to which the adapting feature is represented within a given voxel. Although this is difficult to estimate, the type of adapting stimuli and the functional properties of the adapting brain region in question can provide some guidance. For example, recent studies show that repetition suppression can be reliably observed in visual cortex (including V2, V3, V4, LO, MT, FFA) when 72 repetition trials are measured across two sessions, and in orbitofrontal cortex when 72 trials per adapting condition are measured across three sessions. When repetition suppression is used to assess the online strength of orbitofrontal representations, however, it has been shown that sub-blocks with as few as nine trials can be sufficient.

To summarize, there are a number of different factors to consider when designing an event-related fMRI repetition suppression study. Given that suppression effects are modulated by both recency and familiarity, it is necessary to consider the appropriate repetition time-lag and the relative familiarity of repeating and control stimuli. Furthermore, repetition suppression is likely affected by the nature of the particular adapting stimulus or computation and the intrinsic circuity of the corresponding adapting brain region. To maximize signal-to-noise in fMRI repetition suppression designs, the appropriate number of trials is therefore likely to be task dependent but may be estimated using guidance from previous studies.


Concluding remarks

In this review, we have explored both the merits and limitations of using fMRI repetition suppression as a tool to circumvent the poor spatial resolution of the BOLD signal and provide non-invasive measurements of neural representations in the human brain. Repetition suppression effects are reliably observed in single-unit recordings and likely reflect the overlap between the neural representations that support the repeated stimulus feature. When measured using fMRI, suppression effects are also observed in the BOLD signal, despite the non-trivial and complex relationship between neural repetition suppression effects and BOLD adaptation. Although the potential limitations of this approach are important to bear in mind, fMRI repetition suppression may nevertheless be used to provide access to neural representations in humans at the meso-scale. This may allow associative memories and neural computations to be indexed. Along with other representational fMRI measures, such as MVPA, fMRI repetition suppression may therefore be used as a tool to investigate neural mechanisms that underlie higher cognitive function, including those that may not be amenable to direct measurement in animals.


Authors' contributions

All authors contributed to the preparation of the manuscript and design of the figures.


Wide-field optical mapping of neural activity and brain haemodynamics: considerations and novel approaches

Ying Ma, Mohammed A. Shaik, Sharon H. Kim, Mariel G. Kozberg, David N. Thibodeaux, Hanzhi T. Zhao, Hang Yu, Elizabeth M. C. Hillman — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2016. PMC5003860, CC BY 4.0.

Although modern techniques such as two-photon microscopy can now provide cellular-level three-dimensional imaging of the intact living brain, the speed and fields of view of these techniques remain limited. Conversely, two-dimensional wide-field optical mapping (WFOM), a simpler technique that uses a camera to observe large areas of the exposed cortex under visible light, can detect changes in both neural activity and haemodynamics at very high speeds. Although WFOM may not provide single-neuron or capillary-level resolution, it is an attractive and accessible approach to imaging large areas of the brain in awake, behaving mammals at speeds fast enough to observe widespread neural firing events, as well as their dynamic coupling to haemodynamics. Although such wide-field optical imaging techniques have a long history, the advent of genetically encoded fluorophores that can report neural activity with high sensitivity, as well as modern technologies such as light emitting diodes and sensitive and high-speed digital cameras have driven renewed interest in WFOM. To facilitate the wider adoption and standardization of WFOM approaches for neuroscience and neurovascular coupling research, we provide here an overview of the basic principles of WFOM, considerations for implementation of wide-field fluorescence imaging of neural activity, spectroscopic analysis and interpretation of results.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘Interpreting BOLD: a dialogue between cognitive and cellular neuroscience’.


Introduction

Wide-field optical imaging of neural activity was first demonstrated 30 years ago using cortical application of fluorescent voltage-sensitive dyes (VSDs). Around the same time, it was noted that changes in optical diffuse reflectance of the exposed cortex of the brain were visible, even without application of dyes, and these changes were termed ‘intrinsic signals’. ‘Intrinsic signal imaging’ soon became a standard technique for mapping functional domains of the cortex, for example, to guide placement of electrodes. More detailed spectral analysis of intrinsic optical signals revealed that they could be attributed to local changes in cortical blood volume and oxygenation, and in some cases scattering. The ability to measure brain haemodynamics made this approach a popular tool for studying neurovascular coupling; the relationship between neural activity and local changes in cortical blood flow.

Although VSDs held great promise as direct optical indicators of neural activity, the need to apply them to the exposed brain prior to imaging, their very fast response times and their very small ΔF/F ratios (typically 0.15%) made them challenging to use. However, recent improvements in exogenous and genetically encoded fluorescent indicators of neural activity such as GCaMP have enabled targeted, transgenic expression of fluorescence with much higher ΔF/F levels (exceeding 10%). Additional studies have demonstrated that the dynamics of flavoprotein fluorescence can be optically mapped in the brain of wild-type animals as an indicator of oxidative metabolism. Such wide-field neuroimaging methods are also readily compatible with optogenetic approaches to modulate brain activity in awake animals. As a result, researchers have begun to return to camera-based ‘mesoscopic’ optical recording of neural activity across the exposed cortex, further facilitated by greatly improved high-speed, sensitive camera technology.

Here, we refer to optical imaging of reflectance (intrinsic) and fluorescence contrast in the brain collectively as ‘wide-field optical mapping’ (WFOM) of the brain. We propose that it is important to consider these two techniques as related, since similar optical principles are fundamental to understanding the constraints, resolution and depth sensitivity in both. Importantly, there is also significant potential optical cross-talk effects between detected fluorescence and dynamic changes in absorption caused by functional haemodynamics (a problem already encountered in early VSD work). It is essential that such cross-talk effects be carefully considered and accounted for in analysis to avoid misinterpretation of WFOM fluorescence data. shows an example of both fluorescence and haemodynamic (reflectance) WFOM, performed simultaneously in the bilaterally exposed cortex of the awake, behaving mouse brain. These data were processed using methods for converting reflectance data to haemodynamic parameters, while fluorescence recordings were corrected to compensate for haemodynamic cross-talk.

With limited commercial platforms available, home-built implementations of WFOM have varied widely between groups. Analysis and interpretation of WFOM data have thus also been varied, leading to general confusion regarding what can be understood from the method in terms of sensitivity, quantitative accuracy, depth sensitivity and optimal implementations. Recognizing WFOM's great potential as a method for mapping brain activity at high speeds over large areas of the cortex in animals ranging from mice to humans, this article provides resources for standardization of the method. The basic principles of both reflectance and fluorescence WFOM are reviewed, including approaches and considerations for analysis of data including conversion of reflectance data into haemodynamic parameters and correction of fluorescence for haemodynamic cross-talk.


Reflectance wide-field optical mapping

WFOM datasets are acquired using a simple camera to acquire a time sequence of two-dimensional images of the exposed surface of the brain under illumination by the light of specific wavelengths. For reflectance WFOM, the light detected is diffusely reflected light, meaning that it entered the brain, scattered within the cortex and emerged from the same surface to reach the camera. Raw images generally show the surface vasculature of the brain with good contrast (at wavelengths <600 nm), as well as signal originating from deeper layers from light that has been more deeply scattered.

During a stimulus, the intensity of this diffusely reflected light will generally change in a discrete region of the cortex associated with the applied stimulus. This change in detected intensity can be used to map functional regions of the cortex. Early studies identified that a large contributor to changes in diffuse reflectance was haemoglobin absorption. Moreover, haemoglobin is known to have an oxygenation-dependent absorption spectrum in the visible and near infrared range, corresponding to the bright red colour of arterial blood and the darker brown colour of venous blood. It was, therefore, recognized that measurements of diffuse-reflectance changes at specific wavelengths across the haemoglobin absorption bands would differently represent contributions from changes in the local concentration of oxy- and deoxyhaemoglobin (Δ[HbO] and Δ[HbR]) as well as their total (Δ[HbT] = Δ[HbO] + Δ[HbR]), which represents a change in local blood volume.

shows raw reflectance data collected under green (530 nm) and red (630 nm) illumination (corresponding to the converted data shown in). As described further below, 530 nm is a high-contrast isosbestic point of the haemoglobin absorption spectra meaning that both HbO and HbR have the same absorption values, making the measurement independent of oxygenation and sensitive only to changes in [HbT]. The haemodynamic response evoked by stimulation is represented by a darkening of the cortex, corresponding to a local increase in [HbT] (hyperaemia). All vessels appear dark in the absolute image, with high contrast against the background parenchyma. Darker vessel structures in the ratiometic image (below) correspond to dilations. Conversely, 630 nm light is sensitive primarily to [HbR], with a much lower absorption overall compared with 530 nm. Veins on the pial surface have the highest baseline concentration of [HbR] as they are the least oxygenated, and thus have darkest contrast in the raw reflectance image at 630 nm. Arterioles have minimal contrast in the raw 630 nm image because they contain almost no HbR. During the later phases of the haemodynamic response, increased blood flow drives an increase in oxygenation, most strongly seen in the veins, reducing the concentration of [HbR] and leading to an increase in reflectance, seen as a whitening of vein structures in the 630 nm ratio image. The ‘initial dip’ period of the 630 nm time course is discussed further in a section below.


Quantification of haemoglobin changes from diffuse reflectance in the brain

The raw data shown in demonstrate that images acquired at different wavelengths carry clear information about the concentrations of HbO and HbR within vessels in the cortex. However, to convert reflectance data into estimates of changes in the concentration of haemoglobin, we must examine the physical principles of light propagation in scattering brain tissue.

In a simple, absorbing but non-scattering medium (such as a glass cuvette filled with a clear, absorbing liquid), the transmission of light will follow Beer's Law: where I0 is the incident intensity and I is the resulting intensity after the light has travelled a pathlength x through the medium with absorption coefficient μa. However, the brain is highly scattering at visible wavelengths. In fact, scattering is what permits light entering the brain's surface to be diffusely reflected and detected by a camera focused on the brain's surface. As scattering turns the incident light around, each scattering event adds to the photon's pathlength through the absorbing medium. This redirection also introduces spatial uncertainty in terms of where a photon detected at a particular point on the brain originally entered the brain, and where it visited within the brain. Finally, the light emerging from the brain will exit in a range of directions, based on its last scattering event, such that every photon entering will not necessarily be detected by the aperture of the camera lens. In practical implementations, it is impossible to know precisely how scattering has affected each detected photon across the field of view. However, the overall effects of scattering on equation (2.1) can be approximated by the ‘modified Beer Lambert Law’: where X = DPFx, where DPF is the ‘differential pathlength factor’ which represents scaling of the original linear pathlength x to account for the longer distance travelled by the photon due to scattering. G represents geometric factors that introduce uncertainty regarding how much of the light exiting the brain can be detected by the camera. Calibrating to know exactly the distribution of I0 on the brain's surface, as well as the geometric factor G is challenging to achieve, but it is possible to use relative measurements (e.g. dividing by I(t=0)) to remove the influence of these terms. Incorporating wavelength (λ) and time (t) dependences, we see so the change in absorption coefficient from time t0 to time t can be estimated from the ratio of the detected intensity at time t, relative to the intensity at time t0, scaled by a wavelength-dependent estimate of pathlength Note that I(t)/I(t0) − 1 = ΔR/R shown in. This analysis assumes that scatter is not changing over time, and that the wavelength-dependent pathlength in the brain is known. These two factors are discussed further below.

Considering the contribution of haemoglobin, assuming that equation (2.4) holds, and if the only change occurring in the brain is the concentration of absorbers in the tissue, the final step in analysis is to use the following relationship: and thus where ξn(λ) is the molar extinction coefficient of a given chromophore (absorber), Δcn(r, t) is the change in the chromophore's concentration relative to an earlier time point and r denotes a two-dimensional pixel location. As shown in, in the visible range (400–700 nm) the major absorbers in the brain are HbO and HbR. Below 450 nm, protein absorption is higher, while at wavelengths higher than 700 nm, water and lipids can contribute significantly to absorption. However, even if these additional absorbers contribute to baseline absorption, if we consider only changes over time (as in equation (2.4)) the effects of these absorbers will cancel unless their concentrations change over time. In this case, only a slight contribution might be expected from changes in cytochrome oxidase. So using equations (2.4) and (2.5) with a change over time denoted by Δ below, reflectance WFOM measurements at two wavelengths can yield the following pair of equations: Values of ξ(λ) correspond to the absolute absorption spectra of HbO and HbR. Values of wavelength-dependent pathlength (X(λ)) must be estimated. Values of both of these parameters used by our group have been included as a standardization resource in electronic supplementary material, appendix A (haemoglobin spectra reproduced from). With knowledge of X(λ)) and ξ(λ), equation (2.6) can be simply solved to find the two unknowns (ΔcHbO and ΔcHbR) at each pixel, which correspond to the time-varying change in molar concentration of HbO and HbR over time For a larger number of wavelength measurements, this analysis becomes a linear model that can be solved through least-squares fitting or other inversion of the matrix form below. However, the analysis above demonstrates that a minimum of two wavelengths are required to determine (and estimate) or the relative changes in [HbO] and [HbR].


Scattering governs the spatial resolution and depth sensitivity of reflectance wide-field optical mapping

The main factors governing the overall depth sensitivity and resolution of reflectance WFOM are the wavelengths of light chosen, the background scattering and absorption properties of the brain and the illumination and detection geometry. As illustrated in a, in a pure, two-dimensional diffuse-reflectance geometry, the most commonly detected photon will be one with a short pathlength, which reversed its direction within a short distance of the surface of the brain and originated from an illumination site close to the detection pixel (a inset, photon 1). Photons that have penetrated deeper into the cortex or travelled further laterally from their site of incidence will have a higher likelihood of being absorbed (equation (2.1)) and will thus contribute less to the overall detected signal (a, photons 2 and 3). This means that signal detected at the cortical surface (in the form of a two-dimensional image) represents a superficially weighted sum of signals from shallow and deeper layers of the cortex as depicted in b.

Scattering properties of tissue are dependent on the wavelength of the light probing the tissue, with the scattering coefficient μs having an approximate spectral dependence of where b is estimated to be between 1.3 and 2 for brain tissue. For longer wavelength light (e.g. red compared to blue), both scattering and absorption properties in living tissue are lower. Consequently, red light will, on average, penetrate more deeply into the brain with larger relative contributions to detected signals from deeper changes in absorption compared with blue or green light.

This spatial sensitivity of the signal detected by a single camera pixel is depicted in results from a Monte Carlo simulation shown in d. The model assumes uniform illumination of the tissue surface with unidirectional light and a low-numerical aperture detection lens (as shown in a). Each map shows ∂M/∂μa(x,z) on a log10 scale, representing the change in measurement M that would result from a spatial change in absorption μa at each location (x,z), based on estimates of the optical properties of brain for each wavelength (see caption for assumptions, see electronic supplementary material, appendix B for full details of model). d,e show laterally averaged and depth-averaged contributions, respectively, for each wavelength. These plots show (for the simulation parameters chosen) that changes in absorption at depths up to and exceeding 500 µm can contribute to signals detected in reflectance WFOM, although photons probing deeper changes contribute less towards the detected signal than photons probing more superficial tissue. This spatial sensitivity implies that surface vessels will contribute more strongly to changes in signal, but that changes in deeper capillaries (even if blurred) should be detectable in systems with sufficient dynamic range and signal to noise as depicted in. The higher sensitivity to tissues just below the surface (rather than the very surface) corresponds to the need for the photons to reverse their direction in order to be detected.

Despite the assumptions implicit in spectral conversion and in integrated two-dimensional measurements, the sensitivity of reflectance WFOM data to different vascular compartments can be confirmed using spatio-temporal unmixing as shown in. This approach recognizes that there is an expected difference in the haemoglobin dynamics of each vascular compartment, for example, arterioles will have high HbO concentrations and will increase in diameter (increasing [HbT]) but with little change in [HbR]. Veins are expected to show strong decreases in [HbR] as fresh, oxygenated blood washes into the system during hyperaemia, with relatively little dilation and thus minimal changes in [HbT]. As described further in, unmixing proceeds by selecting a small region of each identified vascular compartment within the responding region (after averaging WFOM signals over multiple stimulus repetitions). [HbO], [HbR] and [HbT] changes are then extracted from these ‘seed regions’ and concatenated across time, forming a basis set of vascular signatures (BComp, Hb_All(t)). Non-negative least-squares fitting at every pixel is then performed on concatenated changes in haemoglobin concentrations (ΔcHb_All(r,t)) to determine the contribution of each time course to the signal in each pixel (assuming a linear sum as shown in equation (2.10)). The results are individual maps PComp(r) delineating the presence of each dynamic signature in each pixel. Maps that generate low residuals and expected vascular patterns confirm good representation of the compartment time course in the compartment-specific basis time courses.

shows unmixing of five temporal haemodynamic components ranging from larger arteries to smaller arterioles, capillaries, venules and veins. Image merges of colour-coded spatially resolved compartments are shown for three- and five-compartment fits along with basis time courses. This analysis clearly delineates capillary contributions that have a different (and expected) time course to arteries or veins, but are more blurred, appearing as a background to the image compared to the sharp relief of the surface vessels.


Limitations of using an estimated, average, wavelength-dependent pathlength

The analysis shown above confirms the utility of WFOM for spatio-temporal haemodynamic analysis. However, it should be remembered that spectroscopic conversion of WFOM data relies upon several major assumptions that require careful consideration before small nuances in response maps and timing are assumed to be accurate. In particular, the modified Beer Lambert Law (equation (2.2)) requires a pathlength estimate to account for the distance travelled by light in the brain due to scatter. It is important to understand the effects of this pathlength assumption on the accuracy of WFOM spectral calculations: (1) The pathlength X used represents an average value for all of the light detected from the cortical surface. Each pixel is detecting a multitude of photons that have travelled a range of different distances within the tissue (a). The modified Beer Lambert Law must thus be valid for the detected distribution of photons and their pathlengths.(2) Light of different wavelengths will, on average, probe different volumes of the brain, and particularly different depths (as shown in d–f). This wavelength-dependence is potentially problematic because equation (2.5) and thus equation (2.7) rely upon measurements that describe a unique mixture of chromophores. Thus, if there is significant heterogeneity of changes in absorption, measurements at different wavelengths could yield data that are inconsistent with this linear model resulting in conversion errors. It is, therefore, advantageous, where possible, to use wavelengths with comparable scattering properties for haemodynamic imaging (factors influencing wavelength choice are detailed below).(3) Estimation of pathlengths for spectroscopic conversion requires an estimate of the scattering and absorbing properties of the brain, as well as knowledge of the illumination and detection geometry. As shown in equation (2.9), scattering in brain decreases with increasing wavelength. However, this dependence is not the only source of wavelength-dependence for pathlength estimation. The absorption properties of the tissue are also wavelength-dependent (e.g. corresponding to the spectrum of haemoglobin). The effect of this wavelength-dependence of absorption on estimation of pathlength can be understood by considering that high absorption will lead to stronger attenuation of photons that have travelled furthest (by equation (2.1)), which will decrease the average pathlength of detected photons at that wavelength. Absorption is a stronger factor affecting average pathlength than scattering.

The commonest approach to estimating pathlength is to use values for X calculated using a Monte Carlo model of light propagation based on estimates of the brain's background scattering and absorption properties (see electronic supplementary material, appendix B for Monte Carlo model details and example values for X). In general, we assume that the absorption spectrum of the brain can be estimated using equation (2.6), assuming 2 mM concentration of haemoglobin in blood, 3% blood in tissue by volume, and an average haemoglobin oxygenation of 75% (see electronic supplementary material, appendix A for haemoglobin absorption spectra and conversions). It is possible to go beyond this simple modelling and incorporate spatial heterogeneity into estimates of the baseline absorption and scatter properties of the brain, or even a nonlinear analysis that re-computes pathlength based on inferred changes in absorption. However, this is both computationally intensive and introduces the risk of erroneous divergence of the algorithm.

In general, published values for optical pathlengths in the rodent brain have varied by a factor of 3, ranging from low values of 0.3–1 mm at 540–580 nm to 3–7 mm around 680 nm. The use of these different factors between groups means that inferred values for Δ[HbO], Δ[HbR] and Δ[HbT], often shown in terms of absolute micrometre concentrations, are somewhat subjective. Ironically, the logarithmic nature of Beer's Law means that values of ΔR/R (fractional change in diffuse reflectance = ΔI(t)/I(t0) from equation (2.3) for specific wavelengths are robust measurements that should be repeatable and comparable between groups thanks to the cancellation of experimental variables such as the illumination intensity distribution. It would, therefore, be valuable to report both raw ΔR(λ)/R(λ) values for responses (as shown in) in addition to spectrally converted values for Δ[HbO], Δ[HbR] and Δ[HbT], in cases where the relative amplitude of haemodynamics is a valuable parameter to compare between groups. Alternatively, the use of common pathlength values could also assist in this standardization. Our routinely used pathlength values are plotted in g (and tabulated in electronic supplementary material, appendix B for this purpose), noting however, that these values should be carefully validated for different experimental conditions, animal models and experimental paradigms.


Choice of wavelengths

Several factors affect the choice of suitable wavelengths for multi-spectral reflectance WFOM. First, it is often helpful to choose at least one wavelength that is isosbestic (λiso), such as 530 nm as described above. In this case, reflectance measurements obtained can be assumed to be invariant with changes in haemoglobin oxygenation. Although this reduces information, this measurement can be reliably considered as a measure of changes in blood volume within the tissue, independent of pathlength estimates or values for haemoglobin absorption coefficients. From equations (2.5) and (2.6) and so irrespective of pathlength estimates or haemoglobin spectra It should be noted, however, that unless a very narrow wavelength range is used, the spectral bandwidth of light centred on an isosbestic point could introduce some sensitivity to oxygenation.

Choice of additional wavelengths should consider several additional factors: (i) that the wavelength has good sensitivity to oxygenation-dependent changes, ideally selecting two spectral regions where HbO and HbR absorption dominate, respectively, to give counteracting measurements. From equation (2.3), it can also be seen that the percentage changes in signal (ΔI/I) for a given change in [HbT] will be higher for wavelengths around blue and green, where the absorption coefficient of haemoglobin is much stronger, than in the red, although note that shorter wavelengths also yield less depth penetration than longer wavelengths. (ii) The baseline scattering and absorption experienced by the wavelengths are not excessively different (as explained above), noting that longer red wavelengths will penetrate around two times more deeply into the brain than blue and green light (d–f). (iii) Availability of suitable sources of illumination with sufficient power in sufficiently narrow spectral bands to allow accurate estimation of haemoglobin absorption parameters (this is much easier since the advent of high power light emitting diodes (LEDs) at a wide range of wavelengths). It should be noted that lasers are less often used as light sources owing to the problem of speckles in wide-field images. (iv) Ensuring avoidance (or in some cases deliberate overlap) of spectral bands important for other aspects of the experiment such as GCaMP excitation and emission ranges, absorption bands of channelrhodopsins and absorption bands of agents such as photosensitizers used to cause photothrombic strokes.

A typical set of wavelengths used in our experiments is 490 nm (blue, more sensitive to HbO and corresponding to GCaMP excitation), 530 nm (green, an isosbestic point) and 630 nm (red, more sensitive to HbR) (as shown in and). Illumination is provided by filtered, strobed LEDs as depicted in a. Although combining 490, 530 and 630 nm signals may introduce some spatial sampling confounds as described above, all conversions are tested in the following way: given three wavelengths (e.g. A, B and C), conversions to Δ[HbO] and Δ[HbR] are performed using successive pairs of wavelengths via equation (2.7) (e.g. A&B, B&C and A&C). If all three conversions yield traces of Δ[HbO] and Δ[HbR] that are in agreement, conversion assumptions are assumed to hold.


Does scatter change during functional activity?

The analysis above does not consider scattering to be a time-varying function during functional changes. Changes in the scattering properties of tissue can affect signal detected in a diffuse-reflectance geometry in counteracting ways: (i) increases in scatter will increase the pathlength of light within the absorbing medium, which should decrease detected light intensity. (ii) Conversely, increases in scatter could improve redirection of light and thus increase the number of photons rapidly reversing their direction and exiting the brain to be detected by the camera. (iii) Increased scatter will cause photons travelling deeper into the tissue to be more heavily absorbed, such that detected signal will become more weighted to superficial layers. All of these effects in combination can lead to ambiguous interpretations of increases and decreases in intensity being attributable to increases or decreases in scatter. Thus, although it is often assumed that a change in scatter can be modelled as another absorbing term in equation (2.1), the effects of scattering can be complex in a diffuse-reflectance geometry.

Foundational work performed in bloodless in vitro tissues such as the giant squid axon detected small (approx. 10−6) changes in the intensity of directionally scattered light that can be clearly attributed to small changes in scattering. However, very few reports in the living, mammalian brain have provided clear evidence of a detectable signal change caused by scatter changes. One paper that shows compelling evidence for a small, very fast scattering signal is Rector et al.. The authors used 660 nm light (red) to avoid strong haemoglobin absorption, and a dark-field illumination geometry to maximize penetration depth and reduce opposing, back-scatter enhancing effects of increases in scatter. In response to a single whisker stimulation, the authors observed a small (ΔI/I ∼ −0.01%), very rapid decrease in detected optical signal that reached its minimum within 200 ms of stimulus delivery and corresponded well to electrical recordings. This signal was found to map accurately to the individual barrels of the rat whisker-barrel region of the cortex. These measurements are likely accurate representations of changes in brain scattering, but it should be noted that such changes due to neural activity are very fast, and highly challenging to detect.

Although early intrinsic signal imaging studies proposed that slower changes in cortical reflectance could, in part, be due to neural activity-linked changes in brain scattering, this possibility is not consistent with the observations of Rector et al.. It has also been suggested that changes in blood flow could alter the scattering properties of the brain, although this effect has not been quantified in vivo. It is concluded that neurally correlated changes in brain scattering are likely to be only very minor, fast contributors to signals detected in reflectance WFOM measurements. It is thus assumed here that changes in scattering do not need to be incorporated into standard analysis to extract haemoglobin concentrations from multi-spectral WFOM data.


Representations of the ‘initial dip’

The first description of the ‘initial dip’ was presented in an early study by Malonek & Grinvald who acquired cortical reflectance data using a slit spectrometer. This study demonstrated the presence of the characteristic spectral bands of haemoglobin absorption, indicating a haemodynamic origin for ‘intrinsic signals’. After spectral conversion, the Δ[HbR] trace was found to show a well-localized early increase in [HbR], interpreted as initial consumption of oxygen (an ‘initial dip’), followed by an undershoot in [HbR] corresponding to an increase in oxygenation as fresh blood washes into the active region. This result was exciting as it indicated that the early component of the ‘intrinsic signal’ could represent a direct measure of neuronal activity in the form of oxygen consumption.

Following this result, it was noted that reflectance WFOM data acquired at a single wavelength between 600 and 640 nm would almost always yield a signal in response to stimulus that initially dipped, and then overshot similarly to the inverse of the Δ[HbR] trace shown in (this trend can be seen in the 630 nm reflectance data shown here in). It was reasoned that HbR is the dominant absorber in this range, and therefore, the signal was an accurate representation of changes in [HbR] without any further need for spectral conversion. As a result, many researchers interested in mapping cortical regions (e.g. to guide electrophysiology) used only a single red wavelength for ‘intrinsic signal imaging’ and focused only the early part of the response under the assumption that it equates to neural oxygen consumption.

However, several subsequent studies questioned the original ‘initial dip’ result, showing that adequately accounting for the wavelength-dependence of pathlength during spectral conversion results in an [HbR] trace that exhibits no initial increase. The presence of the initial dip has also been challenged by many in the functional MRI community, where only a few groups report seeing an equivalent change in the blood oxygen level-dependent signal (which should be inversely proportional to [HbR], such that an ‘initial dip’ would correspond to deoxygenation). Spectral analysis in Malonek & Grinvald both did not account for wavelength-dependent pathlengths and was also performed under the assumption that large changes in scattering were occurring, and that scatter changes would add linearly to a model of the form shown in equation (2.6). This model fit predicted light-scattering changes that first decreased and then increased in a pattern that closely resembled the inverse of the trace derived for Δ[HbR]. Had scattering been held constant, the model might have yielded an Δ[HbR] trace with a monotonic decrease. Moreover, the derived Δ[HbO] trace exhibits a smooth increase immediately following stimulus onset, consistent with a rapid increase in local perfusion that should counteract local oxygen consumption.

Although some groups performing spectral conversion of multi-spectral WFOM data do report initial dips (initial [HbR] increases), many other studies performing spectral conversion show [HbR] traces that exhibit no initial dips. In our case, despite being present in our raw red reflectance time course in, an initial dip in [HbR] is not seen in spectrally converted data shown after conversion in.

In an attempt to explain and reconcile these results, we performed a reflectance WFOM study in the awake, behaving primate visual cortex using green 530 nm (isosbestic) and two red, 605 and 630 nm recordings. Earliest changes in reflectance were seen in 530 nm signals, which by equation (2.12) should accurately report changes in total haemoglobin [HbT] concentration. However, simultaneously acquired changes in 605 and 630 nm signal showed a characteristic dip in signal, followed by an overshoot (consistent with). After spectroscopic conversion, this dynamic pattern of red light reflectance was demonstrated to be attributable to the small, but finite 10–20% contribution of HbO absorption to reflectance in this red wavelength range (highlighted in). A large initial increase in [HbT] (as indicated by a decrease in 530 nm green reflectance), which would be mostly driven by increases in [HbO], since arterial blood is entering the area, would cause a signal decrease at 600–650 nm owing to a higher overall concentration of absorbers. Subsequent decreases in the concentration of [HbR] from this inflow would then dominate the signal and lead to an overshoot in red reflectance. Conversion of these data using a broad range of pathlength factors all resulted in calculated time courses for [HbR] that exhibited monotonic decreases, without an initial increase in [HbR], despite raw red reflectance data having what appeared to be an initial dip (consistent with our converted data shown in).

This result does not question whether ‘initial dips’ (initial deoxygenations) can occur in the brain: it is highly likely that certain brain areas, anaesthesia states, disease states, developmental stages or types of task could yield an imbalance between oxygen consumption and the arrival of fresh blood. It could also be argued that errors in spectral conversion of reflectance WFOM data, or effects of initial scattering changes, could be erroneously eliminating an initial increase in calculated [HbR]. There is also clear evidence that early oxygen consumption takes place, and initial decreases in tissue PO2 following stimulation have been convincingly measured. However, the results described above show that the standard use of a single 600–650 nm red light source for ‘intrinsic signal imaging’ can be ambiguous and misleading. Interpretation of the biphasic shape of red reflectance as an initial dip (corresponding to oxygen consumption) followed by an overshoot (corresponding to perfusion) does not take into account the small, yet significant absorption of HbO at these wavelengths. Initial decreases in red reflectance thus more likely correspond to early, localized hyperaemia in the capillary beds that are also evident at isosbestic green (530 nm) wavelengths, rather than being faithful representations of oxygen consumption.


Wide-field optical mapping of fluorescence contrast

In addition to haemodynamic and ‘intrinsic signal’ optical imaging, the exposed brain can also be imaged to capture a range of dynamic changes in fluorescence contrast including voltage and calcium sensitive dyes, genetically encoded calcium and voltage indicators and intrinsic fluorophores as markers of oxidative metabolism.

Instrumentation for imaging fluorescence contrast in a wide-field geometry can be almost identical to that used for reflectance WFOM. The major practical difference is that fluorophores excite with lower wavelength (higher energy) light, and emit at higher wavelengths (lower energy light). This means that the brain must be illuminated at the fluorophore's excitation wavelength, and this wavelength must be blocked from entering the camera to enable sensitivity to photons at the fluorophore's emission wavelengths. Emission intensities are typically much lower than excitation energies. It is argued here that reflectance WFOM measurements should always be acquired in parallel with fluorescence measurements to protect against haemodynamic cross-talk as explained further below.

Overall, the imaging properties of WFOM for fluorescence imaging are largely similar to those of haemodynamic imaging. However, there are several considerations for fluorescence WFOM that differ from reflectance imaging as described below:


Depth sensitivity of fluorescence wide-field optical mapping

An important distinction between reflectance and fluorescence WFOM relates to the effects of fluorophore spatial heterogeneity on the spatial dependence of imaging. As illustrated in a–c, if a fluorophore is located in a layer deep within the brain (b), and fluorescent light is detected by the imaging system, the detected signal must have originated from the fluorescent layer. This is different from the case of diffuse reflectance (as demonstrated in) where the superficial layers will always be the regions of highest sensitivity to absorption changes (unless dark-field illumination strategies are employed). This effect brings the benefit that light (albeit attenuated and spatially blurred from scattering) could be selectively detected from fluorophores located deep within the brain if labelling was restricted to only this deep region, sources were bright enough and detectors had sufficient sensitivity. However, if more superficial layers are also fluorescent (c), sensitivity will be much more strongly weighted to fluorescent regions closet to the surface, increasing background as well as the dynamic range required to also detect changes in deeper regions. The other effect of this difference is in the applicability of using diffuse-reflectance measurements to correct for absorption contamination of fluorescence measurements as described in more detail below.

Another slight difference between the spatial sensitivity of wide-field fluorescence and absorption measurements comes from the fact that fluorescence emissions are isotropic. Diffuse-reflectance signals come from photons that have repeatedly scattered, usually in a fairly forward direction, until they emerge from the tissue (with signal being inferred from photons that are absorbed, and thus do not emerge). Conversely, a fluorescent absorption event can occur for a photon travelling in any direction, and emission of a fluorescence photon will be in a random direction, such that photons with effectively shorter paths could feasibly return to the detector more efficiently than in diffuse reflectance. This effect is accounted for in the Monte Carlo simulations of depth sensitivity shown in and described further in electronic supplementary material, appendix B.

Finally, for one-photon interactions, it should be noted that excitation light will always be of a different (lower) wavelength than emission light, and that these two wavelengths will experience different absorption and scattering properties within the tissue. Even if a fluorophore emits at longer wavelengths where light propagation will be improved, if blue (for example) light is required for excitation, the penetration depth of this excitation light will remain a limiting factor. Correction for fluorescence contamination by absorption of haemoglobin must also account for attenuation of both excitation and emission bands, as described further below.


Image resolution limitations for fluorescence wide-field optical mapping

The type of fluorophore being imaged will dictate which physical structures are labelled. In the case of the calcium-sensitive fluorophore GCaMP, specific cell types can be selectively targeted to express the fluorescent protein, from all neurons in the cortex, to specific sub-types or layers, dendrites or cell bodies, sparsely or densely labelled, or even other reactive cells such as astrocytes. Other labelling strategies can yield more diffuse labelling such as VSDs which localize to cell membranes, or FAD which is located in mitochondria.

In general, the ability of fluorescence WFOM to spatially resolve single-cell activity can be considered equivalent to the challenge of using a low numerical aperture epi-fluorescence microscope to image a large intact sample. If cell bodies are located close to the surface, where light will have undergone very few scattering events, and sufficient magnification is used, individual cells can likely be resolved but will have low contrast owing to out-of-plane background signal. In the intact brain, very superficial structures such as apical dendrites in layer 1 can be discerned to flash if sparsely expressing GCaMP. An emerging way to establish close proximity to cell bodies deeper within the cortex is to implant a gradient index (GRIN) lens into the brain and perform WFOM over the relatively small two-dimensional field of view at the GRIN lens's tip. Resolving single cells or structures can be enhanced by extracting changes in fluorescence corresponding to temporal events such as neuronal firing, and extended via the use of spatio-temporal unmixing strategies to extract signals from additional cells beyond the focal plane similar to the haemodynamic unmixing strategy shown in.

However, for measurements wishing to probe changes in fluorescence in larger volumes, beyond the initial few scattering events of light, blurring will reduce the ability to resolve and separate activity in individual cells. In the data shown in, each camera pixel captures an area of around 20 × 20 µm. The purpose here was to capture neural activity across the entire superficial cortex of the mouse (including multiple cortical depths) in parallel, rather than seeking single-cell resolution. Here, the combined scattering effects and temporal properties of GCaMP provide a spatio-temporally integrated ensemble representation of neural activity in each region.


Background subtraction for ratiometric calculations

Fluorescence measurements are typically reported as ΔF/F, the fractional change in fluorescence relative to some baseline, e.g. at time t = 0. The true fluorescence of the fluorophore FTrue(r,t) is affected by the following systematic effects: (i) illumination uniformity, detection uniformity and the spatial uniformity of fluorophore expression (collectively represented by S(r) below, where r denotes position). (ii) Time-varying confounds such as haemodynamic absorption, given by P(r,t) and (iii) ‘dark’ signal D(r) given by the background signal measured when taking an image with identical acquisition settings, but without illumination of the brain, and will capture both extraneous ambient light and the camera's baseline ‘dark level’ which can be up to 100 counts. The measured fluorescence FMeas is then given by

Ratiometric analysis is intended to cancel out these systematic errors (as it does for reflectance WFOM). For fluorescence, however, as in equation (3.2) compared with equation (3.3), it is essential to first subtract the dark signal D(r), to enable S(r) to cancel out. This analysis is true for all WFOM analysis, but is particularly important for fluorescence measurements where detected counts on the camera can be small in comparison with the amplitude of D(r)

Even after ratiometric analysis it is clear that fractional changes in fluorescence will not be corrected for time-varying confounds such as absorption changes, as described further below.


The need for haemodynamic correction of wide-field fluorescence data

e illustrates the simplified paths taken by light to and from an interaction with a fluorophore. Excitation light must travel a pathlength X(λex) through the brain before reaching the fluorophore, and along this path will experience the absorption properties of the tissue it travels through. An equivalent effect will attenuate light emitted from the fluorophore. As shown in d, the excitation and emission bands of GCaMP overlap with strong (and different) absorption bands of HbO and HbR. If background absorption properties remained constant, these effects would have minimal consequences; however, through the process of neurovascular coupling, almost all neural activity should be accompanied by functional hyperaemia. As evidenced by the strongly detectable signals in reflectance WFOM, these changes in haemodynamics will thus modulate detected fluorescence, contaminating fluorescence recordings. From e, we can formulate a simple model of this effect: where I1(λEx) represents the initial intensity of excitation light entering the tissue, I2(λEx) represents the intensity of the excitation light reaching the fluorophore after travelling pathlength X(λEx) through tissue with absorption coefficient μa(λEx). Similarly I1(λEm) represents the initial intensity of fluorescent emission light and I2(λEx) is the intensity of emission light exciting the tissue after travelling pathlength X(λEm) through tissue with absorption coefficient μa(λEm). Conversion of excitation light to fluorescence by a fluorophore is a function of σ, the fluorophore's conversion efficiency and cf, representing either the concentration of the fluorophore or the effect (e.g. concentration of calcium) that fluorescence is proportional to. Therefore, By substituting equations (3.4) and (3.5) into equation (3.6), the intensity of fluorescence emission light emerging from the tissue is given by As shown above in equation (3.3), the ratio of measured fluorescence relative to a baseline state FMeas(t0) (after dark subtraction) should cancel out multiplicative, time-invariant factors S(r) such as the unknown distribution of excitation light I1(λEx), as well as the fluorescence conversion efficiency σ, leaving

The above equation is a very important result as it demonstrates that the effects of absorption (haemodynamic) cross-talk are multiplicative with respect to the ratiometric change in intracellular calcium. This relationship means that using brighter GCaMPs or other fluorophores will not overcome the effects of haemodynamic cross-talk owing to their larger signal amplitude.

The result does, however, highlight the dependence of cross-talk on the pathlength travelled by photons on their way to and from the fluorophore. Returning to a–c, the spatial distribution of fluorophores can thus affect the magnitude of haemodynamic cross-talk affecting data. In the case of a brain expressing strong, uniform fluorescence, most fluorescent light will be detected from superficial layers, photons that will have travelled a shorter pathlength and will, therefore, carry exponentially less haemodynamic contamination than in measurements of fluorophores situated in deeper layers.


Methods of correcting for haemodynamic cross-talk in fluorescence wide-field optical mapping

To correct fluorescence WFOM data we must remove the time-varying absorption term from equation (3.8) (P(r,t) in equation (3.3)). We note from equation (2.3) that diffuse-reflectance measurements give us an approximation to this absorption term, if measured at the excitation or emission wavelengths of the fluorophore. In the case of fairly broadband 530 nm (green) diffuse reflectance, which approximates the emission band of GCaMP:

The main difference is the pathlength term XDR(λem), with DR denoting diffuse reflectance, corresponding to light entering the tissue, scattering and emerging. This distance is not the same as the pathlength term X(λem) in equation (3.8) which corresponds to the light's path from the fluorophore to the tissue surface. Nevertheless, this formulation demonstrates that simultaneously acquiring green reflectance data (or the fluorophore's emission band) while acquiring fluorescence WFOM data will provide a valuable measure of the spatio-temporal properties of absorption changes that could confound interpretation of fluorescence changes.

Mathematically removing contributions from changes in absorption can be achieved, but will again each require approximations. We have developed three different methods for correction as detailed below: (1) Approximate division/regression of single-wavelength reflectance data.(2) Removal of excitation and emission contamination using multi-spectral reflectance.(3) Blind-source removal of haemodynamic contamination.


Haemodynamic correction using only green diffuse reflectance (single-wavelength method)

The first approach to haemodynamic correction is to use simultaneously recorded 530 nm (green) diffuse-reflectance signals. In this case, the properties of the tissue (and changes in absorption) are assumed to be the same at λex and λem (so Δμa(t,λem) ≈ Δμa(t,λex)) and the pathlength of the 530 nm diffuse reflectance light is assumed to be approximately the sum of the excitation and emission pathlengths (XDR(λem) ≈ (X(λex) + X(λem)). Contamination removal (under these approximations) can then be done by simply dividing the fluorescence ratio by the reflectance ratio (from equations (3.8) and (3.9))


Haemodynamic correction using estimated excitation and emission attenuation (Ex–Em method)

A more rigorous way to correct the haemodynamic confound is to correct for attenuation changes at both the excitation and emission bands of the fluorophore. In practice, acquiring reflectance images at the fluorophore's excitation band is difficult to achieve for high frame-rate imaging using a single camera, since a long-pass filter would need to be modulated in front of the camera, or a second camera would be needed. Instead, we show here that an improved correction can be achieved via dual-wavelength reflectance measurements that do not necessarily include the fluorophore's excitation band.

In the case of, GCaMP is excited at 488 nm and diffuse reflectance is measured at 530 and 630 nm. Based on the theoretical framework presented above, spectroscopic analysis (equation (2.7)) should be able to infer the corresponding time-varying changes in [HbO] and [HbR] for each pixel using these 530 and 630 nm reflectance measurements. Equation (2.6) can then be used to calculate the effective cortical Δµa at the 488 nm excitation wavelength (or any other wavelength) at the same point in time. We can, therefore, formulate an absorption part of the correction factor as:

Although pathlength values Xest in this case must be estimated, this additional degree of freedom can help in accounting for the inherent differences in XDR(λ) and X(λ), enabling a better approximation to the fluorescence case, and differences in absorption and pathlength properties at excitation and emission wavelengths. In practice, values of Xest(λEx) = 0.56 mm−1 and Xest(λEm) = 0.57 mm−1 in Thy1-GCaMP mice have been found to yield corrected GCaMP images with minimal vessel artefacts and low-frequency trends resembling haemodynamic cross-talk.

The Thy1-GCaMP6f images and time courses shown in were corrected using the Ex–Em method and pathlength values described above. shows an inset of the same data before and after haemodynamic correction. The GCaMP image before correction shows strong vessel artefacts corresponding to absorption by haemoglobin, which are removed after correction. The time course of the uncorrected GCaMP trace for a 5 s tactile whisker stimulation, peaks at first and then dips below baseline as the haemodynamic response reaches its peak. After correction, the GCaMP signal stays positive for the duration of the stimulus. To verify this correction, also shows a comparison between wide-field GCaMP measurements and electrophysiological recordings at the same site. Data were acquired in a urethane-anaesthetized Thy 1-GCaMP3 animal during an 8 s duration, 3 Hz electrical hindpaw stimulation. Electrophysiological data were spike-sorted to yield multi-unit activity (MUA). Raw fluorescence data were corrected using the single-wavelength method. A convolution of MUA with a best-fit gamma function representing the kinetics of GCaMP yielded a good fit to haemodynamic-corrected WFOM fluorescence data. This result both confirms that haemodynamic-corrected data are a more precise representation of neural data than raw fluorescence, while also demonstrating that WFOM fluorescence in Thy1-GCaMP mice provides a valuable representation of underlying excitatory activity.


Haemodynamic correction by blind-source separation

In cases where diffuse-reflectance measurements cannot be (or have not been) acquired, it may be possible to extract the haemodynamic component using blind-source separation techniques such as principal component analysis (PCA). Such methods assume that data can be modelled as a linear sum of temporal components, and seek the largest contributors to variance within the data (which here is multiple time courses given by all of the pixels in the image). The most important consideration in this approach is to note that haemodynamic contamination of fluorescence data is multiplicative (equation (3.8)), whereas PCA and associated methods assume that data are composed of a linear sum of separable components. As such, PCA for contamination removal should be done on the logarithm of fluorescence data, which reduces the contamination problem to a linearly added component (from equation (3.8))

In some cases, PCA of the logarithm of WFOM fluorescence data (e.g. GCaMP or FAD) will yield two primary temporal components that closely resemble the fluorescence response and the haemodynamic confound. The spatial representation of these temporal components should be carefully examined to ensure that they share features with expected neural and haemodynamic components (e.g. the latter showing vessel structures). Ideally, components should be compared to simultaneously acquired diffuse-reflectance data to ensure a spatio-temporal likeness. In this case, the principal component time course found to represent haemodynamics can be multiplied by its spatial representation and subtracted from the (logarithmic) fluorescence dataset and the exponent then taken.

This methodology works optimally for short datasets capturing a single, simple spatio-temporal event such as a response to a localized stimulus. In more complex or longer duration data, where multiple fluorescence events take place in different regions, components will become much more difficult to separate reliably and blind-source techniques could remove important information from the dataset. In general, great care should be taken when using non-supervised algorithms such as PCA for this purpose, since even in the simplest case, the order of principle components can vary from one run to the next (e.g. haemodynamic could be first, second or third).

Performance of PCA (and regression techniques) can be improved with reduction of noise in the data, for example, by registering motion in each trial, averaging across trials and low-pass filtering (at approx. 3–5 Hz) to remove physiological noises such as heart rate and breathing rate.


Material and methods


Instrumentation

All data shown here was acquired using an LED-based WFOM system as described in and depicted in. An Andor iXon 897 EMCCD camera was used to acquire all images shown, except, which used the Dalsa 1M60. In recent work, we have also used the Andor Zyla SCMOS camera to get similar results to the iXon. Simultaneous reflectance and fluorescence measurements are achieved by strobing illumination between up to four different colour LEDs using a microcontroller monitoring the camera's ‘expose’ signal. This approach allows precise control of the LED illumination period, differential control of their intensities, and allows the camera to run at its fastest free-running speed. We have made this software open source and available online. Each high-power LED is mounted with a suitable band-pass filter to define a narrow spectral band and prevent leakage of excitation light (spectra shown in g). LEDs are combined using dichroics to yield a single beam that can be positioned to illuminate the brain directly. To achieve interlaced imaging of haemodynamics and GCaMP fluorescence, a 500 nm long-pass filter is positioned in front of the camera. This means that under (brighter) 480 nm excitation, fluorescence is detected, while during 530 and 630 nm illumination, reflectance signals are detected for spectral conversion to haemodynamics. This powerful strategy can be further expanded to include a near infrared laser diode within the strobe order to collect laser speckle images from which blood flow can also be calculated. Images of different fields of view can be acquired using different lenses in front of the camera, e.g. Nikon AF Micro-NIKKOR 60 mm f/2.8D lens for the bilateral imaging shown in.

Other strategies for simultaneous imaging of fluorescence and reflectance include adding a second (or more) camera to the system, and splitting emitted light into a fluorescence and reflectance path. This approach can feasibly enable imaging of diffuse reflectance and the excitation wavelengths at the same time as fluorescence, and enable imaging at the cameras' highest frame rate. However, in addition to the cost of purchasing two cameras, synchronizing camera acquisition and exactly registering the images on both cameras can make correction analysis challenging.


Animal preparation

All animal procedures were reviewed and approved by the institutional animal care and use committee at Columbia University. Data shown in was acquired in an intravenous alpha-chloralose anaesthetized female Sprague Dawley rat with an acute, unilateral glass cranial window placed after removal of approximately 3 × 4 mm region of skull and dura over the somatosensory cortex. The animal was ventilated via trachotomy. Full preparation details are provided in.

All other figures show data acquired in an awake, behaving transgenic mouse with a ‘chronic’ bilateral cranial window. (C57BL/6J-Tg(Thy1-GCaMP6f)GP5.17Dkim/J, strain purchased from Jackson Labs and bred in-house). Mice were anaesthetized with isoflurane, homeothermically maintained and monitored using pulse oximetry. In a fully aseptic environment, the scalp over the craniotomy area was resected. Skull thinning was then performed with constant saline irrigation, avoiding excessive drilling of the sutures but ensuring maximal removal of skull vessels or opaque skull. The thinning area can be extended beyond the bound of bregma and lambda, towards the frontal area for visualizing motor cortex or occipital area for cerebellum as needed. Once drilled to translucency, the dry surface of the skull was coated with a thin layer of cyanoacrylate (gel-type Loctite® Super Glue) which serves to index-match the rough surface of the skull, prevent bone re-growth and provide mechanical protection. The skin around the thinned skull preparation was sealed using cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive (e.g. 3M™ Vetbond™ Tissue Adhesive). A custom-made head plate made from laser-cut acrylic plastic was then used to enable immobilization (illustrated in). This approach enables the rapid manufacture of a custom-fit, light-weight, unobstrusive head plate for each mouse. The design encircles the bilaterally exposed cortex and is glued to the skull using more gel-type cyanoacrylate. To protect the thinned skull during recovery, a layer of Kwik-Sil™, a two-part, rapid cure silicone rubber is placed over the window and can be peeled-off for imaging (and then renewed following imaging). Post-operative care must ensure that animals are properly hydrated, have adequate pain relief (e.g. pre and post-operative buprenorphine) and are in an environment where they cannot catch or damage their head plates.

Training and handling of animals to perform behavioural tasks can be performed before surgery (without head-fixing) and following post-operative recovery. After recovery, the animal can be imaged repeatedly on subsequent days, enabling longitudinal studies of learning, development or disease progression without the confounds of anaesthesia affecting physiology and cognitive function. In our case, the animal was imaged while free to run on a horizontal ‘saucer wheel’ during imaging and tactile whisker stimulation (using a stepper motor actuator). The animal's running and behaviour was monitored throughout using a small camera. Data shown were averaged over repeated presentations of the same stimulus. However, the system described above also has sufficient signal to noise to record responses to single trials, or spontaneous neural and haemodynamic activity in the ‘resting’ brain.


Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain

Anil K. Seth, Karl J. Friston — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2016. PMC5062097, CC BY 4.0.

We review a recent shift in conceptions of interoception and its relationship to hierarchical inference in the brain. The notion of interoceptive inference means that bodily states are regulated by autonomic reflexes that are enslaved by descending predictions from deep generative models of our internal and external milieu. This re-conceptualization illuminates several issues in cognitive and clinical neuroscience with implications for experiences of selfhood and emotion. We first contextualize interoception in terms of active (Bayesian) inference in the brain, highlighting its enactivist (embodied) aspects. We then consider the key role of uncertainty or precision and how this might translate into neuromodulation. We next examine the implications for understanding the functional anatomy of the emotional brain, surveying recent observations on agranular cortex. Finally, we turn to theoretical issues, namely, the role of interoception in shaping a sense of embodied self and feelings. We will draw links between physiological homoeostasis and allostasis, early cybernetic ideas of predictive control and hierarchical generative models in predictive processing. The explanatory scope of interoceptive inference ranges from explanations for autism and depression, through to consciousness. We offer a brief survey of these exciting developments.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘Interoception beyond homeostasis: affect, cognition and mental health’.


Introduction

Recent years have seen the emergence of a framework within cognitive neuroscience that offers exactly the right set of concepts to talk about the body and mind in terms of beliefs about the body (and oneself). On this view, the brain is not an elaborate stimulus-response link but a statistical organ that actively generates explanations for the stimuli it encounters—in terms of hypotheses that are tested against sensory evidence. This perspective can be traced back to Helmholtzian formulations of unconscious inference. Over the last few years, the underlying idea has been formalized to cover deep or hierarchical Bayesian inference–about the hidden causes of our sensations—and how these inferences induce beliefs and behaviour. ‘Explanations’, ‘hypotheses’ and ‘beliefs’ should in this context be understood not as consciously held mental states, but as neuronally encoded probability distributions (i.e. Bayesian beliefs) over the hidden causes of sensory signals. The biophysical encoding of these ‘beliefs’ is, technically, in terms of sufficient statistics like the mean or expectation of a distribution.

In the last few years, ‘Bayesian brain’ ideas have been applied in the context of interoception, which refers to the perception and integration of autonomic, hormonal, visceral and immunological signals—or more informally as the sense of the body ‘from within’. On some of these views, emotional experience and experiences of embodied selfhood emerge from top-down inference on the (multimodal) causes of interoceptive afferents, generalizing so-called two-factor or evaluative theories of emotion and cognition. A first implication of these proposals is that these kinds of perceptual experience are as subject to (implicit and perhaps idiosyncratic) beliefs, as are perceptions of the external world. Beyond this, the context of interoception brings about further shifts in how to think about the relationships between body, mind and brain. One such shift is that generative models of interoceptive signals should be geared towards control or regulation of physiological variables, rather than towards accurate representation of some extra-cranial state-of-affairs. The two goals remain tightly interwoven, inasmuch as effective regulation depends on deployment of sufficiently elaborated predictive models. This shift recognizes alternative origins to ‘Bayesian brain’ ideas in twentieth century ‘cybernetics’ and in doing so, points to a deep connection between life and mind, in which cognitive processes are grounded in fundamental evolutionary imperatives to maintain physiological homeostasis. Many other specific implications follow, for example in reframing the functional basis of a variety of disorders of emotion and selfhood.

Here, we survey these exciting developments. We first provide a brief introduction to the framework of prediction error minimization in the Bayesian brain, emphasizing its embodied or enactive aspects. These aspects appear prominently in the role of action in reducing prediction error (i.e. active inference) and emphasize the key role of uncertainty or precision in shaping the interplay between prior beliefs and sensory evidence. Precision-weighting of recurrent signalling in cortical hierarchies is closely associated with neuromodulation, providing important clues about developmental origins of conditions like autism; it is also associated with attention, suggesting novel accounts for symptom expression due to aberrant attention to interoceptive signals.

Turning to functional neuroanatomy, we outline the functional architecture of interoceptive inference and review recent suggestions that perceptual predictions originate preferentially in agranular cortices, while acknowledging that direct empirical evidence for interoceptive inference is still to be uncovered. We next address some theoretical issues, relating active interoceptive inference to experiences of emotion and embodied selfhood, highlighting a control-oriented or instrumental perspective on interoceptive inference that calls on cybernetic concepts of predictive regulation, allostatic control and perceptual control theory. We conclude by exploring the implications of these ideas for a sample of clinical conditions that may reflect false interoceptive inference, either in their aetiology and/or in symptom expression. While disorders in emotional processing and interoceptive experience naturally invite explanations in terms of abnormal interoceptive inference, we also highlight how this perspective can illuminate other conditions and symptoms including autism, fatigue and depression.


Predictive coding in the Bayesian brain

Current formulations of Helmholtz's notion are now the most popular metaphors for neuronal processing and are usually considered under the Bayesian brain hypothesis as predictive coding. Predictive coding is a process theory with a biologically plausible back story and a considerable amount of empirical support. (See for a review of canonical microcircuits and predictive coding in perception, for an application of the same ideas to motor control, and for evidence of feed-forward and feed-back signalling carried by distinct frequency bands.)

In these schemes, neuronal representations in higher or deeper levels of neuronal hierarchies generate predictions of representations in lower levels. These descending predictions are compared with lower-level representations to form a prediction error (usually associated with the activity of superficial pyramidal cells). This mismatch or difference signal is passed back up the hierarchy, to update higher representations (usually associated with the activity of deep pyramidal cells). The recurrent exchange of signals between adjacent hierarchical levels resolves prediction error at each and every level, resulting in a hierarchically deep explanation for sensory inputs. In computational terms, the activity of neuronal populations is assumed to encode Bayesian beliefs or probability distributions over states in the world that cause sensations (e.g. my visual sensations are caused by a face—see figures and). The simplest encoding corresponds to representing the belief with the expected value (mean) of a (hidden) cause or expectation. These causes are referred to as hidden because they have to be inferred from their sensory consequences. In other words, they can never be directly observed and are forever hidden behind a sensory veil.

In short, predictive coding represents a biologically plausible scheme for updating beliefs about the world based on sensory samples. In this setting, neuroanatomy and neurophysiology can be regarded as a distillation of statistical or causal structure in the environment that is disclosed by sensory samples. The resulting anatomy of connections and their physiology furnish a generative model—generating predictions of sensations that can be compared with actual sensory samples. Empirical evidence is now emerging that shows how prior expectations shape behavioural and neuronal signatures of perception, with recent studies in vision and audition providing excellent examples. More generally, this view of perception emphasizes ‘the beholder's share’. See also: The insight that the beholder's perception involves a top-down inference convinced [the art historian Ernst] Gombrich that there is no ‘innocent eye’: that is, all visual perception is based on classifying concepts and interpreting visual information. One cannot perceive that which one cannot classify. [p. 287]


Embodied (active) inference and precision-weighting

There are two key ways in which prediction errors can be reduced: the first is by updating predictions to make them more like the expectations at lower levels (and sensations) currently in play. This process corresponds to perception, as implemented in predictive coding. The second way to resolve prediction errors is to change the sensory samples to make them more like predictions. This entails an active sampling of the sensorium through a redeployment of sensory surfaces: e.g. saccadic eye searches or other sensory palpitations. Placing predictive coding in an embodied or enactive framework in which both action and perception are in the game of minimizing the same prediction error is known as active inference. To fully appreciate the bilateral nature of active inference, one has to consider the embodied context in which predictions are made (and fulfilled). These predictions are not only about the world, but also about the body. In brief, perception can be understood as resolving (exteroceptive) prediction errors by selecting predictions that best explain sensations, while behaviour suppresses (proprioceptive) prediction error by changing (proprioceptive) sensations. This suppression rests on classical reflexes, whose equilibrium points are set by descending proprioceptive predictions. For example, an intended movement can be elicited by simply predicting the proprioceptive consequences of a particular movement trajectory, which will be fulfilled by peripheral reflexes. Note that only proprioceptive prediction errors are minimized (at the level of the spinal cord); however, with a good generative model, these movements will also fulfil visual and other exteroceptive (e.g. somatosensory) predictions. This follows because descending (multimodal) predictions emanate from a deep generative model that effectively assimilates prediction errors from all modalities—including interoception. In this context, an important and sometimes overlooked aspect of active inference is that it implies a counterfactual or conditional aspect. That is, in order for an action successfully to reduce prediction error, the brain must represent not only the hidden causes of current sensory signals but also must use these representations to predict how sensory signals would change under specific actions. Interestingly, it has been suggested that such counterfactual aspects of perceptual prediction may underlie basic properties perceptual experience, such as ‘presence’ or ‘objecthood’.

To enable predictions about the consequences of action to be fulfilled, we have to attenuate proprioceptive prediction errors—that would otherwise deliver unequivocal evidence that we are not, in fact, acting. This attenuation rests on reducing the precision of proprioceptive prediction errors. Precision can be regarded as a measure of signal-to-noise or confidence. Mathematically, precision is the inverse variance or reliability of a signal. Estimating precision speaks to a fundamental aspect of inference, namely, the encoding of precision or expected uncertainty. In other words, we have to infer both the cause of our sensations and the context, in terms of the (expected or subjective) precision of sensory evidence. This represents a subtle but ubiquitous problem for the brain, where the solution rests on modulating the gain or excitability of neuronal populations reporting prediction error.

Heuristically, one can regard ascending prediction errors in cortical hierarchies as broadcasting ‘newsworthy’ information that cannot be explained by descending predictions. However, the brain also has to select the prediction errors it attends to. It can do this by adjusting their volume or gain. Those prediction errors that have been assigned high precision therefore have privileged access to high levels of the hierarchy and can therefore update high-level expectations. Empirical evidence suggests that this precision-weighting is a generic computational process throughout the brain and may be instantiated through neuromodulatory mechanisms of gain control at a synaptic level. The ensuing neuromodulatory gain control corresponds to a (Bayes-optimal) encoding of precision in terms of the excitability of neuronal populations reporting prediction errors. This may explain why superficial pyramidal cells are equipped with so many synaptic gain control mechanisms, such as NMDA receptors and classical neuromodulatory receptors like D1 dopamine receptors. Furthermore, it places excitation-inhibition balance in a perfect position to mediate Bayesian belief updating within and among hierarchical levels. This contextual aspect of predictive coding has been associated with attentional gain control in sensory processing and has been discussed in terms of affordance in the setting of action selection. Crucially, the delicate balance of precision over hierarchical levels can have a profound effect on inference and may underlie false beliefs in psychopathology.


Interoceptive inference

Key challenges for formal accounts of brain function are emotion, self-awareness and their disorders. Recently, people have started to cast emotional processing in terms of predictive coding or inference about interoceptive or bodily states. The basic argument follows the explanation for action above, namely, motor reflexes are driven by proprioceptive prediction errors. Proprioceptive prediction errors compare primary afferents from stretch receptors with proprioceptive predictions that descend to alpha motor neurons in the spinal cord and cranial nerve nuclei. This effectively replaces descending motor commands with proprioceptive predictions, which are fulfilled by peripheral reflexes. These predictions rest on deep hierarchical inference about states of the world, including our own body. Replacing proprioceptive signals with interoceptive signals, one can see how autonomic reflexes can transcribe descending interoceptive predictions into physiological homoeostasis (e.g. blood pressure, glycaemia, etc.). Importantly, interoceptive predictions constitute just one stream of multimodal predictions that are generated by expectations about the embodied self. On this view, interoceptive signals do not cause emotional awareness, or vice versa. Instead, there is a circular causality, where neuronally encoded predictions about bodily states engage autonomic reflexes through active inference (see below), while interoceptive signals inform and update these predictions. Emotion or affective content then becomes an attribute of any representation that generates interoceptive predictions—where interoception is necessarily contextualized by concurrent exteroceptive and proprioceptive cues.

A useful way to think about interoceptive inference is as generalizing physiological (James–Lange) and two-factor or appraisal approaches to emotion. These formulations regard emotional experience as arising from cognitively contextualized perception of changes in bodily state. Interoceptive inference extends these early ideas to incorporate a smooth hierarchy of (precision-weighted) predictions and prediction errors, without assuming any bright line distinction between cognitive and non-cognitive processing. By analogy with predictive coding approaches to visual perception, we propose that emotional content is determined by beliefs (i.e. posterior expectations) about the causes of interoceptive signals across multiple hierarchical levels. An important challenge in this context is to identify which aspects of inference support specifically conscious emotional experience, with predictions (rather than prediction errors) being the preferred vehicle. It is tempting to speculate that deep expectations at higher levels of the neuronal hierarchy are candidates for—or correlates of—conscious experience, largely because their predictions are domain general and can therefore be articulated (through autonomic or motor reflexes).

Crucially, interoceptive inference augments appraisal theories with the concept of active inference, by which interoceptive predictions can perform physiological homoeostasis by enlisting autonomic reflexes. More specifically, descending predictions provide a homoeostatic set-point against which primary (interoceptive) afferents can be compared. The resulting prediction error then drives sympathetic or parasympathetic effector systems to ensure homoeostasis or allostasis, for example, sympathetic smooth-muscle vasodilatation as a reflexive response to the predicted interoceptive consequences of ‘blushing with embarrassment’. This formulation of autonomic reflexes follows exactly the active inference formulation of motor reflexes that enable the contraction of striated muscle to be prescribed or enslaved by equilibrium points set by descending projections to alpha motoneurons in the spinal cord.

Active inference highlights a shift from predictive models underlying perception of hidden causes of sensory data, to their use in control or regulation of these causes. Importantly, both (predictive) perception and (predictive) regulation can involve action, as emphasized by distinguishing epistemic and instrumental active inference. The basic idea is that epistemic (active) inference involves selecting actions that we expect to increase the fit between predictive models and hidden causes of sensory signals. This form of inference may characterize, for example, saccadic eye movements or exploratory body movements to inform self-models. Instrumental active inference, by contrast, leverages predictive models to achieve control of sensory variables. This perspective has been applied to exteroception in the guise of ‘perceptual control theory’ which emphasizes that ‘control systems control what they sense, not what they do’ (italics in the original). Instrumental or control-oriented inference is however particularly relevant to interoception, where maintenance of physiological variables within homoeostatically viable ranges is critical to organism survival. In this context, exploratory or epistemic interoceptive ‘actions’ may be less evident because they may be more costly: one does not want to raise one's blood pressure to physiologically dangerous levels just to see whether it can return. The association of predictive models with control of sensory variables recalls the cybernetic view that ‘every good regulator of a system must be a model of that system’ [p. 89], and the distinction between instrumental and epistemic actions also highlights the counterfactual aspects of active inference, where potential actions are associated with their likely sensory consequences.

In terms of predictive coding, the balance between homoeostatic reflexes and more goal-directed allostatic behaviour rests upon the confidence (i.e. precision) placed in deeper expectations about how we will behave. For example, hypoglycaemia could induce low-level predictions that mobilize glucose stores (through autonomic reflexes driven by precise interoceptive prediction errors). Alternatively, if we can attenuate the precision of low-level interoception, then proprioceptive predictions can be fulfilled that preclude domain specific homoeostatic responses and engage allostatic behaviour, i.e. preparing and consuming a meal.

As yet, direct empirical evidence for (or against) interoceptive predictions or prediction errors is still lacking. While there is ample circumstantial that fits comfortably with this framework (see, for reviews), the principles of interoceptive inference rest primarily on the view that perceptual inference—whether about the world or about the body—is likely to involve a common computational architecture. Moreover, the neuroanatomical properties of brain regions involved in interoceptive processing can be informatively interpreted from this perspective, as we describe next.


Functional neuroanatomy of interoceptive inference

Translating the computational machinery of interoceptive inference into a deeper understanding of brain function requires mapping its computational elements onto neuroanatomical substrates. A number of recent proposals suggest several convergent features. The first is that so-called visceromotor areas (VMAs), such as the anterior insula cortex (AIC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), subgenual cortex (SGC), and perhaps also, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) are situated at the top of an interoceptive hierarchy. The second is that these areas collectively embody a generative model of interoceptive responses and issue predictions that, when unpacked at the lowest hierarchical level, serve as homoeostatic set-points. These VMAs are known to receive ascending projections from viscerosensory areas (e.g. posterior and mid-insula) and their descending connections engage a range of subcortical, brainstem and spinal cord targets involved in visceromotor control, such as the periaqueductal grey (PAG) and the parabrachial nucleus (PBN). Visceromotor efferents also directly innervate viscerosensory areas, potentially providing a form of efference copy or corollary discharge (i.e. descending predictions) enabling the formation of (ascending) interoceptive prediction errors. As well as known anatomical connectivity patterns, this basic architecture is supported by cytoarchitectonic observations that VMAs lack a well formed (granular) layer IV as a target for ascending prediction errors. Such agranular cortical regions are argued to be well suited to the issuing of predictions, in both interoceptive and motor domains. shows a schematic of the sort of functional anatomy implied by interoceptive inference (that we will appeal to later in the context of autism).


Interoceptive inference and embodied selfhood

Having described the computational architecture of interoceptive inference and its potential functional neuroanatomy, we are now in a position to explore how this framework can illuminate more theoretical issues in the nature and experience of selfhood. In everyday life, we experience our ‘selfhood’ as continuous and integrated. While it may be adaptive to experience being a ‘self’ in this way, it would be a mistake to assume on this basis that there is such a thing as unitary self-process underlying these experiences. Clinical conditions and experimental manipulations amply illustrate that experiences of selfhood unfold across many partially independent and partially overlapping levels of description; levels which can be teased apart in the laboratory or which may fall apart during psychiatric or neurological illness. A simple classification, from ‘low’ to ‘high’ levels, would range from experiences of being and having a body, through to the experience of perceiving the world from a particular point of view (a first person perspective), to experiences of intention and agency, and at higher levels the experience of being a continuous self over time (a ‘narrative’ self or ‘I’ that depends on episodic autobiographical memory) and finally, a social self, in which my experience of being ‘me’ is shaped by how I perceive others’ perceptions of me. In this putative classification, interoception plays a key role in structuring experiences of ‘being and having a body’ (i.e. embodied selfhood) and may also shape selfhood at other, hierarchically higher levels.

There is accumulating evidence that interoception plays a key role in shaping experiences of body ownership. Illusions of body ownership, like the rubber hand illusion and the so-called ‘full body’ illusion, while normally induced by false visuo-tactile congruence, can also be induced by ‘cardio-visual’ feedback in which a virtual body (or body part) flashes in time with a participant's heartbeat. Recent extensions of these studies have also shown that visual feedback of respiratory patterns can have a similar effect, providing support for a multimodal influence of interoception on embodied selfhood. The ways in which interoceptive predictions and prediction errors shape ‘higher’ levels of selfhood remain exciting areas for investigation. As discussed next, much current evidence in these areas is found in studies of abnormal experiences of selfhood.


Selfhood and psychopathology

Very generally, the (predictive coding) process theory that we have sketched above for active inference speaks to the synaptic mechanisms that might underlie false inference in psychiatric conditions: in brief, the formal constraints implicit in predictive coding require a modulatory gain control on ascending prediction errors. A recent paper exemplifies how one can understand functional (hysterical) symptoms as false inference about the causes of abnormal sensations, movements or their absence. This example offers a simple (neurophysiological) explanation of symptomatology that is otherwise rather difficult to diagnose or formulate. This theme is emerging repeatedly in psychiatry: from false inference as an account of positive symptoms (hallucinations and delusions) in schizophrenia, to the loss of central coherence in autism. Moreover, it is remarkable that the same role for precision-weighting of prediction errors emerges from different theoretical treatments of learning and inference in the brain—including predictive coding in vision, free-energy accounts of perception and behaviour and hierarchical Bayesian models of learning.


Autism and interoceptive inference

Perhaps the best example of applying concepts from interoceptive inference to understanding disorders of selfhood can be found in autism research. Recently, much of the phenomenology of autism has been cast in terms of false inference that results from a loss of prior precision, relative to sensory precision. However, in autism the consequences of increases in (or a failure to attenuate) sensory precision are also being considered in a developmental context, in which one has to accommodate the consequences for acquisition or learning of deep generative models. This is particularly interesting in relation to interoceptive inference because it touches on the acquisition of generative models that distinguish between self and other.

One line of thinking here is that a failure to contextualize interoceptive cues, elicited by interactions with the mother, precludes a proper attribution of the agency to the interoceptive consequences of prosocial interactions. In brief, the idea is that a failure to attenuate the precision of interoceptive prediction errors would not only render autistic infants unduly sensitive to interoceptive cues (i.e. autonomic hypersensitivity) but would have profound implications for a sense of self versus other. This follows from the inability to ignore the absence of interoceptive signals associated with nurturing (e.g. breastfeeding) during affiliative interactions with (m)others. In short, the autistic infant could never learn that the nurturing and prosocial (m)other were the same hidden cause or external object. This has several interesting implications for attachment, theory of mind, and a lack of central coherence that characterizes the disorder in later life. It also provides an interesting explanation for interoceptive hypersensitivity (cf. an emotional echopraxia) in autism and failure to engage with prosocial (exteroceptive) cues. If this explanation is right, then it provides a clear pointer to abnormalities of (precision) gain control in cortical systems mediating interoceptive inference such as the anterior insular and cingulate cortex.

Potential interoceptive abnormalities in autism are unlikely to reside at any single level in the interoceptive hierarchy. In a recent study, a comparison of autistic individuals with controls found that autism was associated with (i) reduced objective interoceptive sensitivity, quantified using standard heartbeat detection tasks and (ii) an increased trait interoceptive sensibility, measured using subjective questionnaires, when compared with controls. These results can be interpreted in terms of an increased ‘interoceptive trait prediction error’ (ITPE) in autism; i.e. a larger mismatch between subjective expectations about interoceptive accuracy and objective interoceptive sensitivity. Interestingly, across both autistic individuals and controls, the magnitude of ITPE correlated with self-reported anxiety, recalling the early proposal of Paulus & Stein which associated anxiety with an interoceptive prediction error (though not in a Bayesian framework). One complication that may nuance this view is that autism often co-occurs with alexithymia (difficulties in identifying and describing one's own emotions); a recent study found that atypical interoception was associated with alexithymia not autism, though this study did not specifically consider ITPEs. More generally, the heterogeneous nature of autism may exclude single process explanations and may underlie apparent inconsistencies in the current empirical data (e.g. another recent study found decreased not increased subjective body awareness in autism).


Depression and fatigue

Beyond autism, interoceptive inference is emerging as a powerful framework within which to understand depression, fatigue and their interactions. Depression exerts a profound impact on quality of life and carries a very high socio-economic cost. Fatigue is a prominent symptom across a variety of disorders and also exacts a high toll on quality and productivity of life. While depression and fatigue encompass a wide range of cognitive, behavioural and physiological aspects, some recent albeit speculative proposals have implicated disrupted interoception in their aetiology.

In one version of this story, peripheral endocrine and immunological changes accompanying or preceding depressive onset lead to persistently imprecise (‘noisy’) interoceptive afferents. This in turn leads to lower precision-weighting of (i.e. reduced attention to) ascending interoceptive signals and correspondingly greater reliance on interoceptive priors for maintaining physiological homoeostasis. Given the translation of interoceptive predictions into homeostatic set-points, this process could set up a positive feedback loop in which greater reliance on prior predictions generates increasingly large and unreliable interoceptive prediction errors, which in turn increases the reliance on the now dysfunctional interoceptive predictions. At some point, the ensuing dyshomoeostasis will tip over into fatigue and sickness behaviour that signal the initial stages of depression.

In another version of the story, while fatigue and depression are still considered as responses to the interoceptive experience of dyshomoeostasis, these now take the form of metacognitive beliefs about the brain's capacity to successfully regulate bodily states (allostatic self-efficacy). Fatigue is proposed to represent an early response to dyshomoeostasis that retains adaptive value (like sickness behaviours in general), while a generalized belief of low allostatic self-efficacy following prolonged (experienced) dyshomoeostasis may trigger depression, in a way that recalls cognitive theories of ‘learned helplessness’. Both these accounts of depression are supported by the involvement of agranular visceromotor cortices in the pathophysiology of depression. To further refine, distinguish and empirically test these formulations may require advanced model-based neuroimaging analyses—of the sort being developed under the rubric of ‘computational psychiatry’.


Concluding remarks

Applying the framework of active inference to interoception provides a powerful set of concepts within which to conceive the neurofunctional basis of emotion, embodied selfhood and allostatic control. The main points can be summarized as follows. Interoceptive inference parallels other applications of active inference (or prediction error minimization) in proposing that sensory areas convey ascending prediction errors that are compared with descending predictions across a hierarchy of perceptual processing. For interoceptive inference, predictions issue from (agranular) VMAs and project to viscerosensory areas (to provide corollary feedback) as well as to brainstem and subcortical areas (to engage autonomic homoeostatic reflexes). Importantly, visceromotor predictions are best interpreted as providing homoeostatic set-points that enslave autonomic reflexes and guide allostatic (behavioural and physiological) responses via interoceptive prediction errors at different hierarchical levels and timescales. This perspective emphasizes the anticipatory control-oriented nature of interoceptive inference, recalling the role of predictive models in cybernetic theories of regulation as well as their counterparts in (exteroceptive) perception, e.g. perceptual control theory.

Mapping the computational architecture of interoceptive inference to neuroanatomical substrates—and considering the key role of precision-weighting—provides the tools to connect these ideas to (i) theories of emotion and embodied selfhood and their experimental manipulation, and (ii) a range of clinical conditions which express interoceptive symptoms and/or plausibly originate via disruptions in interoceptive inference. In terms of theoretical implications, emotional feeling states can be seen as the joint content of interoceptive predictions, while embodied selfhood rests on the multimodal and amodal predictions that distinguish self-related from non-self signals via active inference. Accumulating clinical data and experimental evidence are revealing the mechanisms by which interoceptive signalling shapes experiences of self, and also of perceptions of stimuli originating from the external environment. However, uncovering empirical evidence that speaks directly in favour of (or against) interoceptive inference stands as an important challenge. Key predictions of the framework are that (i) descending signals from VMAs carry predictions about the causes of interoceptive signals (and, further, that in doing so they serve as homoeostatic set-points), (ii) ascending signals targeting VMAs convey interoceptive prediction errors, and (iii) emotional or affective contents depend primarily on interoceptive predictions rather than prediction errors. Future research could test these predictions using advanced laminar fMRI methods to potentially distinguish ‘prediction’ from ‘prediction error’ responses, or by capitalizing on natural variability in physiological rhythms (e.g. heartbeat variability) to model ongoing interoceptive prediction errors that might be reflected in electrophysiological signals (Klaas Enno Stephan 2016, personal communication; see also). Microneurography techniques—which allow direct recording of peripheral nerve traffic—might also provide an innovative means of isolating interoceptive prediction and prediction error signals.

Extending active inference to include autonomic reflexes and interoceptive predictions raises many further interesting questions. For example, can the putative role of neuromodulators (e.g. dopamine and oxytocin) in mediating the precision of prediction errors help to explain the close relationship between arousal and anxiety? What is the relationship between exteroception and interoception during self-observation and how does this depend upon the attenuation of the precision of respective prediction errors? Do von Economo cells in infragranular cortical layers convey interoceptive predictions from the insular cortex to the amygdala and other subcortical targets? How does the control-oriented nature of interoceptive inference shape the qualitative aspects of interoceptive experience, and what in general determines the conscious status of interoceptive predictions? Key questions about hierarchical inference and the role of interoception are also being addressed in the new field of neuropsychoanalysis.

The practical implications of these ideas are highlighted by their application to a variety of clinical conditions in which atypical interoceptive inference may play important roles in aetiology and/or in symptom expression. Emotional disorders like alexithymia are relatively straightforward to explain in terms of atypical interoception, while more complex and heterogeneous constructs like anxiety have been considered in terms of interoceptive prediction error for more than a decade. Recent developments have focused on depression and fatigue as emerging from the interoceptive experience of chronic dyshomoeostasis, whether directly or via metacognitive beliefs in inadequate allostatic self-efficacy. Autism, also highly heterogeneous, seems to have a common interoceptive foundation, possibly with a developmental origin and symptom expression characterized by discrepancies between (reduced) objective interoceptive sensitivity and (enhanced) self-appraisal of interoceptive ability. Importantly, the involvement of interoceptive inference in these and other conditions—including, for instance, depersonalization disorder—opens new avenues for diagnosis through physiological measures and computational psychiatry approaches, and potential clinical intervention via interoceptive training and feedback.

Altogether, considering embodied selfhood through the lens of prediction error minimization brings a new way to think about an old doctrine. Rene Descartes, besides dividing the world into res cogitans and res extensa, also achieved a certain notoriety for introducing the doctrine of the ‘beast machine’ (ca 1694). He argued that while humans had minds directing their behaviour, non-human animals (‘brutes’) were nothing more than unthinking, unfeeling machines that breathe, digest, perceive and move ‘like clockwork’. Now that we can see how human minds are deeply grounded in embodied physiology, and that similar functional principles may unite physiological regulation with perception of the external world and the guidance of actions and behaviour, an inversion of Descartes’ doctrine seems plausible: that our subjective experiences of selfhood may arise because of, and not in spite of, the fact that we too are ‘beast machines’.


Mood as Representation of Momentum

Eran Eldar, Robb B Rutledge, Raymond J Dolan, Yael Niv — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2016. PMC4703769, CC BY 4.0.

Experiences affect mood, which in turn affects subsequent experiences. Recent studies suggest two specific principles. First, mood depends on how recent reward outcomes differ from expectations. Second, mood biases the way we perceive outcomes (e.g., rewards), and this bias affects learning about those outcomes. We propose that this two-way interaction serves to mitigate inefficiencies in the application of reinforcement learning to real-world problems. Specifically, we propose that mood represents the overall momentum of recent outcomes, and its biasing influence on the perception of outcomes ‘corrects’ learning to account for environmental dependencies. We describe potential dysfunctions of this adaptive mechanism that might contribute to the symptoms of mood disorders.

Keywords: Mood, reinforcement learning, decision making

With increasing use of computational models to understand human behavior, scientists have begun to model the dynamics of subjective states such as mood.

Recent data suggest that mood reflects the cumulative impact of differences between reward outcomes and expectations.

Behavioral and neural findings suggest that mood biases the perception of reward outcomes such that outcomes are perceived as better when one is in a good mood relative to when one is in a bad mood.

These two lines of research establish a bidirectional interaction between mood and reinforcement learning, which may play an important adaptive role in healthy behavior, and whose dysfunction might contribute to psychiatric disorders.


Why Do We Have Moods?

The enormous and disruptive impact of mood disorders in society, might suggest that mood is an evolutionary relic that may have been advantageous for early humans but impedes adaptive behavior in the modern world. Indeed, we often attribute irrational behavior to the emotional state of a person,. Our language also reflects this view, with expressions such as ‘moody’ and ‘being in a mood’ carrying negative connotations. We argue that moods serve an important role in adaptive behavior, even in the modern world. We elucidate this role by considering recent findings regarding the dynamics of mood, as well as its interaction with the processes of learning and decision making. Based on these findings, we propose that moods benefit ‘moody’ agents by mitigating inefficiencies that can arise in the process of learning about the natural environment.

Advances in computational modeling have greatly facilitated an understanding of how humans learn from outcomes to make better decisions,. Recently, scientists have begun to utilize the same computational framework to study the dynamics of human emotional states in health and in mental disorders, focusing on how these states affect and are affected by learning and decision-making processes,. In particular, two burgeoning lines of research have sought to characterize precisely, on the one hand, the causes of moods, and on the other the consequences of mood states for learning and decision making. We first review these two largely separate strands of research and then integrate them within a coherent theoretical framework. We propose that mood represents the overall momentum of reward in the environment, and that this representation serves to facilitate efficient learning by accounting for statistical dependencies in the availability of rewards that are prevalent in nature.


Causes: Mood Depends on the Cumulative Impact of Unexpected Outcomes

To understand the function of mood, we first need to consider its causes. A vast psychological literature demonstrates that mood can be manipulated via a range of techniques. Presentation of a film or story with emotional content is a common and effective mood-induction technique. Other stimuli that reliably affect mood include music, self-referential statements, observed social interactions, and facial expressions. While these stimuli are easy to present in laboratory experiments, they are not readily quantifiable and are typically applied categorically, without variation in either quantity or intensity. Monetary outcomes, by contrast, can be precisely controlled and have also been shown to affect mood,.

Another line of research, originating primarily in an economics literature, considers real-world circumstances that covary with subjective well-being. Such research is inherently correlational, but has identified various factors that impact on mood, including outcomes of sporting events and levels of sunshine,. Moreover, to measure the dynamics of emotional state that are relevant to understanding adaptive behavior, well-being researchers have developed experience-sampling techniques that probe participants as to their current subjective state while they go about their daily lives,. These techniques, which involve periodically asking participants about their current emotional state and what they are doing, are considered the ‘gold standard’ for investigating real-world emotion. Experience-sampling and related methods, such as the day-reconstruction method, show that in typical individuals some activities (e.g., conversation, eating) are consistently related to higher happiness ratings, while other activities (e.g., work, commuting) are consistently related to lower happiness ratings. Some studies have also applied these methods to study differences in well-being across individuals, showing greater mood instability in bipolar disorder, and greater negative affect in depression compared to healthy subjects.

Recent research has used experience sampling to examine momentary mood fluctuations during a laboratory-based probabilistic reward task in which monetary rewards varied from trial to trial. The main conclusion of the study was that happiness depends not on how well things are going (in terms of cumulative earnings) but whether they are going better than expected. In particular, self-reported happiness depended on ‘reward prediction errors’ (RPEs), that is, the difference between expected outcomes and obtained outcomes. The laboratory results were also replicated in a large-scale smartphone-based experiment with 18420 participants. In addition, blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) activity measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in the ventral striatum, a target area for dopamine neurons that represent RPEs, correlated with RPEs and with subsequent happiness ratings. This is consistent with a possible role for dopaminergic RPE signals in determining mood. Indeed, pharmacologically boosting dopamine levels has recently been shown to increase the happiness that results from particular types of reward.


A Computational Model of Momentary Subjective Well-Being

Mood is thought to reflect both positive and negative outcomes that have been recently experienced. However, a recent study demonstrated that reported happiness during value-based decision making specifically depends on reward expectations and how actual outcomes differ from these expectations. Subjects repeatedly chose between (i) outcomes that were certain and (ii) gambles with systematically varying potential gains and losses. In addition, they were asked ‘how happy are you at this moment?’ after every 2–3 trials. Happiness ratings were modeled as follows:

For each trial j (from the first trial and up to the current trial t), if the certain reward was chosen it was entered into the equation as CRj. Conversely, if the gamble was chosen two terms were entered into the equation: EVj, the expected value of the gamble, and RPEj, the difference between the actual outcome and the gamble EV. The weights w (which include a constant term w0) capture the influence of task variables on momentary happiness. These influences decay exponentially in time with a forgetting factor 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1 such that recent events are more influential than earlier events. Model parameters were significantly positive on average in three laboratory experiments and in a large-scale smartphone-based field study. RPE weights were significantly higher than EV weights, showing that surprise about outcomes had a stronger effect on happiness than expectations about outcomes. However, changes in the two other task variables (CR and EV) also reflect surprise about the certain rewards and gambles that were made available, and can also be thought of as a type of RPE. Therefore, these results suggest that happiness reflects a running average of recent RPEs in which different types of prediction errors may be differently weighted.


Consequences: Mood Biases Perception of Outcomes

It has long been thought that happiness induces a ‘rosy’ perspective, whereas a depressed mood engenders negative judgments,. More recently, researchers have used computational methods in laboratory experiments to precisely quantify the effects of emotional state on behavior. In one study, mood was manipulated using a wheel-of-fortune draw in which participants either won or lost a relatively large sum of money. In participants independently identified as being less emotionally stable, winning the draw increased self-reported happiness and the effect of subsequent rewards on subsequent choices. By contrast, losing the draw reduced happiness, as well as neural responses to subsequent rewards, and the effect of those rewards on choices. Manipulating mood by viewing emotional facial expressions is also known to induce a bias in both neural responses to rewards and learning from rewards. Moreover, a depressed mood is associated with a reduced effect of rewards on subsequent choices, an effect that is better explained by reduced valuation of reward than by a reduced rate of learning. A similar relationship may also hold between an anxious emotional state and perception of aversive outcomes: stressed humans and rats respond, neurally and behaviorally, to aversive outcomes and ambiguous stimuli as if they are worse than they actually are,.

Other studies have explored additional effects of mood on decision making, many of which can be similarly understood as reflecting a biased perception of reward or of stimuli indicating reward availability. For example, positive mood induces risk-taking in laboratory experiments, and in real financial markets, possibly by biasing upwards the perceived probability of future positive outcomes. In addition, repeated positive RPEs, which should improve mood, invigorate reward-seeking behavior, possibly reflecting an implicit belief in greater reward availability. Furthermore, a positive emotional state reinforces, and a negative emotional state inhibits, one's current mode of thought, presumably by biasing perception of how well that mode of thought is functioning,. Finally, many studies suggest that a depressed mood is associated with greater attention or sensitivity to negative information, an effect that may underlie biased perception of outcomes. Notably, both effects can be seen to reflect an implicit belief that things are worse than the objective evidence suggests,.

The upshot of this research is that mood induced by a stimulus can affect judgment about other, potentially unrelated, stimuli. Indeed, this property may have given mood its reputation as a rich fountain for irrational behavior. Any attempt to rationalize moods must therefore explain how such biased judgments, which in some cases may reinforce irrelevant actions, nevertheless promote adaptive behavior.


The Function of Mood

According to current theories, agents can maximize reward by keeping track of how much reward is obtained in each experienced state of the environment, and then choosing actions that return them to the states in which such reward has been most abundant,. For example, an animal using such a mechanism can learn which specific trees bear more fruit and focus its foraging efforts accordingly. This type of ‘reinforcement learning’ algorithm constitutes a powerful way to learn about the environment and converges upon optimal behavioral policies. However, there are many real-world situations for which such an algorithm may be poorly equipped. We propose that the information represented by mood is used to mitigate problems that arise in the application of reinforcement learning to such real-world problems.

One such learning inefficiency arises when changes in reward in different states are correlated. For instance, increased rainfall or sunshine may cause fruit to become more abundant in all trees simultaneously. In this situation, it makes little sense to update expectations for each tree independently, and a more efficient learning algorithm would instead infer a general increase in reward and update expectations for all related trees accordingly. We suggest this is the function of mood. If fruit becomes more abundant in all trees, a foraging animal will be positively surprised multiple times as it visits adjacent trees and, as a result, its mood will improve. Improved mood will bias the subjective reward for each subsequent fruit upwards, and because these observations are used to update expectations, expectations associated with these trees will be adjusted upwards more rapidly than they would be otherwise. In essence, the effect of positive surprises will be enhanced as more positive surprises are encountered.

Through the existence of mood, as an animal learns from experience, its expectations come to reflect not only the reward associated with each particular state (e.g., each tree), but also recent overall changes in the availability of reward in its environment. In this way, learning can account, albeit approximately, for the impact of multiple general environmental factors without having to directly infer the number of factors or the extent of their impact. We have described one scenario in which this can be beneficial, but such a generalization mechanism can improve the efficiency of learning in any environment in which different sources of reward are interdependent. Indeed, such interdependencies may be the rule rather than the exception, for both animals and humans, because success in acquiring skills, material resources, social status, and even mating partners can be tightly correlated.


Different Learning Algorithms for Different Environments

The optimal learning algorithm for a particular environment can be determined by creating a probabilistic model of the environment and then using the laws of probability (specifically, Bayes rule) to infer what outcomes are most likely given previously observed events,. For example, if reward in the environment is determined by the state we are in, and states are independent of one another (A), the optimal learning algorithm estimates the reward expected in each state similarly to a standard reinforcement learning algorithm:

That is, the estimated mean reward vs at state s is updated at each time-step t according to the difference between the observed reward r and the previous estimate (i.e., the prediction error) scaled by a learning rate ηt.

If, however, different states are not independent, but instead multiple states are similarly affected by general environmental factors (B), then an efficient learning algorithm would update its expectations of all states that are affected by the same factor when experiencing a prediction error in any one of them. This might not be feasible with an unknown number of general factors, each applying to only a subset of neighboring states (e.g., the abundance of fruit is more tightly correlated for trees growing in the same valley). However, a simple approximation is to keep track of all prediction errors in recently visited states:

where is a learning rate, and to assume that other states that are close in space or time have also changed similarly. One way to implement this solution is to bias the perception of outcomes in subsequent states by adding a bonus to the actual reward that reflects the tracked average of recent prediction errors (mt) such that this bonus gets incorporated into learned expectations:

where ft is a scaling factor. This way expectations of reward in particular states come to reflect not only the outcomes experienced in those states, but also outcomes experienced in other related states.

The above algorithm can also be useful with only a single state, when changes in rewards are not independent in time but instead follow an underlying momentum (C). In this case, precise inference requires estimation of the underlying momentum, which again takes the form of a running average of recent prediction errors. This average can then be integrated in the expectation update equation as above to account for the dependency between adjacent time-steps (see Note S1 in the supplemental information online for mathematical derivations).

Mood can also be useful for learning in another common scenario in which current changes in reward predict later changes in reward. Many processes in the natural world have such momentum. For instance, initial increases in fruit availability may indicate that spring is coming and that further increases are probable. In such a case, a positive mood would represent inference of a positive momentum – which would, in turn, bias perception of subsequent rewards upwards. Because rewards would then be perceived as better than they really are, expectations would be updated upwards quickly and would catch up with rising rewards. Similarly, if reward availability is decreasing in an environment (e.g., winter is coming), then a negative mood leads to rewards being perceived as less good than they actually are (even though increasingly rare rewards still result in positive RPEs) and expectations will catch up with declining rewards, allowing behavior to be quickly adjusted (e.g., hibernate). In accordance with this idea, the relationship between mood and reward perception suggested by the recent literature can be formally derived as statistical inference of average reward and its momentum.


From Function to Dysfunction

Identifying the function of mood points to how it might be compromised, potentially leading to maladaptive behavior. The proper function of mood, as we delineate, increases the efficiency of learning about the environment when emotional reactions to changes in reward are appropriate in intensity and duration. Positive or negative moods maximize their usefulness by persisting only until expectations are fully updated in accordance with changes in rewards. Indeed, happiness eventually returns to a baseline level even following highly significant changes in circumstances, including winning the lottery, whereas excessive happiness can induce maladaptive behavior,. This homeostasis crucially depends on appropriate updating of expectations, that is, on the integrity of learning processes. If, for instance, expectations are not updated downwards following outcomes that are worse than expected, encountering the same outcomes again would continue to generate negative surprises indefinitely, inducing a negative mood. In fact, in environments with even modest amounts of variability or randomness, it suffices that the rate of learning (ηt in) is lower for negative than for positive surprises in order for overly optimistic expectations to develop. As a result, the frequency and magnitude of negative surprises would increase, leading to low mood (A). Indeed, low serotonin function, which has been associated with impaired learning from negative outcomes, is linked to both depression and risk-taking behavior, two co-occurring conditions, that may stem from lower negative learning rates and consequent overly optimistic expectations. Interestingly, in the general population, positive mood and risk aversion predominate, possibly indicating higher learning rates for negative than for positive surprises, which could reflect the greater importance to survival of avoiding negative outcomes.

More generally, if a negative mood is too intense or persists for too long, positive feedback dynamics can exacerbate the situation. Bad mood will result in subsequent outcomes being perceived as worse than they really are, leading to further negative surprises that induce further decreases in mood, which in turn will make outcomes seem even worse, and so on (B). As expectations are updated to match biased perception of outcomes, overly pessimistic expectations can develop. Only if expectations catch up with perceived outcomes will the escalatory dynamics abate and de-escalation begin. Empirical findings indicate that an affective perceptual bias precedes ostensible changes in mood in response to treatment with serotonergic drug in major depressive disorder, an observation that supports a possible role for such a feedback cycle in the unfolding of depressive episodes.

If mood does eventually return to baseline levels, the pessimistic expectations that developed when mood was lower may now lead to increased positive surprises and improved mood. In some individuals, good mood may also persist and a positive feedback cycle may develop in the opposite direction, with good mood biasing perception of outcomes upwards, thereby increasing positive surprises, which further improve mood (B). Overly optimistic expectations will develop, setting the stage again for negative surprises, which decrease mood, and potentially turning the cycle in the negative direction again. The overall result could be oscillatory dynamics, as observed in bipolar disorder, in which expectations and mood cyclically fluctuate even in the absence of objective changes in the external environment.

Thus, while learning makes outcomes more predictable and promotes habituation to these outcomes, the biasing effect of mood on the perception of outcomes has the opposite sensitizing effect of increasing responsivity to outcomes. A predisposition to emotional instability could therefore result from any factor that strengthens the sensitizing effect of mood or that weakens the habituating effects of learning (e.g., ηt << and high ft in). Laboratory evidence suggests that such sensitization may indeed underlie emotional instability. Specifically, participants who report being more emotionally unstable show stronger effects of outcomes on their feelings, as well as on their evaluation of subsequent outcomes. It is notable that clinically pathological escalation in the direction of negative mood seems to be more prevalent than escalation of positive moods. Negative moods might escalate more frequently because of a stronger biasing effect, possibly reflecting the greater overall adaptive significance of reacting quickly to negative changes in momentum.


Concluding Remarks

We have outlined a normative perspective on mood, according to which mood serves as a representation of the momentum of changes in reward. This momentum signal can be used to adjust learning to account for dependencies between different states and across time. How this momentum is represented in the brain is an open question (see Outstanding Questions), although some studies implicate the neuromodulators serotonin and dopamine,. Our approach suggests different ways in which the function of mood might be disrupted, and we have described two specific dysfunctions that might contribute to the emergence of depression and mood instability. The proper function of mood might also lead to maladaptive behavior in particular scenarios. Thus, moods can reflect inference of momentum even when there is none in the environment, leading to excessive optimism or pessimism. However, the ubiquity of moods and the extent of their impact on our lives tells us that, throughout the course of evolution, our moodiness must have conferred a significant competitive advantage. Being moody at times may be a small price to pay for the ability to adapt quickly when facing momentous environmental changes.

How is mood represented in the brain?

How do long-lasting moods interact with and relate to more short-lasting emotions?

Can an anxious mood be understood as a representation of momentum in aversive outcomes?

How can our model, which was derived from studies of healthy individuals, be utilized to explain the dynamics of mood in psychiatric mood disorders?

How do antidepressants, mood stabilizers, and other therapeutic interventions affect the dynamics of mood?


Neurobiological Basis of Language Learning Difficulties

Saloni Krishnan, Kate E Watkins, Dorothy VM Bishop — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2016. PMC4993149, CC BY 4.0.

In this paper we highlight why there is a need to examine subcortical learning systems in children with language impairment and dyslexia, rather than focusing solely on cortical areas relevant for language. First, behavioural studies find that children with these neurodevelopmental disorders perform less well than peers on procedural learning tasks that depend on corticostriatal learning circuits. Second, fMRI studies in neurotypical adults implicate corticostriatal and hippocampal systems in language learning. Finally, structural and functional abnormalities are seen in the striatum in children with language disorders. Studying corticostriatal networks in developmental language disorders could offer us insights into their neurobiological basis and elucidate possible modes of compensation for intervention.

Keywords: specific language impairment, dyslexia, development, striatum, disorder, subcortical, procedural learning

Individuals with SLI and dyslexia have impaired or immature learning mechanisms; this hampers their extraction of structure in complex learning environments.

These learning difficulties are not general or confined to language. Problems are specific to tasks that involve implicitly learning sequential structure or complex cue–outcome relationships. Such learning is thought to depend upon corticostriatal circuits.

In language learning studies, the striatum is recruited when adults extract sequential information from auditory-verbal sequences and as they learn complex motor routines relevant for speech.

Neuroimaging studies indicate striatal abnormalities in individuals with language disorders.

There is a need to probe the integrity of neural learning systems in developmental language disorders using tasks relevant for language learning which place specific demands on the striatum/MTL.

Specific language impairment (SLI) and developmental dyslexia are categorized as types of specific learning disability, but for many years the bulk of research on these disorders has looked at perceptual impairments and problems with specific linguistic components such as phonology and grammar. Here we adopt a different perspective: the idea that children with these disorders have impairments in the basic process of learning language. On this view, the language and literacy difficulties experienced by these children are not byproducts of some other primary deficit; instead, they implicate impairment or immaturity of learning mechanisms that allow the extraction of structure from a rich and varying language environment. We review recent developmental and neurobiological studies to evaluate the contribution of different brain systems in language learning, particularly focusing on how they might be affected in children with language and reading disorders.


Why Use Developmental Dyslexia and SLI as Examples of Language Learning Disorders?

SLI is diagnosed when oral language lags behind other areas of development for no apparent reason, and is not the result of known developmental concerns, sensory impairments, or global developmental delay. SLI affects between 3–10% of children entering school. Developmental dyslexia is identified when a child has poor literacy skills despite adequate intelligence and opportunity to learn, and similar prevalence levels are reported for this group. Although the reading difficulties in dyslexia were initially thought to be in the visual perception domain, it is now fairly well established that most children with dyslexia have problems in the linguistic domain, particularly for categorising sounds, establishing sound–letter mappings, and manipulating sound sequences in their first language. These definitions indicate that both groups have specific difficulties with aspects of language learning. In addition, both disorders have a strong genetic basis, particularly for cases where nonword repetition deficits are noted.

There is a great deal of overlap between dyslexia and SLI. At a cognitive level, both groups show core deficits in phonology, particularly on tasks that tap into the ability to understand the sound structure of words (phonological awareness) and those that involve nonword repetition (motor control and phonological memory). Oral language problems place children at risk for literacy problems, both in reading comprehension and accuracy. On the other hand, children at risk of dyslexia often experience early language difficulties, even before they start to read. However, these disorders are not identical or even points on a continuum of phonological ability. Bishop and Snowling have argued that these disorders are best characterised using a 2D model of phonological and non-phonological language skills. While children with dyslexia have typical non-phonological skills but impaired phonological ability, children with SLI are more likely to present with impairments of both phonological and non-phonological skills (for example, semantic and syntactic difficulties). Ramus and colleagues have provided empirical support for this theory, but posit further dimensions with respect to phonological skills, separating out phonological representations and access.

Language problems are of significant concern in both SLI and dyslexia because poor language learning has been linked to negative consequences for academic achievement, self-esteem, social and emotional development, and employment. Understanding why language learning is affected, and the specific mechanisms that impair their learning, could allow us to design optimal means of compensating for these difficulties.


What Learning Impairments Are Observed in Developmental Language and Reading Disorders?

Children with developmental language disorders struggle to learn new words and syntactic constructions. Is this a linguistic problem, or do they exhibit difficulties with learning new information more generally? Learning is not a unitary phenomenon. Neuropsychological studies have suggested functional and neurological distinctions between different types of learning. Ullman and Pierpont were the first to suggest that the procedural learning system, which is involved in implicit learning, was impaired in individuals with SLI. They proposed that procedural impairments could account for poor learning of grammatical rules, such as the past tense inflection of regular verbs. The postulated impairments in procedural learning were not, however, specific to language; they would have broader effects, with deficits predicted in the acquisition of any skill involving sequences – irrespective of whether the sequences were sensorimotor or abstract. By contrast, declarative learning systems, which support the sort of idiosyncratic mapping required to learn new vocabulary or inflection of irregular verb forms, were argued to be relatively intact.


Procedural/Declarative Distinctions in Memory

Initial distinctions between learning systems were based on studies of a noted patient, Henry Molaison, who became densely amnesic after bilateral hippocampectomy. While he could not acquire new information such as facts and events, he was able to learn new visuomotor skills in rotary pursuit, bimanual tracking, and tapping tasks. This led to a distinction being made between memory systems – ones that encoded explicit knowledge about facts and events, termed ‘declarative’ learning systems, and ‘procedural’ systems, which encoded skill-based information that is implicitly expressed through performance.

Ever since, the acquisition of declarative memory has been shown to depend upon heavily interconnected MTL structures, including the hippocampus, entorhinal, perirhinal, and parahippocampal cortices. These regions are well adapted for rapid learning, and are particularly relevant when learning occurs over a single exposure, when associations between stimuli must be made over space or time, when acquired information must be used flexibly, and when learning depends on the awareness of what is being learned. An umbrella term of ‘non-declarative’ learning is used to describe learning that can be accomplished without the MTL system, and this includes procedural learning of skills and habits, perceptual learning and priming, and classical conditioning. Procedural learning is specifically used to describe a gradual trial-and-error learning system that leads to the formation of habits, which uses the reward related circuitry through the striatum. Knowledge acquired through this system is rigid and not verbalisable.

In some situations, both ‘declarative’ and ‘procedural’ systems can achieve learning, for example, tasks learned via memorisation can also be learned using a gradual trial-and-error strategy. The nature of the interactions between these two systems differ based on the information to be learned and the stage of learning. Making optimal transitions between procedural and declarative memory could explain improvements in performance. When solving arithmetic problems, children must switch from a procedure-based counting strategy to a memory-based problem-solving one. In an imaging study, increased hippocampal–neocortical connectivity was longitudinally associated with a switch to memory-based strategies. With respect to language, more-efficient proceduralisation could accelerate language learning because speech actions could be chunked into sequences earlier in time. While there is no direct evidence for this, a recent study offers some indirect insight. Humans with a mutation of the FOXP2 gene present with speech/language disorders and have difficulties learning and performing sequences of orofacial movements. Mice carrying the humanised version of FOXP2 could more readily use procedural strategies in a cue-enriched T-maze task than could wild mice.

The procedural deficit hypothesis inspired a series of studies examining the non-linguistic procedural learning abilities of children with SLI, typically using a serial reaction time (SRT) paradigm. A meta-analysis of eight studies using an SRT paradigm with children with SLI and age-matched controls revealed small but significant effects of language impairment on this task, of the order of 0.33 of a standard deviation. In studies with younger participants, larger effect sizes were found. In SLI, learning was impaired more when sequences were long and complex. Similar problems with learning implicit sequences in the SRT task are also seen in younger typically developing children matched on grammatical ability, suggesting that implicit sequence learning in SLI may be immature rather following an atypical developmental trajectory.

The learning abilities of individuals with dyslexia have also been examined using SRT measures, motivated by broader theories suggesting that the automatisation of learning is impaired in this disorder. A meta-analysis of nine studies that used SRT paradigms with individuals with dyslexia revealed a moderate effect of having dyslexia (0.45 of a standard deviation). This meta-analysis also indicated that age and sequence type influenced the likelihood of finding a difference between dyslexic and control groups.

SRT paradigms emphasise the motor aspects of procedural learning. However, these groups also show learning impairments in non-motor paradigms. Both children with dyslexia and adults with SLI, appear to have difficulty extracting structure from novel sequences in artificial grammar learning (AGL) paradigms. These difficulties in making judgements about grammaticality are not related to problems holding information in mind because deficits are present even when children with dyslexia can accurately recall a training sequence from memory,. Other studies have found that children with SLI perform worse than typically developing peers at extracting regularities from speech streams in statistical learning paradigms, although they can extract relevant information when exposure is doubled. Adults with dyslexia also find extracting regularities in these statistical learning tests difficult, and their performance correlates with their reading ability. Although these tasks stretch the definition of procedural learning provided by Ullman, there is some indication that the same implicit learning processes are involved.


The Basal Ganglia and Their Role in Learning

The basal ganglia are a group of highly interconnected subcortical nuclei, including the striatum (caudate nucleus, putamen, and nucleus accumbens), globus pallidus, substantia niagra, and subthalamic nucleus. The basal ganglia interact with the cortex in parallel processing loops where regions of the cortex project to the striatum, which in turn project to the pallidum and then to the thalamus, and then on to frontal cortex. Such loops through the basal ganglia have traditionally been associated with motor control, particularly the selection and suppression of actions. However, the function of these loops is complementary to the cortical areas that project to the loop. The ventral striatum (nucleus accumbens) receives input from the orbitofrontal cortex, temporal cortex, amygdala, and hippocampus, and is thought to gate behaviour in response to emotional or motivational stimuli. Particularly relevant for learning are loops through the basal ganglia that take on sensorimotor, executive or associative, and limbic functions.

The basal ganglia have been implicated in learning gained through practice, such as the formation of skill memories or habits. Lesion studies in rodents indicate that the basal ganglia are necessary for habit formation. In humans, both neuroimaging and neuropsychological studies demonstrate that the basal ganglia play a key role in learning sequences of actions or stimulus–response mappings. Initially, tasks used to probe learning were implicit, which led to the view that the basal ganglia was specialised for non-declarative learning. However, this did not reconcile with findings where the basal ganglia were recruited in explicit sequence learning or categorisation tasks. The findings highlighting the role of the striatum in learning stimulus–response mapping through reinforcement have helped to reconcile these differences. Recently, Graybiel and colleagues have proposed that the striatum could play a role in optimising behaviour over time by implementing reinforcement-based feedback to allow an effective combination of sequential motor elements. Subdivisions of the striatum are thought to contribute differently to learning. While the ventral striatum contributes to the initial learning of a motivated behaviour, the dorsal striatum plays a role in initial learning from anticipated outcome of behaviours for future selection, and later in creating a habitual pattern that is resistant to interference.

The aforementioned implicit learning studies have shown that those with language disorders are less able to learn regularities in sequences, even when these are non-linguistic (summarised in). Difficulties with sequential learning are not confined to the encoding stage. There is emerging evidence that individuals with SLI, and dyslexia do not consolidate and retain sequence knowledge as effectively as other children. There is some evidence for these learning deficits patterning with individual differences in grammatical skill, but not vocabulary, in children with SLI (although for robust evidence of such associations we will need to develop psychometrically strong indices of procedural learning in individuals).


Specificity of Learning Difficulties in Developmental Language Disorders

Although the literature reviewed above suggests that children with SLI and dyslexia are impaired in sequential procedural learning tasks, these deficits could simply indicate a generalised learning deficit. In the following we argue that this is not the case, on the basis of studies that have probed declarative learning as well as non-sequential procedural learning.

Declarative learning is thought to be an area of relative strength in children with SLI and dyslexia,. Despite this, relatively few studies have empirically examined declarative learning in these groups. In tasks that involve encoding and retrieving word lists, children with SLI perform poorly relative to age-matched controls,. However, individual differences in working memory seem to account for these differences, suggesting that the ability to hold information in mind for short periods of time may be the limiting factor for declarative learning. Another study demonstrated that children with SLI and controls show equivalent non-linguistic paired associate learning. In addition, this study showed that their rate of learning verbal–visual mappings over four sessions is comparable to their typically developing peers, although their initial learning of these mappings was more severely affected. Children with dyslexia also show equivalent learning to age-matched peers on visual-visual paired-associates learning, but less well when verbal-visual or verbal-verbal mappings must be made. These results suggest that paired-associated learning is impaired when it requires learning of a novel sequence of speech sounds – which taxes the procedural system – but that learning of arbitrary associations, which employs declarative learning, is intact. Further evidence that declarative memory is unimpaired comes from a study reporting that, when an implicit AGL task is made explicit, learning differences are no longer seen in a group of adults with dyslexia.

In addition to relative strengths in declarative memory, not all forms of implicit or procedural learning are impaired in individuals with developmental language disorders. Both children and adults with dyslexia showed similar implicit learning to controls in non-sequential contextual cueing tasks,. Children with SLI also show learning similar to that of age-matched controls in other non-sequential procedural learning tasks such as the pursuit rotor task; they do not differ from controls in eyeblink conditioning, which engages corticocerebellar circuits,. However, a sequential learning deficit cannot explain all the evidence. Probabilistic category learning tasks, such as the ‘weather prediction’ task, have also been used to probe procedural learning in these groups. Adults with dyslexia, or SLI, but see do not acquire implicit categorical knowledge at the same rate as age-matched controls. One possibility is that individuals with language disorders struggle in conditions where learning dimensions are not explicitly defined. Another is that these learning deficits occur concurrently with core sequence learning difficulties, perhaps owing to impairment in overlapping neural circuits.

In summary, individuals with language and literacy disorders have difficulties with procedural learning in sequence-based tasks, but appear to be relatively unimpaired on declarative and non-sequential procedural learning measures. This may explain why their difficulties are more prominent in language tasks – which heavily load on to extracting and producing sequential information. However, no type of learning is purely declarative or procedural in nature, and the ways in which these distinctions apply to language learning in particular needs clarification.


Neurobiological Systems Involved in Language Learning

Language learning involves many different processes, such as extracting implicit knowledge about how sequences of sounds and words combine, learning novel mappings between words and referents, and consolidating learned knowledge to make it readily accessible. We review here how neurobiological learning systems are involved in some of these different aspects of language learning, and how these map onto conventional knowledge about the roles of these systems (as outlined in). Although we describe differences in the structure and function of the striatum and hippocampus, these structures are connected to each other as well as to the cortex and other subcortical structures. Functional interactions between these regions have been described during learning. Consequently, changes in functional neural activity in one of these regions during language learning do not imply that this region is solely responsible for that type of learning, but rather that this might reflect a local change within a hub of a broader learning network.


Subcomponents of Language Learning

Learning Speech Sounds

Language users learn to divide up acoustic information into sound categories that are relevant in the language. A phoneme is the smallest unit that changes word meaning in a language. Phonemes are not universal across languages, for example, /r/-/l/ are not distinguished in Japanese, and native Japanese speakers group them together in a single category. However, these sounds distinguish words in English. Listeners must use a combination of acoustic features to map specific sounds onto a speech category. Listeners must also learn to produce these sounds within the constraints of the speech category boundaries of their language.

Learning Phonology

Phonemes are sequenced together to form words, but these combinations follow language-specific constraints. For instance, /mb/ is not a legal combination to start a word with in English. Language learners will implicitly extract these constraints, which are called the phonotactics of a language. Learning these regularities helps word learning. These regularities are also important for production because it is easier to produce words that have higher phonotactic probability.

Learning Vocabulary

Word learning involves making an arbitrary connection between a sequence of sounds and a concept, which may be concrete or abstract. Mappings are usually not explicitly taught, but are learned implicitly in complex environments, and listeners must therefore track regularities between the occurrence of a word and its referent. In addition, words are typically extracted from a continuous stream of speech, and listeners use multiple cues – transitions between phonemes, grammatical cues, prosodic boundaries – to discern word boundaries. Once an association between a word and its referent is learned, language users must also be able to retrieve it in expressive speech and writing.

Learning Syntax

To interpret and use a language, listeners must build an understanding of sentence structure. While initial use of syntax may only comprise a set of exemplar sentence frames; with time and increased language experience, learners will detect statistical regularities in their input and use these to construct more abstract patterns or structures. A key challenge in learning grammar is that it is not merely patterns between adjacent words that must be learned, but also patterns that are non-adjacent and occur over intervening words. Again, language users must be able to use these structures in speech or writing.

Learning Pragmatics

Language is primarily a social tool, and our use of language changes based on whether we are speaking or writing, with whom we are communicating, and the context in which we are speaking. Language learners must learn which constructions are appropriate to produce in different social and functional settings, and must learn to use context to infer what is not directly stated.

The extraction and encoding of verbal sequential regularities is particularly relevant to learning the phonology and grammar of a language. These are learned implicitly, and can be considered as examples of procedural learning. The frontal cortex and the basal ganglia appear to be relevant to such learning,. For example, the left inferior frontal gyrus and the bilateral striatum are recruited for statistical learning of word boundaries in an artificial language. People with striatal degeneration are impaired at using sequential regularities in artificial speech streams to derive ‘morpho-syntactic’ rules and ‘words’. However, extracting sequential regularities is not purely dependent on the striatum, and declarative memory systems also show some involvement in this process. A study using a Hebb repetition learning task replicated findings of a correlation between striatal activation and learning. Nevertheless, multivariate analyses revealed that the hippocampus and medial temporal lobe (MTL) were coding the identity of repeating sequences. More recently, overlapping spatiotemporal networks that include auditory cortex, regions considered to be part of the dorsal speech (or auditory)-processing stream, including the striatum and the hippocampus, have been shown to be differentially engaged as people learn to identify ‘words’ in an artificial language. Similar cortical results have been shown using a natural language task and artificial grammar learning paradigms. These findings indicate that interactions between corticostriatal and corticohippocampal regions occur over the course of learning.

Word learning involves mapping a novel sequence of sounds to a referent. Learning arbitrary mappings is a classic ‘declarative’ task, and there is ample evidence suggesting that the hippocampus is an important region for encoding such mappings. For example, in an fMRI study examining how adults learn new vocabulary, activity over the left hippocampus and fusiform gyrus declined as associations between pseudowords and pictures were repeated. Other word learning studies have shown that hippocampal activity at the encoding stage relates to whether words are subsequently recalled or recognised. Davis and Gaskell have suggested a two-stage account for word learning, where rapid initial learning dependent on the hippocampus is followed by a slower consolidation process where there is a transfer of learnt information to the cortex, particularly superior temporal, inferior frontal and premotor regions.

It would be rash to conclude that the hippocampus is necessary and sufficient for word learning. Studies on patient H.M. indicate that residual semantic learning is present, despite his bilateral and complete hippocampal lesions. In addition, cases with bilateral hippocampal damage sustained in childhood perform at average to low-average levels on standardised verbal measures, suggesting that semantic learning can rely upon areas adjacent to the hippocampus within the MTL.

Furthermore, regions involved in word learning extend beyond the MTL. Recent work shows that creating sound–meaning links also recruits the striatum. The ventral striatum (nucleus accumbens) is activated as these links are learned, suggesting a role for reward-based circuitry in learning novel words. The dorsal striatum also responds to feedback in verbal paired-associate tasks, especially when participants believed that the feedback was indicative of achievement. The striatum is also recruited when learning to produce novel words. Activity in the striatum decreases as people covertly repeat words in their native language, as well as when they learn words in a non-native language: this reflects articulatory learning of the sequence of sounds, from an initial phase of sequencing novelty to habitual performance of an utterance. This is evidence that both corticostriatal and corticohippocampal networks are involved in word learning, although they seem to be tied to different aspects of this process. Corticostriatal networks are responsive to the motor and sequential demands of word learning, with some indication that reward-related circuitry might play a role in sound–meaning mapping.

When learning a language, listeners must also learn to group sounds they hear into the categories relevant in that language (see speech sound learning). Given that speech sounds are multi-featured and variable, single acoustic features cannot be used to learn these distinctions. Learning occurs in a probabilistic fashion and theoretically should involve procedural learning systems. A few studies have explored the brain systems involved in speech category learning,. A recent study examining the dynamics of non-native speech category learning in adults showed that this learning is initially associated with activation in both hippocampal and corticostriatal circuits. Across learning trials, participants’ behavioural responses indicated a shift from a rule-based strategy to one that is more procedural. In line with the crossover to a procedural strategy, the corticostriatal system showed increased activation during learning and was associated with better categorisation performance.

In summary, domain-general learning mechanisms involving striatal and MTL circuits are also recruited for speech and language learning. Corticostriatal systems are involved when adults learn speech sequences for articulation and when complex regularities in auditory sequences must be extracted. MTL circuits are relevant for learning arbitrary and explicit however, no single speech or language behaviour is associated with corticostriatal or MTL circuits alone; instead there are interactions between these learning systems as language is learned.


Subcortical Abnormalities in Individuals with Language Disorders

Given the difficulties in language learning experienced by children with SLI, we might expect them to exhibit structural or functional differences in neurobiological learning circuits (depicts the connections between the MTL, striatum, and the cortex). A simple prediction based on their behavioural profile is that they should show abnormalities in the basal ganglia, but their hippocampi and medial temporal cortices will resemble those of age-matched controls. However, given that SLI and dyslexia are neurodevelopmental language disorders, we might expect the profiles of impairments to change during development.

The majority of studies on the brain bases of SLI and dyslexia focus on cortical anatomy, with particular reference to hemispheric asymmetries,. However, the neurobiological literature needs to be interpreted cautiously, given the inconsistencies in the direction of results, the small numbers in each group, the heterogeneity in defining the disorder, and the different age-ranges used across different studies. Bearing in mind these caveats, there is evidence of subcortical abnormalities or atypicalities in individuals with SLI, particularly in the striatum (for the role of the basal ganglia in learning). Studies converge to indicate that the volume of the caudate nucleus is altered in children with SLI relative to typically developing peers,. Some studies suggest that a reduction in volume is observed, which would pattern with the bilateral reductions in caudate nucleus volumes observed in affected members of the KE family (who have severe speech and language problems in the context of a rare genetic mutation). However, others have reported increases in caudate nucleus volume,. The changes in directionality of differences might be accounted for by differences within the analysis pipeline across these studies. The available literature also indicates that striatal differences are affected by age. Early differences observed in striatal volumes between children with SLI and typically developing children appear to normalise by late adolescence, although longitudinal studies are necessary to confirm this point.

In contrast to the findings from individuals with SLI, structural differences in the striatum are only inconsistently observed in those with dyslexia. A recent well-powered cross-linguistic study found only one regional difference – reduced grey matter in the left thalamus. With respect to language processing, stimulation studies of the thalamus indicate a ‘specific alerting response’, which could gate the entry of language information to the perisylvian cortex, and is implemented via thalamic connections to the striatum and cortex. The alerting response is thought to accelerate language and memory processes because gating of different cortical networks could allow enhanced encoding and retrieval of specific memories. However, even this structural difference is not observed across all studies. A possible explanation for lack of consistent structural differences is the behavioural heterogeneity displayed by this group. While phonological skills are thought to be impaired in those with dyslexia, dyslexic readers do not struggle with identical aspects of phonology and there are children with reading disorders who have unimpaired phonology. In addition, dyslexia results from a combination of multiple risk factors, including phonological problems, as well as motor, oral language, and executive functioning deficits. Studies comparing dyslexics to controls may therefore be grouping together individuals with varying aetiologies.

Functional studies, however, have indicated that adults with dyslexia show hyperactivation of the striatum. This striatal overactivity was not seen in children with dyslexia, leading the authors to suggest that striatal overactivity may be a compensatory mechanism in adulthood. In line with this, a recent study suggests that children with dyslexia show striatal overactivity when phonological tasks are simple but not when they are complex. Functional studies of children with SLI also report increased activity in the head of the right caudate nucleus for phonological and executive tasks.

Striatal changes may not suffice to cause language disorders. In the study by Badcock and colleagues, the unaffected siblings of children with SLI also had significant reductions in the volume of the caudate nucleus relative to typically developing children. It is possible that striatal abnormalities act as a heritable risk factor for language disorders, but other risk factors are necessary before the disorder manifests. If this is the case, some neurological differences may be protective. A recent structural network analysis showed that the hippocampus, temporal pole, and putamen were less strongly connected in individuals with a higher risk for dyslexia relative to those with low risk. Intervention studies with dyslexia suggest that hippocampal volumes are enlarged after training where behavioural gains are made, suggesting successful compensatory change,. Finally, structural and functional differences between children with SLI and controls have been reported in inferior frontal, temporal, and inferior parietal cortex, and in white matter tracts connecting these regions,. These differences suggest that it is important to consider the entire learning system, including regions of the brain that might be involved in the consolidation and storage of linguistic and sequential knowledge.

A cautionary note from this area of research is that findings from brain imaging do not consistently replicate. There is a need for well-powered neuroimaging studies to address brain–behaviour relationships in language disorders, allowing us to take into account the heterogeneity of language disorders and their diagnosis. To ensure that fMRI findings are not simply descriptive of a specific sample, we need to test whether fMRI findings generalise beyond the tested sample, scanner, and stimuli used (see for related recommendations).


Concluding Remarks and Future Directions

Individuals with SLI and dyslexia have difficulties in performing sequential procedural tasks and learning from feedback, but not in simple mapping tasks or non-sequential implicit learning. In language learning tasks, corticostriatal systems have been shown to be involved in acquiring complex motor routines that are relevant to speech and in learning speech categories from feedback. Given the evidence of abnormalities in the structure and function of corticostriatal systems in developmental language disorders, a plausible bridging hypothesis is that dysfunctions of corticostriatal systems can explain difficulties in learning language. These difficulties are likely to have greater impact on aspects of language that involve learning complex rules that are probabilistic and sequential, such as phonotactics and morpho-syntax, but would also affect the ease with which learned motor skills become habitual.

A facet that is currently missing from the literature is that both neurobiological and behavioural studies in these groups suggest that the influence of corticostriatal learning systems, and their impact on behaviour, changes substantially with age. There is a need for longitudinal studies in this area – to explore the trajectory of corticostriatal dysfunctions during development as well as how these pattern with learning behaviour. Such studies would also be helpful in establishing whether these learning differences cause language disorders, or whether they are a consequence of the same (see Outstanding Questions).

Corticostriatal dysfunctions have also been noted in psychiatric and other neurodevelopmental disorders, such as schizophrenia, obsessive-compulsive disorders, Tourette's disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). However, different computational models explain the behavioural learning profile in each of these disorders. For instance, dysfunctions of the ventral striatum and orbitofrontal/prefrontal cortices are linked to ADHD, but Tourette's disorder is better explained by an imbalance of the direct/indirect pathways. It is not yet clear what distinct corticostriatal circuit dysfunction might distinguish language disorders from these other disorders with that exhibit very different symptomatology. One way to probe the specificity of learning impairments in developmental language disorders is to use learning tasks that are known to pattern with specific brain regions or pathways. Our working hypothesis is that developmental language disorders are more likely to be associated with corticostriatal loops involving the dorsal striatum, and that learning impairments in this group will be more evident when stimulus–response associations rather than state values must be learned.

Probing learning in these groups is likely to be helpful for designing better intervention. Different strategies are likely to be of benefit to typically developing children and those with language disorder. For example, studies with typically developing children suggest that greater variability in sentence structure is beneficial for learning syntax, but this variability did not aid children with language disorders,. Comprehending the nature of learning difficulties in children with language disorders will allow us to design interventions to circumvent these issues. Understanding the neurobiological interactions between learning systems might also offer insight into what might be optimal strategies. Studies of patients with acquired striatal or MTL damage suggest that altering the way we present information in a task, for instance, by changing the timing or valence of feedback, affects learning performance as the relative involvement of striatal and MTL systems is changed. We need fMRI studies on children with SLI and dyslexia that use tasks that tap into language learning, and that are known to activate striatal or MTL systems. These will be key to understanding whether and how these learning strategies might alter learning outcomes for those with language disorders.

Are procedural learning difficulties a cause of language learning difficulties? The alternative explanations are that they co-occur with developmental language disorders, or are a consequence of language disorders.

Are procedural learning difficulties specific to language disorders? Procedural learning impairments have been reported in a range of different neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism, ADHD, and Williams syndrome. Is procedural learning particularly vulnerable during development? If this is the case, is there a set of procedural learning difficulties that distinguish language disorders from other neurodevelopmental disorders?

On a related note, what corticostriatal dysfunctions are specific to developmental language disorders? Corticostriatal dysfunctions are observed in psychiatric and other neurological disorders, for example Tourette's disorder, addiction, and Parkinson's disease. What is the best network model to explain the behavioural difficulties faced by children with developmental language disorders?

Are abnormalities in the structure and function of corticostriatal systems linked to individual differences in learning? What behavioural measures and brain activities are reliable indices of procedural and declarative learning systems?

Are there interactions between learning systems that can be exploited for learning? If so, why do relatively typical hippocampal learning systems not compensate adequately in developmental language disorders?

Can the conditions that promote learning in neurotypical individuals be applied to aid those with developmental language disorders, or do the conditions that benefit learning differ?

When learning sequential and non-sequential information, do children with language disorders engage different neurobiological learning systems? What makes one system resilient and not the other?


ENIGMA and the individual: Predicting factors that affect the brain in 35 countries worldwide

Paul M. Thompson, Ole A. Andreassen, Alejandro Arias-Vasquez, Carrie E. Bearden, Premika S. Boedhoe, Rachel M. Brouwer, Randy L. Buckner, Jan K. Buitelaar et al. — NeuroImage, 2015. PMC4893347, CC BY 4.0.

In this review, we discuss recent work by the ENIGMA Consortium (http://enigma.ini.usc.edu) – a global alliance of over 500 scientists spread across 200 institutions in 35 countries collectively analyzing brain imaging, clinical, and genetic data. Initially formed to detect genetic influences on brain measures, ENIGMA has grown to over 30 working groups studying 12 major brain diseases by pooling and comparing brain data. In some of the largest neuroimaging studies to date – of schizophrenia and major depression – ENIGMA has found replicable disease effects on the brain that are consistent worldwide, as well as factors that modulate disease effects. In partnership with other consortia including ADNI, CHARGE, IMAGEN and others, ENIGMA's genomic screens – now numbering over 30,000 MRI scans – have revealed at least 8 genetic loci that affect brain volumes. Downstream of gene findings, ENIGMA has revealed how these individual variants – and genetic variants in general – may affect both the brain and risk for a range of diseases. The ENIGMA consortium is discovering factors that consistently affect brain structure and function that will serve as future predictors linking individual brain scans and genomic data. It is generating vast pools of normative data on brain measures – from tens of thousands of people – that may help detect deviations from normal development or aging in specific groups of subjects. We discuss challenges and opportunities in applying these predictors to individual subjects and new cohorts, as well as lessons we have learned in ENIGMA's efforts so far.


Introduction

Here we provide an update on the progress of the ENIGMA consortium, a global alliance of over 500 scientists from over 200 institutions in 35 countries to study brain imaging data worldwide, discovering factors that modulate brain structure, integrity, connectivity, and patterns of brain differences in major brain diseases. Founded in 2009, ENIGMA's initial aims were to perform genome-wide analyses to identify common variants in the genome that are reliably associated with normal variability in brain structure. Since the initial effort discovered consistent effects worldwide of genetic variants that explained less than 1% of the variance in brain measures (Stein et al., 2015; Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press), over 500 scientists have joined ENIGMA. ENIGMA is now (as of October 2015) a worldwide consortium, organized into over 30 working groups, studying major brain diseases (detailed at http://enigma.ini.usc.edu). The work in ENIGMA is divided into projects on (1) genetics, screening genomic data for predictors of individual variations in brain structure, function, and connectivity; (2) disease, screening brain measures to identify patterns of differences in the major brain diseases and factors that affect them; and (3) methods development. New “Big Data” methods are being developed and implemented around the world to perform genetic analysis of high-dimensional features that arise in neuroimaging — such as brain networks or “connectomes” (Sporns et al., 2005), 3D or 4D maps of brain changes over time, and more complex imaging data from functional MRI and EEG/MEG.

For this issue of NeuroImage we review the work ENIGMA has done, and how it relates to making individual predictions to support the emerging discipline of precision medicine — where personalized medical decisions are made considering an individual's genetic make-up, other risk factors, and the large body of scientific knowledge detailing genotype-phenotype relationships. ENIGMA's genetic and disease-related studies are discovering new factors that affect the brain throughout life, how the diseased brain differs from the healthy brain, and how patterns of brain measures differ from one disease to another. The potential to use machine learning methods in this context is vast, and we point to future opportunities and challenges, and what we have learned already about how individual genetic variants and diseases affect the brain.

One major thrust of ENIGMA's work is genomics, so we first review studies that discovered individual loci in the genome that are linked to variations in brain structure (Stein et al., 2012; Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press). The effect of these common genetic variants tends to be small, but the aggregate effect of thousands of them accounts for a substantial proportion of the variance in brain measures (Toro et al., 2015; Ge et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2015). The relevant genes can be difficult to discover in individual cohorts, but they can be detected by meta-analyzing data across multiple sites. We discuss multivariate and machine learning methods needed to combine some of these predictors in more powerful models that can make valuable predictions about individuals, such as predicting deviations from normal lifetime aging, risk for mental illness, or recovery from trauma.


Reproducibility

There have been numerous recent surprises regarding the nature of gene effects on the brain, including surprisingly poor reproducibility of candidate gene effects on imaging measures and risk for mental illness, and the very large sample sizes needed to reliably detect any genetic associations at all. There have also been dramatic claims of poor reproducibility of findings in genetics, neuroimaging, and neuroscience studies in general (Button et al., 2013; Ioannidis, 2014; Ioannidis et al., 2014). Meta-analyses, such as those conducted by ENIGMA, have been proposed as a way to screen for false positive findings. If claims of “significance chasing” and “fishing” in neuroscience studies are true (Ioannidis, 2014), then predictive models based on them should fail more often than models based on meta-analyzed studies of large numbers of independent cohorts, analyzed in a harmonized way (Ware and Munafò, 2015). ENIGMA is dedicated to replication, and a number of initiatives are underway to develop methods to replicate imaging genomics findings.

We discuss factors that affect reproducibility of models that predict specific gene effects on the brain, including technical factors of image acquisition and analysis. Low effect sizes for individual predictors make genetic effects hard to detect, so meta-analysis is valuable in demonstrating effects that no single cohort can detect on its own. Clearly, if we build a model to classify a person into a certain diagnostic group, based on a set of predictors, we also need to know how to decide if we have measured the predictors well enough, or if the context where the model was fitted is similar enough to the current situation for the prediction to make sense and be accurate. Apart from the choice of predictive model and predictors, there are many other reasons why imaging or genetic models of diagnosis or prognosis may generalize poorly or not at all, depending on the context. Factors that affect model prediction will include age and environment, and the demographic history of the populations sampled; these may affect whether or not a predictor is relevant to a new cohort or an individual. In the ENIGMA studies below, we point to examples in which predictors in the genome and image would be valuable in making individual predictions about brain volume or about a person's diagnosis, but only in certain contexts, such as in certain parts of the lifespan, or only after considering certain confounds or variables that are known to drive brain differences (duration of medication and duration of illness are often confounded, and modeling each effect independently may produce paradoxical conclusions, e.g., that medication is bad for the brain). Individual predictive models are likely to become increasingly nuanced, as we find out more about how predictors interact and contexts where different models work best.

In the course of ENIGMA's efforts, a vast quantity of normative data has been gathered and analyzed from different countries and continents of the world, allowing us to make some inferences about the normal trajectory of brain development and aging (ENIGMA-Lifespan; Dima et al., 2015). We discuss the challenges and opportunities in using models based on these data to make assertions about individual and group deviations from normal, or to generate cohort, or national norms, if they exist and if their value outweighs the costs of generating them.

We also discuss several concepts that have increased the power of ENIGMA to find factors with very small effects on the brain, including how we assess their generality and extensibility to new cohorts.


ENIGMA's Genetic Studies

By December 2009, many researchers worldwide had collected genome-wide genotyping data from cohorts of subjects for whom brain imaging information such as anatomical MRI was available.

It had long been presumed that genetic and environmental factors, and the complex interactions among them, play a role in shaping brain structure. Decades of work in behavioral and medical genetics had convincingly shown that many of the major brain diseases – from Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease to psychiatric illnesses such as schizophrenia and major depression – had a strong additive genetic component. Similar genetic risks exist for neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism. Even so, studies of identical twins who share the same genome show that genetic factors do not fully account for disease risk, and discordant twin pairs provide valuable information about the impact of environmental and epigenetic factors on disease (Munn et al., 2007). Furthermore, many common disorders are likely to reflect a constellation of modest gene differences acting in concert, which smaller individual studies are unlikely to find. Instead, larger studies that capture heterogeneity have begun to unravel the influence of multiple ‘low level’ minor but important gene differences on disease expression (Lopez et al., 2015).

As high-throughput genotyping methods became available, genome-wide association studies (GWASs) began to reveal specific sources of risk in the genome for several major brain diseases. To fully appreciate this kind of study, we need to understand that much of the genome is invariant between humans (Rosenberg et al., 2002). Many kinds of individual genetic variations – common or rare – can occur, including polymorphisms, insertions and deletions of genetic material, loss or retention of homozygosity (LOH/ROH), or copy number variations (CNVs) — where the number of copies of pieces of genomic material differs from the normal two alleles in some individuals but not others. Polymorphisms are a common marker of individual differences, where a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is essentially a “single-letter” change in the genome: a change in a single base pair between individuals.

Some genomic changes interfere with the viability of the organism, leading to very low frequencies in the population. Others remain and some have a moderate or severe impact on a person's health, or their risk for disease. For example, a common variant (present in 1 in 100 in the general population) in the HFE gene impairs a person's ability to metabolize iron. Excessive iron levels can then accumulate in bodily organs, which can cause liver and kidney failure. Multiple deletions in the 22q region of the genome provide another example. Individuals with these deletions have a characteristic neurodevelopmental profile associated with mild to severe abnormalities in the face, brain, and heart, and are at heightened risk for schizophrenia and autism. 22q deletions occur frequently de novo, so they do not really remain in the population; rather 22q is a vulnerable spot in the genome for mutation. Even so, 22q deletion syndrome – and other neurogenetic disorders such as Fragile X, Williams syndrome, and Turner syndrome – have often been studied to help identify potential mechanisms that may contribute to more prevalent psychiatric conditions. ENIGMA's 22q working group has been set up to understand brain differences associated with deletions at this locus, and how they relate to those found using the same analysis protocols in ENIGMA-Schizophrenia and ENIGMA-Autism.

Genetic risk for many major psychiatric illnesses is thought to be mediated in part by common genetic variants that have persisted in human populations for thousands of years. In many cases, the adverse effects of disease risk genes – such as the Alzheimer's risk gene, APOE – are not apparent until later in life (Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press). Because of this, the variants tend to be preserved in the gene pool and continue to drive disease risk worldwide.

Geneticists continue to debate the relative contribution of common versus rare genetic variants to risk for various diseases, but a recent large-scale screen of schizophrenia patient cohorts worldwide implicated over 100 genetic loci in risk for the disease (Ripke et al., 2014). This highly successful study pointed to several genes in the dopamine neurotransmission pathway that had long been implicated in schizophrenia and its treatment — for example, a functional polymorphism in the DRD2 promoter region, which modulates levels of gene expression, and affects antipsychotic drug efficacy (Zhang and Malhotra, 2013). This same genomic screen pointed to other unexpected genetic variants in immune system pathways that offer tantalizing new leads about disease mechanisms, and the role of modifiable factors in eventually treating or averting the illness. Similar efforts in bipolar illness, major depression, and ADHD uncovered genes driving risk for these disorders that overlapped to some extent with those for schizophrenia and with each other (Cross Disorders Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2013). Members of the ENIGMA Consortium have recently demonstrated the usefulness of polygenic risk scores for schizophrenia (based on the 108 loci shown in) in revealing an association between early cannabis use and brain maturation during adolescence — replicated in three samples (French et al., 2015).

Many successful genomic screens involve over 100,000 individuals. For example, the most recent GWAS of height, educational attainment, and body mass index (BMI) identified 56 novel BMI-associated loci in a sample of up to 339,224 individuals (Wood et al., 2014; Locke et al., 2015). Similarly, the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium's discovery of genetic loci implicated in schizophrenia risk took a ‘quantum leap’ once the sample sizes exceeded 75,000 (Ripke et al., 2014), after less successful searches in smaller samples. Several factors may contribute towards this need for large sample sizes in genome-wide association. First, there are biological variation and ascertainment differences among cohorts. A person diagnosed with a specific illness may have other co-morbid illnesses, and diagnostic criteria may vary somewhat worldwide in terms of who is included in the groups of patients and controls.

However, the main reason GWAS needs large samples is power: a genome-wide association analysis comprises approximately a million independent tests, so a threshold of p < 5 × 10–8 is employed to minimize false positives. Early GWAS estimated their required sample sizes based on published effect sizes of candidate genes that have since been shown to be greatly overestimated. Although the genetic architecture of each trait is unique, for most complex traits the effect sizes of individual SNPs are typically less than half a percent (Franke et al., in press). Thus, it follows from power analyses that GWAS and GWAS meta-analyses typically require data from tens of thousands of individuals.

In the imaging field, initial studies also attempted genome-wide screens of brain imaging measures, such as brain size (Paus et al., 2012), the volume of the temporal lobes on MRI (Stein et al., 2010a,b), in cohorts of around 800 subjects (see Medland et al., 2014, for a review). This type of analysis became feasible as large cohort studies, such as the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (Jack et al., 2015), started to put their images and genomic data online. In line with accepted practice in genetics, it is customary to require replication of such genetic effects in independent cohorts.

While some effects appeared to replicate, most did not as the studies were underpowered, and it was unclear whether cohort factors, biological differences, or technical factors were to blame.


Endophenotype Theory and Power

As the field of imaging genetics grew, some researchers hoped that imaging might offer a more efficient approach to discover genes involved in mental illness. The reason for this optimism was based on the observation that many brain measures are consistently reported as affected in psychiatric cohort studies (see later, under ENIGMA Disease Studies), so they could maybe serve as quantitative traits, or markers, correlated with the illness.

There was also some hope that the biological signals in images – measures of neurotransmitters, receptors or metabolite levels, blood flow, the volume of specialized brain areas such as the hippocampus, or its chemical content – might be influenced by genetic variants because of their proximity to primary gene action. Likewise, it was argued that brain-derived measures may have a simpler genetic architecture – perhaps with fewer individual genes or pathways influencing them – compared to the multitude of factors driving a person's overall risk for developing a disease (Saykin et al., 2015). Brain measures may also offer a more precise or reproducible diagnostic scale. Potkin et al. (2009) noted that GWAS can be more efficient when researchers analyze continuous measures (such as brain volumes) rather than binary traits, such as diagnosis, which may also disguise complexities such as co-morbidity, etc.

This endophenotype theory led to confidence that genome-wide screening of brain measures would yield “hits” – genetic loci consistently associated with brain measures – relatively efficiently and, some believed, in much smaller samples. Several countervailing arguments should also be considered. The genetics of brain traits may reveal common pathways involved in a number of mental illnesses, but one loses some specificity when moving from a psychiatric disorder to brain measures — different disorders may have very similar brain abnormalities. For this reason, ENIGMA's Disease Working groups have analyzed tens of thousands of brain scans to see which measures best distinguish patients from controls, across a range of 12 diseases, with a view to understanding similarities and differences. Collecting brain imaging data is more expensive than diagnostic testing. Also, genes that affect brain measures may be of less interest to a patient or physician unless they are also connected to disease risk or prognosis. In ENIGMA, however, the costs of collecting the imaging data had already been incurred, making the feasibility of a large-scale analysis the main consideration. Others voiced a muted optimism: Munafò and Flint (2014) noted that effect sizes for gene effects on neuroimaging data were not likely to be any greater than for any other trait, but the value in studying them came from the ability of brain measures to help understand mechanisms that might underlie associations between genes and more conventional traits (see also Flint et al., 2014). Yet, the potential to find genetic factors that jointly influence risk for mental illness and a neuroimaging trait could dramatically improve statistical power and provide an important link between the genome and the behavioral symptoms used to diagnose psychiatric and neurological illnesses (Glahn et al., 2014).

In ENIGMA's first paper in Nature Genetics, Stein and 158 authors (2012), including 4 existing consortia (SYS, EPIGEN, ADNI, and IMAGEN), meta-analyzed GWAS data from cohorts worldwide and found genetic loci consistently associated with the size of the human hippocampus and total intracranial volume. Notably, in a partnership with another consortium, CHARGE (Bis et al., 2012), the top “hits” – the genetic variants with greatest effect sizes – were anonymously exchanged and found to be the same, supporting the replicability of the findings in completely independently designed efforts.

In a follow-up study in a larger sample (N = 21,151 individuals; Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; called “ENIGMA2”), eight genetic loci were discovered that were reliably associated with the size (volume) of several subcortical structures, including the putamen, caudate, and pallidum. With the increased sample size, earlier findings regarding the hippocampus and intracranial volume were replicated and reinforced; new genetic loci were also discovered. Several of the SNPs implicated lie within or close to genes involved in cell migration, axon guidance, or apoptosis — all cellular processes likely to lead to observable differences in the size of cellular nuclei in the brain. Parallel work in mice by the Williams lab in Memphis began to study mouse homologs of these variants (Ashbrook et al., 2014); recent data suggest that variation of the top putamen gene, KTN1, can predict putamen volume and cell counts in outbred mice (R. Williams, pers. commun.).

Several lessons were learned from the first two ENIGMA genetic studies, in addition to a third pair of papers currently in submission, involving an even larger sample (N > 31,000; Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press; Adams and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication). First, through meta-analyses, it was possible to detect factors (here, SNPs) that accounted for less than 1% of the variance in brain measures. This was despite the fact that the participating studies were designed with different goals in mind, and many used scanners of different field strengths, processed by researchers who had not all met, and communicated through email and teleconference calls.

Much of the consistency in brain measures capitalized on the ongoing refinement of standardized protocols for analyzing images and genomes; in turn, those protocols relied on decades of work by developers of widely used and extensively tested analysis packages such as FreeSurfer (Dale and Sereno, 1993; Fischl, 2012), and FSL (Jenkinson et al., 2012). The supplement of the first ENIGMA paper (Stein et al., 2012) contained 104 pages of ancillary tests supporting the validity and reliability of the data, including tests comparing different imaging software for brain volume quantification.

On the genomic side, the ability to compare genomic data in a common reference frame depended on the availability of the HapMap3 (The International HapMap3 Consortium, 2010) and later the 1000 Genomes reference datasets (Genomes Project C et al., 2010). These reference panels are continually updated and refined, and allow genotyping data collected with one kind of genotyping array (“chip”) to be imputed to match data collected using others, and pooled in the same overall study.

A second issue is whether these findings could have been detected more efficiently using only some of the samples. In a sense, this is a “meta-question” — how might the study have been designed more efficiently after seeing the results?

As in any meta-analysis, the weight assigned to each cohort in the final statistics can be made to depend on its total sample size, or on the standard error of the regression coefficients (which is in fact what ENIGMA does). As such, it is not vital for every cohort to reject the null hypothesis on its own. In fact, any cohort study, however small, can partner with other sites to contribute to the discovery of effects that it cannot detect alone. In ENIGMA1 (Stein et al., 2012), only 5 of the 21 cohort studies were able to detect the effect of the SNPs on the brain in their cohort alone, at the nominal significance level of p = 0.05. By the time of ENIGMA2, 20 of the 38 Caucasian European (CEU) cohort studies could detect the effects of the top SNP. Even so, the aggregate support of the discovery and replication samples was crucial to making sure the effects were credible and unlikely to be false positives.


Relevance to Disease Risk

The quest to identify genetic variants associated with brain measures is partly motivated by finding variants that affect our individual risk for disease. Any modulators of health outcomes in populations may have a vast impact on society, even if they are not the main factors explaining risk for any one individual. As well as affecting risk for disease, genetic differences may also affect symptom severity, treatment response, and prognosis.

As such, several clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease drugs already stratify their cohorts by APOE genotype — a major risk gene for AD that may have a bearing on treatment response as well as disease risk (see Riedel et al., submitted for publication, for a review of APOE effects, which are remarkably complex). At the time of writing, several manuscripts are under review addressing the overlap between ENIGMA's genomic findings and accepted or emerging markers of disease risk (Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press; Adams and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Franke et al., in press). Here we simply review their overall design. Some initial reports have appeared in abstract form, relating brain-related SNPs to risk for Parkinson's disease (Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press), obsessive compulsive disorder (Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press), schizophrenia (Stein et al., 2015; Franke et al., in press), and multiple sclerosis (Rinker et al., submitted for publication). An initial negative report has appeared for epilepsy (Whelan et al., 2015). Even so, given the low fraction of heritability explained by the SNPs discovered, the studies so far are widely accepted as underpowered.

One method to assess an individual's relative risk for disease, based on genome-wide genotyping data, involves computing a polygenic risk score (PRS) for each individual. In Alzheimer's disease, for example, carrying one copy of the APOE4 genotype boosts lifetime risk for AD by a factor of 3, and carrying two copies may boost risk by 15 times. These odds ratios are not constant across human populations and even vary by ethnicity, or circumstances, so some caution is needed when extrapolating them to new data; but as AD GWAS data accumulate, over 20 common genetic variants have been found to affect AD risk — 3 of them, in the genes CLU, PICALM, and CR1, appear to be associated with a difference in disease risk of over 10% per allele. If an individual's genotype is known for these loci, it is possible to create a polygenic risk score in a number of different ways, depending on whether the goal is to predict diagnosis, outcome, or brain measures. The simplest approach is to count risk loci, although that clearly ignores the vastly different odds ratios from each locus. It is more common to weight the loci based on their odds ratio for disease, or by their regression coefficients. APOE4, for example, is just a single genotype that might contribute to calculation of a polygenic risk score together with other risk loci. As shown by the PGC analyses, the predictive accuracy of PRS scores increases as the number of variants included increases. Calculation of these scores does not need to be restricted to genome-wide significant loci.

Recent efforts to predict disease status based on polygenic risk scores have had varied success, but the reasons are quite well understood. First, for the most prevalent neurological or psychiatric diseases, we do not yet have a set of common variants that account for more than a small fraction of disease risk (except for APOE4, where a single copy may triple a person's risk for AD, other factors being equal). In AD, there are rare mutations in genes related to AD pathology – such as presenilin and APP – that invariably produce early-onset AD. Carriers of these genetic variants are the targets of major neuroimaging initiatives (Benzinger et al., 2013). A very important aspect of this – relevant to the field of personalized medicine – is that the person's genotype in conjunction with amyloid imaging can accurately predict the age of onset for the disease and the symptoms (Benzinger et al., 2013).

Another cause for optimism is the efforts of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC). When the PGC Schizophrenia Working Group increased their sample size to 36,989 cases and 113,075 controls, they discovered over 100 loci associated with risk for schizophrenia, suggesting that other GWAS may experience similar boosts, depending on where they are in the arc of discovery. The rate of success of these efforts, and yield on the efforts invested, also depends on the polygenicity of each disease, and the distribution of risk loci across the genome. Holland et al. (submitted for publication) used recent data from the ENIGMA study and the PGC to estimate what sample sizes are needed for a GWAS to discover enough SNPs to account for, say 50% or 80% of the chip-based heritability, i.e., the amount of the population variance predictable from genotyped SNPs. They argued that some traits are more polygenic than others, and that, relative to some brain measures, GWAS studies of schizophrenia and major depressive disorder may require much larger sample sizes to discover enough SNPs to account for high levels of the chip-based heritability. If that is true, then imaging genetics may be well on the way to a significantly higher rate of discovery, and a more complete understanding of common variants driving individual differences in brain measures.


How much individual variance is explainable by GWAS and common genetic variants?

In recent years, a number of powerful methods emerged to estimate what fraction of the population variance in a trait could be predicted, in principle, from all the SNPs on the genotyping chip, even if the exact genes and SNPs were not yet known. Predictions can be made from the full set of association statistics: models (linear or Gaussian) are first fitted to the observed effect sizes of all the SNPs, even if most SNP effects fail to reach the accepted standard for genome-wide significance. In much the same way as FDR (the false discovery rate method) is used in imaging to confirm evidence for a distributed signal — spread out across the brain, the overall effect of genome-wide SNPs on a trait can be estimated without having to pinpoint which exact regions — of the image or the genome — contribute unequivocally to the effect.

Hibar et al. (2015) used genome-wide summary statistics to estimate heritability (So et al., 2011) and found that common variants across the genome explained around 19% of the variance in hippocampal volume, which is comparable to SNP-based estimates of heritability for many psychiatric disorders and other biological traits. More recently, B.K. Bulik-Sullivan et al., 2015 introduced a similar method based on linkage disequilibrium (LD) scores that is also able to recover heritability from summary statistics. The LD score method assigns an LD score to each SNP — the sum of its squared correlations (r2) with all other SNPs in a 1 centimorgan window. One then regresses the chi-squared statistics from a GWAS against the LD score for each SNP. The slope of the resulting regression line depends on the sample size and the SNP-heritability — the proportion of trait variance accounted for by all the genotyped SNPs (see B. Bulik-Sullivan et al. (2015), B.K. Bulik-Sullivan et al., 2015, for derivations).

A related method, GCTA (genome-wide complex trait analysis; Yang et al., 2011) suggested that a still higher proportion of population variance in brain volumetric measures may be accounted for based on all genotyped SNPs, even in cases where we do not know which SNPs help as predictors of the trait. Members of the ENIGMA Consortium have applied this method to estimate SNP-based heritability for structural (Toro et al., 2015) and functional (Dickie et al., 2014) brain measures. A working group in ENIGMA, ENIGMA-GCTA, is now comparing the GCTA and LD score methods to better estimate how much brain variation is explainable by genotyped SNPs, at least for the brain measures that are most readily computed from MRI. SNP-based heritability estimates of cortical surface area for different cortical subdivisions calculated by GCTA were recently published (Chen et al., 2015). These cortical subdivisions were defined by a genetically based cortical parcellation scheme (Chen et al., 2012).

The reason ENIGMA and other GWAS researchers are interested in measuring heritability – and ideally the fraction of heritability explained by common genetic variants – is that it should be possible to prioritize brain measures for deeper genetic analysis based on their heritability, reliability, polygenicity, and relevance to disease. Such rankings or “Bayesian priors” would help in prioritizing research, making studies more efficient and better powered (Schork et al., 2013; Becker et al., submitted for publication; Holland et al., submitted for publication; Wang et al., submitted for publication). Even so, there is no evidence that phenotypes with higher heritability show stronger associations with SNPs. One such example is white matter hyperintensities — a brain measure with high heritability, for which specific genomic risk factors have been hard to find. The main benefit of focusing on highly heritable phenotypes comes from the fact that measurement error is typically lower, and prioritizing brain measures is important as there are so many ways to quantify brain structure and function.

A recurring caveat in this work is that the SNP effects are not expected to be constant in all cohorts. They may depend on a person's age, environment, or other circumstances. We now know from ENIGMA2 that the top 8 loci associated with the volumes of subcortical structures were detectable consistently worldwide, even though each one accounts for < 1% of the variance. A later screen for age × SNP effects suggested that some genes have a greater effect on brain measures later in life (Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press), perhaps because they interact adversely with other biological processes or environmental stressors. In other words, although ENIGMA primarily uses meta-analysis to assess evidence, we do not assume that the effect size is always the same. Heterogeneity of effects is also assessed – a SNP effect important late in life may not be replicated in younger samples. Conversely, since most psychiatric disorders occur at a young age, one may expect to find associations that link genetic vulnerability, brain structure and disease at a younger age, with effects that may diminish later. Moreover, for certain disorders such as addiction, the psychological, neurobiological and genetic factors most relevant at one age (e.g., impulsivity or sensation-seeking in adolescents experimenting with drugs) may be quite different from the factors when dependent (e.g., compulsivity or habit-based behavior) or when recovering (e.g., stress regulation or cognitive control). Even so, ENIGMA's genomic screens so far are only well-powered to detect SNP effects that are consistent — there may also be SNP effects, so far undetected, that depend on the demographics of the cohort assessed, or disease status, or other circumstantial factors.

This is a reminder that predictive models work best in cohorts similar to those where discoveries were made. Because of this concern, which to some extent affects all brain imaging studies — and all human studies — ENIGMA has diversified to over 33 countries. Recently, ENIGMA partnered with other consortia such as the Japanese consortium, COCORO (Okada et al., in press); encouragingly, effects of psychiatric illness on brain structural measures were replicated in Western and Eastern populations, not just in the structures affected the most, but in their rank order, showing congruence between independent studies (van Erp et al., 2015; Okada et al., in press).


ENIGMA's Disease Studies

After the initial success of the genetic analyses (Stein et al., 2015; Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press), ENIGMA investigators had analyzed brain MRI data from well over 30,000 individuals — around a third of the data came from patients with a range of psychiatric conditions. In the primary GWAS studies, analyses were run with and without patients, and excluding patients did not affect the main findings; of course the possibility remains that some SNP effects may be easier to detect in some patient cohorts, but ENIGMA's overall results were not driven by the presence of patients.

In 2012, ENIGMA formed working groups on schizophrenia (van Erp et al., 2015), bipolar disorder (Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press), major depression (Schmaal et al., 2015), and ADHD (Hoogman et al., 2015); groups meta-analyzing data on 8 additional disorders have been formed since, with current sample sizes detailed in; a map of participating sites is shown in. In the summer of 2015, additional working groups were formed on anorexia nervosa, recovery after stroke, and Parkinson's disease — the current “roadmap” showing relationships between ENIGMA's working groups is shown in (also see http://enigma.ini.usc.edu for the latest status). The diseases surveyed include many where controversy exists on the nature and scope of disease effects on the brain. Given this controversy, the main benefit of meta-analysis is to discover which effects are strongest or most reliably found, and which depend on known or unknown factors of the cohorts assessed.

The initial goal of ENIGMA's Disease working groups has been to meta-analyze effects of these disorders on the subcortical brain measures studied in the GWAS study. As scans had already been analyzed with a harmonized protocol, and subtle genomic effects had been discovered, there was some interest in ranking brain measures in terms of disease effects (i.e., differences between patients and controls).

A secondary goal was to find factors that might moderate how these diseases impact the brain, such as a person's age, the duration or severity of illness, comorbidities, or treatment-related effects, such as which medications the patients had been treated with, and for how long. Clearly, treatment effects on the disease or the brain depend on many factors. ENIGMA's multiple cohorts, in some cases, offered the opportunity to gauge their generality or consistency. At the same time, many groups joined ENIGMA and provided only brain measures as their initial case–control analyses did not require genome-wide genotyping data on their cohorts. As such, truly vast samples began to be analyzed (N = 8,927, in the published ENIGMA-Depression study; N = 10,194 in the ENIGMA-Lifespan study;).

At the time of writing, ENIGMA's first studies of schizophrenia and major depression have been published; results are compared in. Some caveats are needed in showing these data side by side: the schizophrenia and major depression patients were not ascertained at the same sites, so site or geographic effects may be present.

Among the subcortical structures so far assessed, the hippocampus shows the greatest differences in each disorder in terms of statistical effect sizes — but in major depression, it is the only structure showing differences, of those assessed so far (Schmaal et al., 2015). Many other structures show volume deficits or even hypertrophy in schizophrenia; basal ganglia enlargement has been widely noted in prior studies of patients taking second-generation antipsychotics. In people with schizophrenia, abnormal ventricular enlargement has long been reported (as far back as Johnstone et al., 1976), but the natural variations in ventricular size make the effect size smaller for this structure, even though the absolute volume difference, on average, is greater than for other structures assessed. In major depression, the hippocampal volume difference was greater in patients who experienced more depressive episodes, and in those diagnosed before the age of 21 years, which were at least partly independent effects. This is in line with many prior reports of greater brain differences in those with an earlier onset of the disease. Studies of cortical measures are now underway across all ENIGMA disease working groups; many cortical regions are commonly implicated in psychiatric illness, so these analyses may offer a more complete picture relating brain structural differences to clinical measures, medications, and outcomes. At the same time, diffusion imaging studies are also underway; initial reports reveal consistent deficits in fractional anisotropy – a measure of white matter microstructure – for major white matter tracts in schizophrenia (Bora et al., 2011; Holleran et al., 2014; Ellison-Wright et al., 2014; Kelly et al., 2015); an interesting question is whether antipsychotic medications affect white matter (Ahmed et al., 2015) and brain connectivity (O'Donoghue et al., 2015) in a way that fits with their known effects on structural anatomy.


Extensions and Refinements

Because of the worldwide scope of the ENIGMA studies, only the brain measures that were most readily measured have so far been examined. Clearly, there are measures that may be more relevant to each disease or closer to the action of disease-causing genes, but if they are difficult to harmonize and measure in a standard way, the available sample sizes will lag behind those available for the simpler measures. Because of decades of work on shape analysis of anatomy, several of the ENIGMA disease groups have begun to analyze and meta-analyze subcortical shape (Gutman et al., 2015a,b,c), to map the profile of volumetric effects with more spatial precision. These efforts will also determine whether shape metrics offer additional predictive value over and above standard metrics, and in which situations.

The ENIGMA-Laterality group is studying global trends in the profile of left–right differences in brain structure, and whether they relate to handedness, sex, and disease status, in over 15,000 people (Guadalupe et al., 2015, submitted for publication). Reduced or abnormal brain asymmetry has been reported in many brain disorders (Okada et al., in press), but the scope and generality of these differences is not yet understood. Also, many important aspects of human brain function show lateralization in terms of the underlying processing networks, but the biology of this specialization is poorly understood, as are factors that influence it. Whether brain asymmetry measures add value as diagnostic predictors, will be testable across ENIGMA.

ENIGMA-EEG is studying the influence of genetic variants on brain functional activity measured with scalp recorded electrical signals, in a combined dataset from 10,155 individuals, ranging from 5 to 74 years of age. EEG metrics of brain function mature rapidly with age, and relate to aspects of cognition such as the brain's processing efficiency; they also show abnormalities across many neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders. Combining data from several large twin and family datasets, the ENIGMA-EEG working group is performing a genome-wide association analysis of brain oscillatory power – a highly heritable trait – before proceeding to in-depth analyses of lateralized activity, brain connectivity, and network properties.


Brain-Wide Genome-Wide Association Studies

Voxel-based mapping methods are complementary to approaches that measure the volumes of specific regions of the brain, and they allow comprehensive and unbiased searches for effects of disease or genetic variations across the brain. “Brain-wide” genome-wide searches, or “voxelwise GWAS” (Shen et al., 2010; Stein et al., 2010a,b) can involve over a trillion statistical tests. However, once we account for the covariance within the image and genomic data, the number of independent tests being conducted drops to less than 15,000 × 1,000,000. Given the extremely low p-values of some genetic associations in ENIGMA (p ~ 10–23 in Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press), several effects can still survive a “double” Bonferroni correction for multiple testing across both the image and the genome (Medland et al., 2014).

As a result, several recent approaches have been developed to perform brain-wide genome-wide association studies to identify “spatial” features associated with genetic variants, such as specific WM pathways and their components, patterns of cortical thickness, or even activation patterns, rather than “global” measures such as brain or subcortical structure volumes. These approaches may be broadly divided into (1) “brute force” methods, that use mass-univariate testing to test every SNP for associations at each voxel in the image, and (2) data reduction methods, that attempt to reduce the search space by reducing the number of features in the image, or the genome, or both (Vounou et al., 2010, Ge et al., 2012). Data reduction methods may include classical methods, such as canonical covariates analysis, or independent components analysis (Gupta et al., 2015; Calhoun et al., 2015), or modern variants such as sparse coding, compressive sensing, or “deep learning” for feature discovery (see Thompson et al. (2013) for a review of multivariate imaging genomics methods). Among the “brute force” methods, Jahanshad et al. (2015a,b) detail a practical method whereby several sites run a voxel-based morphometric analysis independently, using a GWAS or other covariate-based analysis at each voxel, and later communicate their findings to a central site for meta-analysis. This approach was able to map out in the brain and meta-analyze the effects of the top SNP from the ENIGMA2 study, which screened the genome for variants associated with the size of subcortical structures (Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press). To avoid re-computing everything when a new site joins, this “meta-morphometry” approach allows cohorts to align their data to their own brain templates, which are later aligned to an overall mean template for meta-analysis. Such a distributed effort offers many advantages for imaging genomics, due to the vast number of predictors: as new cohorts join, each site's computational hardware can be leveraged by all the others. Such an approach allows cooperative computation on data without requiring all the data to be shared or ever transferred. This is an interesting area of cooperative machine learning that can also increase “buy-in” — opening up participation to countries with stricter data transfer laws.

As part of ENIGMA3, a genome-wide screen of the cortex, one subproject will adopt “genetic clustering” methods to identify coherent patterns of gene effects in the brain (Chen et al., 2013). Based on the notion of genetic correlation, brain regions or sets of voxels can be grouped into clusters with similar genetic determination. The standard decomposition of the brain into regions may be adapted to include genetic clusters, or new regions where genome-wide association may be more efficient (Chiang et al., 2012). This approach has already been applied to create genetic partitions of the cortex; initial work in ENIGMA will overlay pre-made partitions on the cortical data from each site. Genetic correlations can now be computed rapidly from GWAS summary statistics (B. Bulik-Sullivan et al., 2015; B.K. Bulik-Sullivan et al., 2015) making it feasible to compute and perform clustering on matrices of “genetic connectivity” whose entries are genetic correlations. The ENIGMA-GCTA Working Group is currently studying these methods, in multisite data.

Many disorders affect the brain's white matter and connectivity. Using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), ENIGMA's disease working groups have begun to compile evidence across cohorts for differences in a range of DTI measures, which reflect white matter integrity and microstructure (Kelly et al., 2015). Several years of work went into harmonizing ENIGMA's DTI analysis protocols, to study which metrics are consistently heritable and reproducible across multiple twin and family cohorts worldwide (Jahanshad et al., 2013a,b; Kochunov 2014; Kochunov et al., 2015). These DTI protocols have been carried forward into ongoing GWAS and disease studies, and initial genome-wide screens of the structural connectome (Jahanshad et al., 2013a,b; de Reus et al., 2015). On the genetic side, ENIGMA working groups have also formed to assess other kinds of genetic variation, including copy number variants (CNVs), where abnormalities have been reported in autism, schizophrenia, and learning disabilities. The ENIGMA CNV helpdesk is now supervising supervising an initial analysis of CNV data in 13,057 people from 24 cohorts worldwide, after developing harmonized protocols for CNV “calling” and quality control. Participating cohorts include groups from Japan, Mexican-Americans, and people of Western European, Nordic or Swedish ancestry. Initial efforts are evaluating known “psychiatric” CNVs as predictors of MRI and DTI phenotypes computed in other ENIGMA projects. Challenges include the pooling of data from genotyping chips with different coverage; some have sparse coverage of SNPs in regions with segmental duplications or complex CNVs.

In a complementary initiative, the ENIGMA-Epigenetics working group is studying epigenetic processes such as methylation, which is an index of biological aging and lifecourse ‘stress’ that may explain an important proportion of the gene-environment contribution to expression of many common diseases such as stroke and dementia. The group is now performing epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS), across 14 cohorts from Asia, Australia, North America, and Western Europe, to test associations between DNA methylation and brain measures, initially focusing on total brain volume, subcortical volumes and cortical thickness and surface areas. The working group is analyzing methylation data from 9,000 people, of whom 5,000 have both methylation data and MRI. In addition, the ENIGMA-Epigenetics group is prioritizing the analysis of DNA methylation sites based on their effects on gene expression or association with stress- and anxiety-related phenotypes. There is some evidence of early life changes in stress response genes through methylation (Backhouse et al., 2015), just as early life events influence later life disease expression — notably stroke, white matter hyperintensities, and cognitive impairment. Of great interest are epigenetic changes throughout the life span, and with aging, which may predict mortality from all causes, as well as physical and cognitive performance. Associations are being tested first for brain phenotypes that are known to change the most across the lifespan, based on incoming information from ENIGMA's Lifespan study in over 10,000 individuals (Dima et al., 2015).


Relevance to Individual Evaluation, and Longitudinal Assessment

ENIGMA was not designed to make predictions about individuals based on their scans and genomic data. As in most epidemiological studies, the power lies in aggregating so much individual data that subtle effects on the brain can be detected, including findings that each cohort's data were insufficient to detect. In other words, its primary goal has been to relate brain measures to disease and treatment effects, and to variants in the genome. With the aggregated data, it has been possible to determine how reproducible these patterns are worldwide. Also, for the study of treatment effects, ENIGMA does not have the ideal design. Ideally, one would prefer to have pre–post treatment longitudinal designs instead of the cross-sectional comparisons in ENIGMA, where medication status is often confounded by age, disease duration, comorbidity and disease severity.

Even if a large data sample is needed to discover a factor that influences the brain, it does not mean that it is irrelevant to individuals; APOE is one such example, discovered in 1993 by linkage analysis in pedigrees. More recently, a rare variant in the TREM2 gene (Jonsson et al., 2013; Rajagopalan et al., 2013) was found to affect Alzheimer's disease risk and accelerate brain tissue loss as we age — perhaps doubling loss rates in old age and increasing AD risk by a factor of 2–4. This gene variant is undoubtedly important for those who carry it: it is found in a little under 1% of controls and a little over 1% of AD patients.


How Does it Help to Predict Risk for Decline?

In current clinical practice, it is not recommended to notify a research participant of their APOE status, and most ethics boards clearly define the circumstances in which incidental findings or health-relevant information is communicated back to a research participant. In the case of APOE, participants are not typically informed of their genetic status, as there are no effective treatments for late–onset Alzheimer's disease. Still, discovering predictors of more rapid decline is useful for the pharmaceutical industry for understanding the behavior of participants in clinical trials, and can greatly improve drug trial design, reducing costs. Enrichment approaches use some characteristic of a patient to select them for a clinical trial — this may be prior response to a certain drug, or it also may be a prediction that they are more likely to decline (FDA, 2013). In the AD field, some clinical trials now select patients based on having a PiB-positive PET scan (Ikonomovic et al., 2008) – as evidence of incipient AD pathology – and the APOE4 risk genotype, as carriers are more likely to develop AD. This selective enrolment allows faster, less costly, and more well powered clinical trials, with demonstrable reductions in the number of patients needed to show treatment effects (Hua et al., submitted for publication).

ENIGMA's disease working groups are likely to broaden the set of known factors that help predict recovery or decline. In ENIGMA-HIV, for example, a key goal is to understand predictors of resilience — factors that might forecast healthy brain development after the use of antiretroviral treatment (Fouche et al., 2015). Crucially, it is important to know if a predictor of decline is specific to one cohort or likely to generalize to others, or if it is applicable in a limited set of situations. Understanding how APOE4 and other major risk genes shift the lifetime trajectory of brain measures will also help determine how much they will help when used for clinical trial stratification. This is a goal of the ENIGMA-Lifespan group (Dima et al., 2015). Clearly, any predictors of suicidal behavior would be very important in the management and follow-up of patients with psychiatric disorders (Mathews et al., 2013), and a secondary project on suicidality was started within the ENIGMA-Depression working group (Rentería et al., submitted for publication). Similarly, factors that predict whether ADHD in a child will persist into adulthood, will have clinical utility (Hoogman et al., 2015). Ultimately, the stratification or clustering of ENIGMA cohort data into subtypes, based on imaging, clinical or behavioral data, may point to distinctions that help us understand the heterogeneity of these disorders. This heterogeneity, without models to disentangle it, makes individual patient predictions harder to make.


Normative Data Across the Human Lifespan

One effort where ENIGMA may contribute to individual prediction and evaluation – albeit with some caveats – is the ENIGMA-Lifespan project (Dima et al., 2015). In this work, ENIGMA cohorts are invited to contribute volumetric measures from normal individuals in their samples, which span the age range from 2 to 92 years of age. Although some cohort studies focus on children or the elderly, many scan people across the lifespan, allowing the computation of age-trajectories for several key brain measures; the results show a remarkable difference in the maturational trajectory of different structures, supporting many earlier neurodevelopmental reports on the sequence of brain development (Gogtay et al., 2004; Sowell et al., 2004). To cope with the non-uniform sampling density of the cohorts, these overall trajectories must be interpreted cautiously; clearly some parts of the lifespan are better sampled than others, and unmodeled effects of scan site, demographics, and even cultural or environmental differences may drive some of the effects. Clearly, disentangling the driving factors is statistically complex, but the potential is there, to derive normative measures and models of our path through life, in cohort studies as diverse as ENIGMA. The life span analyses (and normative curves) are also highly relevant for neurodevelopmental disorders such as OCD, ADHD, autism, etc. — for early detection, and secondary prevention in at-risk populations. Eventually, there may even be efforts to train individuals in specific domains, to stimulate the maturation of specific brain areas that appear to be deviant from the norm curves.

Such normative data have possible applications for individual assessment, if used judiciously. In pediatrics, growth charts for height and weight offer metrics of where a child stands relative to others of the same age, as a Z-score for example. Similar metrics for brain structure, among others, may help in studies of neurodevelopment where interventions and treatments are used to promote healthy maturation, or recovery, as in the case of brain trauma, for example. Similarly, better trajectories to chart loss of brain volume with advancing age help in routine diagnosis of the individual with possible cognitive problems, by indicating first if their brain is within normal limits for age, and secondly the precise centile on which it lies (Farrell et al., 2009; Dickie et al., 2013, in press) – much more data is needed to populate these graphs, but (much like child growth charts) they have the potential to be highly valuable in routine clinical practice as well as research. Original scan data are being collected to expand these templates (e.g., www.brainsimagebank.ac.uk).

Norming of brain measures also has commercial applications (Ochs et al., 2015). ENIGMA relies heavily on developments in software for imaging and genotype acquisition, quality control, and analysis, that make standardized assessment possible. In some regions of the world, such as Thailand and Cambodia, ENIGMA has contributors who are interested in whether it makes sense to use brain development norms from Western cohorts, or build their own (Jahanshad et al., 2015a,b,c; Fouche et al., 2015). By comparing developmental trajectories across very diverse multi-cohort data, better answers to these and other practical questions are within reach.


Machine Learning, Big Data, and Individual Prediction

With the advent of very large neuroimaging datasets, we can fit predictive models to the data and test them for their robustness. Our models of how diseases and genes affect the brain are constantly being tested and improved, especially in situations where statistical effects have previously been too small to discover, or have been confounded by factors that cannot be adjusted for. In GWAS for example, there are known genetic differences in allele frequencies across populations, and if these are not accurately modeled based on much larger datasets, and adjusted for using multidimensional scaling, they will confound the analysis and lead to spurious results - many more SNPs will show “effects” on the brain, ultimately turning out to be false positives. Years of “false alarms” (Farrell et al., 2015) led the genomics community to adopt strict standards for reporting effects, including a standard genome-wide significance threshold (described above). In addition, independent replication of effects is required. In imaging, a somewhat more flexible approach has been used, with approaches from FDR to random field theory and permutation all co-existing in the literature; the use of candidate brain regions or prior hypotheses in functional imaging studies is encouraged, but the use of candidate regions in genomics is sometimes hotly debated as leading to many false positive effects (Collins et al., 2012; Farrell et al., 2015; ENIGMA-DTI Working Group, 2014). Munafò and Kempton (2014) argued that the growing flexibility in analyses used in neuroimaging is increasing the reporting of false positive results, and meta-analyses may offer better estimates of the validity of claims regarding brain differences in major depression and bipolar illness, fields for which they meta-analyzed the neuroimaging literature.

Given the sample sizes attained, ENIGMA offers a framework not only for unrestricted searches, but also to test more focused hypotheses and provide internal replication using, for example, cross-validation methods. So far, the Working Groups have over 30 “secondary proposals”: many study clinical measures, disease subtypes, and patterns of behavior such as suicidality or negative symptoms, or other differences that might contribute to the heterogeneity of brain disease and outcomes. One such project, in the ENIGMA-Major Depression group, assesses the effects of childhood trauma on depression-related brain measures, a factor that may be modeled effectively by comparisons with data from the ENIGMA-PTSD group, where childhood trauma is also a major predictive factor. Partnerships between ENIGMA groups may resolve some sources of brain differences that are difficult to disentangle. In HIV+ people who abuse stimulant drugs, for example, white matter inflammation is commonly reported, while patterns of accelerated atrophy are often seen in HIV+ people who do not use intravenous drugs, especially in those carrying the APOE4 genotype. These and other predictors can be assessed in partnerships between the ENIGMA-Addictions and ENIGMA-HIV groups, by determining a common core of predictor variables that can be harmonized.

More refined models are also needed: we now know that the profile and extent of brain differences in disease may depend critically on a patient's age, duration of illness and course of treatment, as well as adherence to the treatment, polypharmacy and other unmeasured factors. Differences in ancestral background, as determined based on genotype, are strongly related to systematic differences in brain shape (Bakken et al., 2011; Fan et al., 2015). Any realistic understanding of the brain imaging measures must take all these into account, as well as acknowledge the existence of causal factors perhaps not yet known or even imagined. The quest to identify individual predictors is therefore more likely to succeed in finding factors that affect aggregate risk and outcome in groups of individuals, rather than offer firm predictions regarding an individual.

A more immediately achievable goal, for ENIGMA, is to rank brain measures in terms of how well they do predict individual decline, or diagnosis. Predictors of imminent brain decline are already used to boost the power for clinical trials in Alzheimer's disease, by over-enrolling, or separately analyzing patients whose brain measures, or clinical and genomic measures, suggest that they will decline faster. In ENIGMA, the ENIGMA-Plasticity group is evaluating the genetic influences on measures of brain change, in a meta-analytic setting (Brouwer et al., 2015). If reproducible drivers of brain decline could be found by screening brain data worldwide, they would help in planning enrichment approaches for drug trials. Several major initiatives have this goal (e.g., ADNI; Jack et al., 2015). Currently, the only genetic marker used for enrichment is APOE, but this may change as more information accumulates (see Lupton et al., submitted for publication). The complex pattern of association between brain measures and SNPs across the APOE gene (Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press) suggests that future polygenic predictors based on machine learning may better predict clinical decline, and decline in brain measures, than the standard APOE genetic test, which is based on just 2 SNPs.


Machine Learning

Innovations in machine learning make it possible to build robust predictive models from millions of predictors, often using dimension reduction techniques to home in on more efficient sets of variables that explain the most variance in the data; this vast field, including sparse learning and compressive sensing, is especially valuable in imaging genomics, with millions of predictors in both the images and the genome. Several machine learning developments have been applied to connect genomic and imaging measures, using methods such as parallel ICA (Gupta et al., 2015; Calhoun et al., 2015), elastic net (Wan et al., 2011), sparse reduced rank regression (sRRR; Vounou et al., 2010), among others. ENIGMA is beginning to test some of these models, specifically in the disease working groups, for case-control differentiation and differential diagnosis. Past efforts to combine imaging and genomic data for outcome prediction suggest that imaging measures may be much more predictive of future clinical decline than genomic measures, but both are complementary (Peters and the Alzheimer's Disease DREAM Challenge, submitted for publication). Predictive models should improve as they draw on more data, and the larger ENIGMA GWAS studies are now discovering more genetic markers that can be used in predictive models for brain measures (Hibar and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication; Hibar et al., 2015a,b, in press; Adams and the CHARGE and ENIGMA2 Consortia, submitted for publication). However, compelling as these approaches are and not wishing to dampen the enthusiasm for these very promising techniques, the image measurements being predicted generally require a human check and correction if necessary, particularly in datasets with complex imaging features such as occur in older patients with stroke – machine learning analysis algorithms still cannot reliably separate the hyperintensity due to a small cortical infarct from that due to a white matter hyperintensity or artifact, reliably. Also, the variants driving the heritability of disease risk are only just beginning to be discovered for many of the major brain diseases studied within and outside of ENIGMA. Unsupervised learning is also relevant for understanding the heterogeneity of diseases, which has made it harder to discover their causes and mechanisms. Brodersen et al. (2013) argued that one could use unsupervised learning on imaging, clinical and genetic data to see whether subtypes (or clusters) can be identified within a disease, and whether these data cluster together in agreement (or disagreement) with current diagnostic classifications.

In conclusion, we have reviewed current work by the ENIGMA Consortium. ENIGMA began in 2009, and is now a distributed effort, with over 30 working groups, coordinated from many centers worldwide. As we noted, ENIGMA's main goals have been to detect effects of disease and genetic variants on the brain, to see how consistent these effects are worldwide, and to study what modulates these effects. On the genetic side, it may soon be possible for polygenic scoring to produce predictors that are routinely used in brain imaging studies, explaining some of the observed variance. This may make other effects easier to detect. On the disease side, we are beginning to identify and confirm distinctive patterns of brain differences in each of a range of brain diseases, along with a better understanding of which patterns are specific to given disorders, which patterns tend to generalize, and what factors account for the heterogeneity across cohorts. This will help us understand the situations where predictive models can be used, for diagnostic classification, outcome prediction, and norming of individual data against appropriate reference populations.

We end with a note in praise of small studies. Like any consortium, ENIGMA would be impossible without the cohort studies and all the individuals who contribute; most of the data analyzed in ENIGMA came from cohorts with relatively modest sample sizes. Inevitably, many hypotheses are not addressable on a large scale, and some questions - especially causal questions - involve targeted interventions or phenotypic assessments with a depth or sophistication not likely to be attained at every site. As Aristotle said, “Nobody has the ability to work everything out, but everyone has something useful to say; working together, the whole vast world of science is within our reach.” (ἐκ πάντων δὲ συναθροιζομένων γίγνεσθαί τι μέγεθος; Aristotle, Metaphysics α, c. 350 BCE). This is the ENIGMA motto: http://enigma.ini.usc.edu/about-2/.


White Matter Plasticity in the Adult Brain

Cassandra Sampaio-Baptista, Heidi Johansen-Berg — Neuron, 2017. PMC5766826, CC BY 4.0.

The study of brain plasticity has tended to focus on the synapse, where well-described activity-dependent mechanisms are known to play a key role in learning and memory. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that plasticity occurs beyond the synapse. This review focuses on the emerging concept of white matter plasticity. For example, there is growing evidence, both from animal studies and from human neuroimaging, that activity-dependent regulation of myelin may play a role in learning. This previously overlooked phenomenon may provide a complementary but powerful route through which experience shapes the brain.

Keywords: white matter, plasticity, MRI, learning, myelin


Main Text


Introduction

White matter (WM), consisting of axons connecting different brain regions, constitutes about half of the total human brain volume. Axons can be myelinated or unmyelinated, and it is myelin’s chemical composition of mainly lipids that gives the WM its characteristic color. If the myelinated axons of an adult human brain were laid out end to end, the total length would reach approximately 160,000 km (Marner et al., 2003).

Besides axons, WM also contains myelin-producing oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, microglia, and oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs). In the CNS of the rat, each oligodendrocyte can myelinate more than 20 axons, but this varies between brain areas (Chong et al., 2012, Davison and Peters, 1970). Myelin is formed in segments with the unmyelinated axonal areas between segments called nodes of Ranvier. The primary function of myelination is to speed conduction of the electric impulse along an axon, allowing the action potential to travel long distances faster (reviewed in Freeman et al., 2016, Hartline and Colman, 2007). Other features of WM such as axon diameter, internode length, ion channel density, and myelin thickness also affect conduction speed. In gray matter, myelin plays a role in neurite growth inhibition (McKerracher et al., 1994), potentially limiting plasticity once a circuit has been formed (McGee et al., 2005). Complex cortical networks tend to be less myelinated (McGee et al., 2005) and thus more prone to plasticity mechanisms, suggesting that myelin might provide the finishing touches in circuit formation.

Myelination is so important for the proper function of the nervous system that it is thought to have evolved independently in several distinct animal branches (Hartline and Colman, 2007). Myelination is particularly important in larger brains, where finely calibrated conduction speeds are necessary for signal coordination across long distances. Brain tracts like the corpus callosum are not fully myelinated and there is great variation in myelination from brain region to region (Sturrock, 1980, Young et al., 2013). Furthermore, axons can exhibit long unmyelinated stretches between myelinated segments (Tomassy et al., 2014) as well as variation in internode length (Ford et al., 2015). This suggests that faster is not always better; instead, myelination is finely and locally tuned in order to coordinate the timing of action potentials that may require both high and low conduction speeds (Waxman, 1997). Recent simulations support this view (Arancibia-Cárcamo et al., 2017, Etxeberria et al., 2016, Ford et al., 2015).

The importance of WM to brain health has long been appreciated due to devastating effects of WM diseases such as multiple sclerosis. However, WM has traditionally taken a backseat role in our understanding of behavior and is typically considered to simply provide a route for communication between neurons. Similarly, conceptions of how brain connections change with experience have naturally focused on the synapse, where Hebbian plasticity mechanisms such as long-term potentiation provide a powerful substrate for learning. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that WM plasticity offers a complementary route through which experience can shape brain connections. Recent evidence from both human (Scholz et al., 2009) and rodent neuroimaging studies (Blumenfeld-Katzir et al., 2011, Sampaio-Baptista et al., 2013), as well as knockout mouse models (McKenzie et al., 2014), shows that WM demonstrates dynamic, experience-dependent plasticity that contributes to learning in the adult brain.

In the next sections, we will discuss possible cellular mechanisms of WM plasticity, such as new myelin formation, changes in myelin thickness, internode length modulation, and alterations in the nodes of Ranvier. We will also summarize activity-dependent myelination mechanisms that might underlie experience-dependent changes in the adult brain. Finally, we will review the current evidence from human and animal models that provides support for WM plasticity in response to learning and experience during adulthood.


Cellular Mechanisms of White Matter Plasticity

Experience-dependent WM plasticity requires mechanisms through which activity along an axon can alter the structural properties of that axon. For this process to be relevant to learning, these alterations in structure would in turn be associated with changes in the functional properties of the axon, giving rise to alterations in behavior. As discussed above, alterations in the structural properties of the axon, such as myelin, axon diameter, or internode length, give rise to changes in physiological properties such as conduction speed, which will have relevance to behavior (Fields, 2015).

To date, most work on WM plasticity has focused on activity-dependent changes in myelination, though changes in other properties, such as nodes of Ranvier or internode length, may potentially play a role (Ford et al., 2015). Alterations in myelin may occur through changes in myelin thickness by pre-existing oligodendrocytes, or by new myelin formation through differentiation of OPCs into new oligodendrocytes.


Oligodendrocyte Precursor Cells in the Adult Brain

OPCs are a subtype of glial cells that have the capacity to differentiate into myelin-forming oligodendrocytes (and A–2C). During the postnatal period, many OPCs differentiate and develop into oligodendrocytes (Kessaris et al., 2008), but a significant number remain as OPCs into adulthood. It is estimated that around 5% of the total cells in the adult rat brain are OPCs (Dawson et al., 2003). NG2-positive cells have also been identified in the human brain (Chang et al., 2000), with suggestions that OPCs might represent 10%–15% of total human glial cells (Staugaitis and Trapp, 2009). These OPCs have the potential to proliferate, differentiate, and form new myelinating oligodendrocytes in adulthood (Hughes et al., 2013, Young et al., 2013) (and A–2C). Indeed, rodent studies show that more than 20% of myelinating oligodendrocytes present in the adult brain are adult-born (Rivers et al., 2008).

A subclass of OPCs can fire electric impulses. Although it is not clear what function is served by these spikes, it has been proposed that they provide a cell-wide signal that can be used to detect active axons and guide myelination (Fields, 2008, Káradóttir et al., 2008). It has also been demonstrated that OPCs extend their cellular processes to synapses (Bergles et al., 2000) in gray matter and to nodes of Ranvier in WM (Butt et al., 1999, Serwanski et al., 2017), suggesting OPCs might monitor action potentials at these sites.


Forming New Myelin during Adulthood

Recently matured oligodendrocytes establish all their myelin segments within a few hours in in vitro and in vivo zebrafish models (Czopka et al., 2013, Watkins et al., 2008). Although this suggests a short time window for segment formation, there is evidence that occasional segment retractions can occur after this period (Czopka et al., 2013) and that myelin thickness within each segment can be altered. For instance, in response to conditional upregulation of a cellular signaling pathway, preexisting oligodendrocytes of adult mice globally increased myelin thickness, resulting in faster nerve conduction velocity and enhanced hippocampal-dependent emotional learning (Jeffries et al., 2016). Although it is unclear why a global myelin change should be associated with such a specific behavioral improvement (no changes in motor learning or object recognition were detected), this finding provides evidence that preexisting oligodendrocytes in the adult brain retain the ability to regulate myelin thickness (F). Additionally, mechanisms have been identified by which myelin thickness changes can be achieved by preexisting oligodendrocytes (Flores et al., 2008, Snaidero et al., 2014). In fact, it has been suggested that the majority of myelin remodeling occurring in the adult human brain is carried out by preexisting oligodendrocytes: 14C analysis of human brain revealed only a small number of new oligodendrocytes a few years after birth, but on the other hand, new and contemporary myelin could be detected. This finding could be related to renewal of myelin sheaths or to protein exchange in stable myelin sheaths (Yeung et al., 2014). This suggests that preexisting oligodendrocytes continually form new myelin and that new adult-born oligodendrocytes are less common in the human brain in comparison to the findings that 20% of the oligodendrocytes present in the adult rodent brain are adult-born (Rivers et al., 2008). It is not clear if the different conclusions of these two studies stem from a difference in species (humans versus nonhuman species) or due to the cell labeling methods employed.

Overall, there is accumulating evidence that newly formed oligodendrocytes and preexisting oligodendrocytes remodel myelin in the adult brain. This can be potentially altered by experience, and myelin thickness changes have been reported in relation to social isolation or neuronal stimulation studies (Gibson et al., 2014, Liu et al., 2012) (F). However, it is not known if this is due to myelin remodeling by preexisting oligodendrocytes or if newly formed oligodendrocytes simply form thicker myelin in response to experience.


Activity-Dependent Modulation of Myelination

Which signals guide myelin modulation, and do any of these guiding signals support the idea of activity-dependent modulation of myelin? Oligodendrocytes do not wrap astrocytes or dendrites (Althaus et al., 1984, Zalc and Fields, 2000), as dendrites inhibit myelin-guidance adhesion molecules, resulting in lack of myelination in these cell regions (Redmond et al., 2016). Fiber caliber is one determinant of myelination: oligodendrocytes can wrap around carbon fibers larger than 0.4 μm in the absence of electrical activity or axonal signaling, but myelination in such cases has previously been found to be abnormal and not well compacted (Althaus et al., 1984, Lubetzki et al., 1993). However, recent evidence suggests that oligodendrocytes can form compact myelin sheaths even in the absence of molecular axonal cues, and furthermore that sheath length depends not on properties of the fiber but on the regional origin of the oligodendrocyte (brain versus spinal cord) (Bechler et al., 2015).

Still, it has been proposed that myelination is modulated at least in part by axonal activity (Demerens et al., 1996, Ishibashi et al., 2006, Mensch et al., 2015, Stevens et al., 1998, Stevens et al., 2002, Wake et al., 2011). Most evidence of activity-dependent regulation of myelination comes from developmental studies. For instance, in vitro studies demonstrated that increases in neuronal activity, either by high-frequency stimulation or pharmacological manipulation, result in increased myelin sheath formation and myelin compaction within 2–14 days (Demerens et al., 1996, Ishibashi et al., 2006, Stevens et al., 1998), while low-frequency stimulation inhibits myelination compared to no stimulation (Stevens et al., 1998). A recent in vivo developmental study in zebrafish shed new light on mechanisms that direct myelination to specific axons, establishing that neuronal activity is important both for the appropriate selection of specific axons for wrapping and for myelin stabilization (Hines et al., 2015). While oligodendrocytes initiated wrapping of large caliber axons even in the absence of neuronal activity, resulting myelin sheaths were only maintained on active axons (Hines et al., 2015) (D–1G). In these studies, a modest increase in OPC number was also seen with increased activity (Hines et al., 2015). The above developmental studies suggest that myelination can be bidirectionally altered by neuronal activity during development.

To what extent may similar mechanisms persist into adulthood? A recent study reported that optogenetic stimulation of secondary motor cortex of adult mice increases OPC proliferation within 3 hr and results in increased myelin thickness and behavioral effects 4 weeks later (Gibson et al., 2014). These effects were not seen in a control group that did not express channelrhodopsin but received the same type of light stimulation. Controlling for light stimulation is important, as it has been demonstrated that stimulation alone, even in the absence of the light-sensitive channels, results in increased blood flow (Rungta et al., 2017). However, further evidence and replication are needed to effectively demonstrate a direct relationship between neuronal activity and myelination during adulthood.

The majority of studies in this area have assessed whether increasing activity results in increased myelination. Whether activity-dependent modulation of myelin can be bidirectional, such that reductions in activity result in reductions in myelin, remains an open question. The developmental zebrafish studies discussed above demonstrate that, in the absence of activity, new myelin is not maintained (Hines et al., 2015). During development, sensory deprivation leads to shortened myelin sheathes, resulting in reduced impulse conduction (Etxeberria et al., 2016). There are a few rodent studies of social isolation, which could theoretically be associated with lower neuronal activity, that indirectly suggest that lower brain activity results in lower myelination during both development (Makinodan et al., 2012) and adulthood (Liu et al., 2012).

In conclusion, current evidence suggests that oligodendrocytes are intrinsically programmed to myelinate large-caliber fibers (>0.4 μm) with inhibitory molecules preventing indiscriminate myelination of dendrites, while the regional origin of the oligodendrocytes influences the length of the internodes. On the other hand, external cues such as axon size and axonal activity can additionally regulate sheath length, number, and thickness, providing a mechanism by which the environment and behavior can fine-tune myelination. While most studies demonstrating neuronal activity-dependent regulation of myelin have been carried out in developmental models, at least one study has provided evidence of similar mechanisms occurring during adulthood (Gibson et al., 2014).


Axonal Sprouting and Changes in Nodes of Ranvier

Plasticity of axonal branching offers another route by which WM structure could be altered by experience, though this has not yet been demonstrated in brain WM (G). However, there are reports of axonal branching in spinal cord WM in response to injury (Bradbury and McMahon, 2006).

Given the lack of available data on this potential plasticity mechanism in WM, it is of interest to consider the literature on gray matter as a source of inspiration for future studies of WM plasticity. Learning and experience have long been associated with dendritic and synaptic changes in gray matter though changes in axonal branching have been investigated far less extensively. In vivo chronic imaging of axons in the adult brain shows that, without experimental perturbation, subtypes of intracortical axonal branches can grow and retract several tens of micrometers over a few days (De Paola et al., 2006). There is some, albeit limited, evidence that cortical axons also extend or retract in response to experience (Hihara et al., 2006). For instance, a qualitative study suggested that axonal projections increase within the intraparietal sulcus in monkeys that were trained to use tools compared to controls (Hihara et al., 2006). Spatial learning induces axonal branching in the hippocampal formation (Ramírez-Amaya et al., 2001). Axonal boutons, the terminals that contact dendritic spines and where synapses are situated, can rapidly reorganize in response to experience and neuronal activity (De Paola et al., 2006, Holtmaat et al., 2008, Nikonenko et al., 2003). Future work should assess whether the experimental manipulations suggested to evoke axonal branching in gray matter produce any measurable change in WM or plasticity of long-range axonal projections.

Nodes of Ranvier, internode length, and changes in ion channel density are other features of the myelinated axon that impact conduction speed and can potentially be modulated by experience (I and 2E). For instance, a recent study showed that changes in internode length and node of Ranvier specialization can be used to tune the arrival of action potentials along different length branches of the same axon (Ford et al., 2015). Node length has recently been shown to be more consistent within axons than between axons, and computational modeling demonstrates that variations in node length can modulate conduction speed by 20%, a similar magnitude to changes in myelin thickness or internode length (Arancibia-Cárcamo et al., 2017) (I and 2E). This suggests that modulation of node length along the length of an axon may offer a rapid and energy-efficient means to fine-tune axon-specific conduction speed.


Examples of White Matter Plasticity: Evidence from Human and Animal Studies

Non-invasive neuroimaging methods offer powerful approaches to study WM microstructure in vivo, and its change with experience, in both humans and animals. Consistent with studies in postmortem samples (Benes et al., 1994), in vivo imaging investigations have revealed that WM development continues well into adulthood (Giedd, 2004, Lebel and Beaulieu, 2011, Sexton et al., 2014, Sowell et al., 1999) and WM decline accelerates beyond middle age, around 50 years old (Burzynska et al., 2010, Lebel et al., 2012, Sexton et al., 2014). Beyond these age-related changes, there is growing evidence that experience results in dynamic changes in WM structure throughout the lifespan.


Imaging White Matter in the Human Brain

WM structure can be studied using non-invasive brain imaging techniques. The most commonly used approaches rely on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). For example, diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) is sensitive to self-diffusion of water molecules in tissue and will therefore be affected by alterations in local tissue microstructure. Typically, multiple different brain images are acquired using DWI, with each one sensitized to diffusion in a different direction in space. This provides, for each brain voxel, a series of measurements describing the amount of water diffusion measured along a particular direction in space. Mathematical models can be fit to those measurements, with the complexity of the possible models depending in part on the number of directions sampled. The most commonly used model is the diffusion tensor model (DTI), in which diffusion at each voxel is described by a tensor or ellipsoid. This allows for voxel-wise estimation of several useful model parameters, such as fractional anisotropy (FA), which estimates the directional dependence of the water diffusion, or mean diffusivity (MD), which estimates the average diffusion across all directions. In WM, water diffusion is highly directionally dependent as water diffuses more easily along the axis of a fiber bundle than across it, due to physical barriers such as cell membranes or myelin. As such, FA is modulated by several features, which we will collectively refer to as “white matter microstructure” (Zatorre et al., 2012). For instance, high axon packing density and low axon diameter translate into high FA values in organized WM due to high membrane density perpendicular to the axon (Takahashi et al., 2002, Zatorre et al., 2012). Although myelin is not necessary for anisotropy, FA is altered when myelin is absent or damaged, with the absence of myelin decreasing FA values up to 20% in mouse models (Beaulieu and Allen, 1994, Gulani et al., 2001).

DTI is very sensitive to changes in microstructure, but it has limitations. While the tensor model is useful in regions of highly coherent fiber structure, it is more difficult to interpret in areas with fiber crossing or complexity, where there is more than one fiber direction. In addition, DTI parameters are nonspecific since there is not a direct correspondence between a DTI-derived value and a WM cellular component. Recently, more specific diffusion acquisition and analysis techniques have been developed to bypass some of the traditional DTI limitations. For instance, one method, called “Axcaliber,” uses a model of intra-axonal and extra-axonal diffusion to estimate the average axon caliber and density in a particular voxel that typically would contain thousands of axons, potentially of varying sizes (Assaf et al., 2008, Barazany et al., 2009). Other techniques, such as neurite orientation dispersion and density (NODDI) (Zhang et al., 2012) and composite hindered and restricted model of diffusion (CHARMED) (Assaf and Basser, 2005), allow for an estimation of fiber dispersion, orientation, and density.

There has been considerable effort put into developing MRI techniques that are sensitive to more specific cellular components, particularly myelin. T1-weighted imaging is a non-quantitative type of structural image that has been traditionally used to extract information about volume, density, or thickness of gray matter. Interestingly, most of the contrast in T1-weighted images is provided by myelin and iron content (Stüber et al., 2014). T1 weighted/T2 weighted ratio images can be used to calculate “myelin maps” and facilitate the identification of cortical areas based on regional differences in myelin (Glasser and Van Essen, 2011). Moreover, high-resolution quantitative T1 or 1/T1 maps reflect myeloarchitecture in cortical areas (Eickhoff et al., 2005, Sereno et al., 2013, Tardif et al., 2015). While T1 maps seem to reflect myelin content in the cortex in high-resolution images (Stüber et al., 2014), this is yet to be validated in WM.

Magnetization transfer (MT) is another MRI technique that indirectly detects water bound to macromolecules such as lipids and proteins and is thus sensitive to myelin (Kucharczyk et al., 1994). MT ratio (MTR) imaging is a semi-quantitative technique that is calculated from an MT-saturated image and a non-MT-saturated image. MTR maps are found to correlate with myelin (Barkhof et al., 2003, Schmierer et al., 2004) and have a short acquisition time at relatively high resolution. However, this method, as with any non-quantitative or semi-quantitative method, has several disadvantages, including a lack of standardization across imaging centers, making it hard to compare results (for review, see Alexander et al., 2011). Quantitative MT (qMT), on the other hand, provides a better characterization of the underlying tissue than MTR and is more sensitive and specific to myelin (Schmierer et al., 2007, Sled et al., 2004). For instance, it has been demonstrated that qMT is able to show regional differences in WM of healthy participants that are related to tissue myelination (Sled et al., 2004) and that qMT measures reflect myelination in multiple sclerosis (Schmierer et al., 2007). However, the higher specificity and sensitivity come at the expense of resolution, coverage, and scan time (Henkelman et al., 2001, Schmierer et al., 2008, Schmierer et al., 2010).

In conclusion, structural MR measures are nonspecific and multimodal approaches can provide a more detailed picture of the cellular mechanisms that underlie WM plasticity in humans. Recent developments in MRI acquisition and analysis techniques are now allowing for a more specific characterization of the underlying tissue and higher sensitivity, but more work is needed on validation and optimization of these methods. Such advances will greatly enhance our ability to interpret neuroimaging measures of WM plasticity in cellular terms.


White Matter Microstructure and White Matter Integrity: What Do They Mean?

In neuroimaging, WM microstructure is often used as a shorthand to refer to the WM features present at the microscopic level that can be indirectly measured by MR methods such as diffusion imaging. The specific features referred to will depend on the sensitivity of the method in question. For diffusion imaging, this would include, for example, axon diameter and density, fiber organization, myelin content, glial cells, and the condition or permeability of the membrane. As such, any change or group difference in a measure derived from diffusion imaging (e.g., FA, MD, radial diffusivity [RD], etc.) may reflect a change or difference in any of these underlying microstructural features. WM integrity is another commonly used term, typically used interchangeably with WM microstructure. However, as the term “integrity” (or rather its inverse) carries implications of pathology or degeneration, in this review we favor the expression “white matter microstructure” as most of the examples we will discuss are not from a pathological context.

There is extensive evidence from both humans and animal models that skill learning has an impact on WM. Environmental and social factors have mostly been investigated in animal models, and there is currently no clear evidence of their effects on WM of humans. Although less well demonstrated, lifestyle factors such as exercise and sleep have been found to correlate with WM measures and are potentially important mediators of WM plasticity during adulthood. In the following sections, we provide an overview of the main evidence for experience-dependent WM plasticity during adulthood.


Skilled Performance and Learning

Cross-sectional human neuroimaging studies have shown that WM microstructure correlates with skilled performance, with correlations typically localized in pathways that are functionally relevant to the skill. For instance, fractional anisotropy (FA) within a corpus callosum area that connects both motor cortices was found to correlate positively with performance in a novel bimanual task (Johansen-Berg et al., 2007). Such relationships can also be found for long-standing skills, honed after years of practice. For example, in pianists, FA within the internal capsule, which includes corticospinal tract fibers, was shown to correlate positively with the number of hours of musical practice during childhood (Bengtsson et al., 2005). Other motor activities such as dancing or typing (Cannonieri et al., 2007) have also been shown to have effects on WM. Although higher FA or WM volume has more often been associated with greater skill, some studies have found the opposite relationship. For instance, professional ballet dancers compared to controls were found to have lower gray matter, lower volume in the underlying WM, lower FA in WM areas underlying bilateral premotor cortex, and lower brain activation, which correlated with age of onset of dancing (Hänggi et al., 2010). While the functional findings fit with previous demonstrations that experts have reduced BOLD signal in brain areas associated with their expertise (Haslinger et al., 2004, Meister et al., 2005), the structural findings are more challenging to interpret. Variables such as amount of training, learning stage, or learning strategy might underlie some of the discrepancies between studies. For example, we have previously reported that amount of practice has differential effects on gray and WM structure (Sampaio-Baptista et al., 2014). In the cognitive domain, studies have demonstrated cross-sectional associations between WM microstructure and, for instance, memory (Charlton et al., 2010, Rudebeck et al., 2009), reading ability (Carreiras et al., 2009, Klingberg et al., 2000), grammar learning (Flöel et al., 2009), and mental rotation (Wolbers et al., 2006). These studies suggest that variation in WM structure may be due in part to experience-dependent plasticity. However, due to the nature of the design, cross-sectional studies are unable to distinguish between experience-dependent structural changes and pre-existing structural conditions that determine behavior and performance.

Longitudinal studies, which are able to test directly for experience-driven changes in WM structure, have provided some evidence that learning can induce structural plasticity in WM in humans. For example, 6 weeks of juggling practice resulted in increases in FA in WM tracts that co-localized with increases in gray matter areas that are related to reaching and grasping movements (Scholz et al., 2009). Similarly, working-memory training increased in FA in parietal fibers (Takeuchi et al., 2010) while visual perception learning increased FA in tracts underlying the visual cortex in older adults, but not younger (Yotsumoto et al., 2014). Such changes can happen remarkably quickly—for example, just 2 hr of training in a car racing game that required navigational skills resulted in immediate decreases in mean diffusivity (MD) in the fornix, a WM pathway associated with the hippocampus (Hofstetter et al., 2013).

Most such studies have reported that training results in increased FA or decreased MD, a pattern typically associated with increased myelin or increased packing density of a fiber bundle. However, changes in the opposite direction have also been reported. For example, participants that trained in a whole-body balancing task showed decreases in FA and a negative correlation between FA changes and performance in prefrontal areas (Taubert et al., 2010). This highlights a challenge in interpreting measures such as FA, which do not show a straightforward relationship to the underlying fiber architecture or tissue properties. In this case, the decrease in FA was interpreted as being due to changes in areas of crossing fibers, where, for example, selective strengthening of a minor fiber population in a crossing fiber region could result in a decrease in FA (Taubert et al., 2010).

As diffusion metrics such as FA are modulated by many different WM features, such as myelin, axon diameter, and axonal density, it is not possible to pinpoint the cellular events that are changing the diffusion signal in these studies. Recently, rodent studies have used a combination of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques and histology to shed light on the cellular mechanisms of WM plasticity in learning (Blumenfeld-Katzir et al., 2011, Sampaio-Baptista et al., 2013). For example, we recently reported higher FA and myelin expression in a rat model of motor learning (Sampaio-Baptista et al., 2013). Additionally, greater myelination, as shown by immunohistochemistry, was related to better performance in the task (Sampaio-Baptista et al., 2013). The apparent importance of myelin plasticity in this motor learning paradigm is consistent with a recent study using a conditional transgenic mouse model to provide causal evidence that new myelin is required for novel motor learning (McKenzie et al., 2014). New evidence suggests that oligodendrocyte plasticity might even play a role in the very first hours of skill acquisition. Preventing the differentiation of new oligodendrocytes resulted in a deficit in complex wheel running within 3 hr (Xiao et al., 2016). Additionally, maturation of new OL was found to be increased in WM within the same time frame in response to experience in the complex wheel (Xiao et al., 2016).

Beyond the motor domain, a role for myelin plasticity in learning was also found in a prior neuroimaging study that used a spatial navigation task (Blumenfeld-Katzir et al., 2011). However, a correlation between FA and immunohistological measures of myelin expression could not be established in any of the above neuroimaging studies. This might be due to the complexity of the FA signal. A recent study using composite hindered and restricted model of diffusion (CLARITY) and whole-brain immunolabeling along with the diffusion tensor model (DTI) demonstrated that myelin basic protein (MBP) correlates with FA in WM regions with coherent fiber orientations and low fiber dispersion, but not in areas of crossing or complex fiber architecture (Chang et al., 2017). It is possible that myelin is but one aspect of the WM that has undergone plasticity and FA is capturing the sum of all changes in WM microstructure. Further studies using other techniques, such as electron microscopy, could potentially clarify if other events such as axonal diameter changes (H) are also contributing to FA changes (see for discussion).


What Cellular Changes Are Most Likely to Underlie Neuroimaging Findings of White Matter Plasticity?

When speculating about the cellular changes that are most likely to underlie neuroimaging findings of WM plasticity, a number of questions need to be considered, including the following: What tissue properties are the neuroimaging metrics in question sensitive to? What cellular changes are plausible consequences of the experimental manipulation being studied? What are the likely cellular contents of our imaging voxels?

In response to this last question, a recent report attempted to estimate, using confocal imaging of immunofluorescent markers of cell bodies and electron microscopy, the composition of such a volume (Walhovd et al., 2014). The authors estimated that a volume of 100 × 100 × 100 μm of rodent WM contains between 1,000 and 13,000 axons, plus an average of 86 oligodendrocytes, 22 astrocytes, 6.5 OPCs, and 9.5 microglia; astrocytes’ processes and oligodendrocytes were found to each cover 48% of the assessed area. The authors extrapolated that a 2 × 2 × 2 mm voxel, commonly used in human diffusion imaging studies, and assuming similar axon density in humans and rodents, would contain between 0.5 and 5 million axons, 700,000 oligodendrocytes, 185,000 astrocytes, 52,000 OPCs, and 76,000 microglia. The authors acknowledge, however, that these estimates should be considered with caution since there is not a linear relation to total brain volume and little is known about how these cell sizes and densities scale across species. For instance, it has been reported that human astrocytes are two times bigger and occupy a larger volume than those in rodents (Herculano-Houzel, 2014). Thus astrocytes (D), along with myelin and oligodendrocytes, would be expected to make a large contribution to any voxel measurements in humans (Walhovd et al., 2014).

Considering the few studies that have combined WM MRI and histological measures in relation to learning and experience, myelination has been consistently been found to be involved (Blumenfeld-Katzir et al., 2011, Sampaio-Baptista et al., 2013), though few alternative cellular changes have been quantified for comparison. These studies are unable to distinguish between de novo myelination and myelin remodeling by preexisting oligodendrocytes. Considering the small number of OPCs present in each voxel, it is more likely that the main contribution to the FA changes is related to preexisting oligodendrocyte remodeling, such as change in internode length and/or thickness. Although de novo myelination from recently differentiated OPCs has been found to be important for motor acquisition (McKenzie et al., 2014, Xiao et al., 2016), it is likely to have a small contribution to the neuroimaging findings in human studies. Future studies using the same transgenic strains have the potential to clarify and estimate the real contribution of de novo myelination to the MRI measures. Timescale is a crucial factor in assessing the contributions of each myelin-related mechanism. For instance, with long timescales, such as weeks or months, the potential contribution of de novo myelination to the MRI signal is longer, as more time would be available for OPC proliferation, differentiation, and myelination. Additionally, changes in nodes of Ranvier size are functionally important (Arancibia-Cárcamo et al., 2017), but studies estimating their impact on neuroimaging measures are lacking.

As mentioned above, astrocytes’ contribution to the overall signal is likely to be significant given the large volume they occupy (Walhovd et al., 2014). There are few neuroimaging studies that have assessed DTI changes in relation to changes in astrocytes, and they are mainly in gray matter (Blumenfeld-Katzir et al., 2011, Johansen-Berg et al., 2012, Sagi et al., 2012). Future studies of WM plasticity should consider assessing the contribution of astrocytes relative to axons and myelin, and assessing astrocyte function in the context of learning and experience.


Environmental and Social Factors

Social and physical environments affect WM structure not only during development, but also in adulthood, though evidence of exactly what properties of the WM are altered by these environmental effects is mixed. For instance, 4-month-old rats (roughly equivalent in age to human young adults) housed in an enriched environment for 2 months were found to have a higher area of unmyelinated axons and glial cells in the corpus callosum (Markham et al., 2009). This study suggests that myelination may be less sensitive to experience in adulthood. However, a different study reported an increase in volume of myelinated fibers and myelin sheaths in the corpus callosum with 4 months of environmental enrichment in 14-month-old rats (equivalent in age to human older adults) (Zhao et al., 2012). The discrepancy between the studies might be due to differences in the age of the animals as well as to the duration of enrichment exposure.

Social experience seems to play a particularly important role in myelination of the prefrontal cortex. For example, studies in mice suggest there is a critical period for social experience to induce normal prefrontal cortex myelination very early in life (Makinodan et al., 2012). However, later experience can then alter prefrontal myelin: 8 weeks of social isolation in adulthood was found to decrease myelin thickness in the gray matter of mouse prefrontal cortex but had no effects in the corpus callosum (Liu et al., 2012).


Lifestyle Factors: Exercise and Sleep

Our lifestyle choices are increasingly recognized to influence our cognitive health throughout life (Peel et al., 2005). Consistent with this, there is growing evidence of associations between lifestyle factors and measures of brain structure and function (Erickson et al., 2014, Jackson et al., 2016). Aerobic exercise has been extensively reported to have an impact on gray matter volume of the hippocampus as measured by neuroimaging (Erickson et al., 2011, Thomas et al., 2016), but the underlying cellular drivers for gross changes following exercise interventions detected using neuroimaging remain unclear. Animal studies provide consistent evidence that exercise increases neurogenesis and angiogenesis within the hippocampus (van Praag et al., 1999a, van Praag et al., 1999b). One human study demonstrates increased blood volume in the same region after an exercise intervention (Pereira et al., 2007). But another study reported that an increase in hippocampal volume was more consistent with an increase in myelin than with an increase in vasculature in an exercise study using a range of multi-modal imaging metrics (Thomas et al., 2016).

There are also a few reports of associations between physical activity and WM structure. For instance, cross-sectional studies suggest a correlation between WM structure and amount of physical activity in older adults (Burzynska et al., 2014, Tian et al., 2015). A recent meta-analysis of 29 studies reported a small but significant positive association between physical activity and measures of WM structure (Sexton et al., 2016). The potential relevance of this association is highlighted by a recent study reporting that WM microstructure mediates the relationship between fitness and cognitive performance in older adults (Oberlin et al., 2016). In this study, a mediation analysis showed that fitness levels were associated with higher FA in WM, which, in turn, may help to preserve spatial memory performance in older adulthood (Oberlin et al., 2016). There is also some longitudinal evidence that 6 months of exercise results in increases in the volume of the anterior corpus callosum in elderly adults (Colcombe et al., 2006), while a 1 year intervention didn’t result in microstructural changes in WM (Voss et al., 2013). Rodent studies suggest that running promotes OPC proliferation and differentiation in gray and WM regions (Ehninger et al., 2011, Matsumoto et al., 2011, McKenzie et al., 2014, Simon et al., 2011), which might partially contribute to changes in WM or myelin measures seen in humans.

Another lifestyle factor that may influence cognitive and brain measures is sleep. Sleep is present across animal species and is thought to be necessary for neural network homeostasis (Tononi and Cirelli, 2003), learning, and memory consolidation (Maquet, 2001). It is well established that sleep is important for motor consolidation in humans (Fischer et al., 2002, Walker et al., 2002) and rodents (Gulati et al., 2014, Hanlon et al., 2009) and that slow waves during sleep reflect the recent neuronal activation and synaptic plasticity (Tononi and Cirelli, 2006). A recent study has found a correlation between WM variation and individual sleep oscillations in healthy individuals (Piantoni et al., 2013), suggesting that the sleep oscillations could be related not only to local cortical networks, but also to long-range structural connectivity.

There is recent evidence that the awake-sleep cycle might play a role in WM maintenance (Bellesi et al., 2013). Some cross-sectional human studies have reported that insomnia is associated with lower FA in WM regions (Li et al., 2016, Spiegelhalder et al., 2014). Rodent studies show that OPC proliferation increases during sleeping hours while differentiation is higher during the awake period (Bellesi et al., 2013). It is possible that abnormal sleeping patterns interrupt the proliferation phase of the OPCs that might play a role in myelin maintenance. However, cross-sectional studies cannot clarify if lower FA is caused by abnormal sleeping patterns or vice versa. Longitudinal studies are necessary to investigate if an improvement in sleeping patterns, for instance through pharmacological interventions, can result in a positive change in WM structure.


Conclusions

These are exciting times for the field of WM plasticity, with enormous opportunity for fundamental new discovery. There is mounting evidence that WM change plays an important and previously neglected role in learning and plasticity throughout life. Recent years have seen particular advances in our understanding of activity-dependent myelination. Progress has been accelerated in part through methodological advances. These include methods for manipulating brain circuits, for example through optogenetic stimulation; techniques for interfering with key cellular processes, such as transgenic or pharmacological manipulation; and new approaches for monitoring WM, like in vivo imaging in animal models as well as in living humans.

Such rapid advances in our understanding give rise to scores of fundamental unanswered questions. For example, is activity along an axon sufficient to drive myelin plasticity or do myelin changes depend on “learning” (i.e., plasticity at the synapse) occurring? If the latter, then what signals allow for synaptic plasticity to be communicated to the oligodendrocytes? Do particular types of activity preferentially drive myelin plasticity? To what extent do changes in other features of the myelinated axon, such as axon diameter or node length, alter with experience or learning? Are local changes in myelin used to regulate signal timing across distributed circuits? If so, then what signals communicate effective synchronization back to the oligodendrocyte? Can activity-dependent process decrease, as well as increase, myelination?

Addressing these questions requires investigations that span across scales. Continued technological advances will help to fuel these investigations. For example, advances in automated methods for volumetric reconstruction of tissue at ultrastructural resolution (Briggman and Bock, 2012), alongside efforts to build models to translate between MRI signals and microscopy (Chen et al., 2013, Stüber et al., 2014), will help both to push the boundaries of investigation and to relate evidence across scale. Such cross-scale opportunities bring us closer to bridging the gap between fine-grained molecular mechanisms of WM plasticity and understanding the role it plays in complex behavior and learning.


Perceived effort for motor control and decision-making

Ignasi Cos — PLoS Biology, 2017. PMC5576751, CC BY 4.0.

How effort is internally quantified and how it influences both movement generation and decisions between potential movements are 2 difficult questions to answer. Physical costs are known to influence motor control and decision-making, yet we lack a general, principled characterization of how the perception of effort operates across tasks and conditions. Morel and colleagues introduce an insightful approach to that end, assessing effort indifference points and presenting a quadratic law between perceived effort and force production.


How much effort is effortful?

Because of the redundancy of the motor system, movements aimed at a target may vary in different ways, with adjustments to duration, curvature, or path length made as a function of the task condition. When there is a defined target to reach for, farther targets require movements of longer duration and by extension, presumably, of greater effort. However, experimental data has also shown that when the target is ambiguous, movement duration remains relatively constant regardless of distance, therefore implying an increase of movement intensity to preserve temporal duration. But do these strategies obey a principle bound to minimize subjective effort?

The perception of effort is a major constraint for movement generation and also for deciding between potential movements, and its abnormal perception is a relevant hallmark for a broad set of disorders such as depression, chronic fatigue, Parkinson’s, or Huntington’s disease. However, the main hurdle in grasping the specifics of effort is that it cannot be directly assessed. We can objectively measure the metabolic energy consumption associated with performing a movement as well as its relationship with specific choices of movement parameters and with decisions between movements. Furthermore, metabolic energy, movement proficiency, and subjectively perceived effort are known to be interrelated, as studies of motor learning often report that movements become energetically more efficient and are perceived as less tiring as athletic proficiency increases. However, despite all the evidence, we still lack a general formalism capable of describing how effort is globally perceived and how it relates to behavior across tasks and conditions.

Research by Morel and colleagues published in PLOS Biology has shed light on this matter by introducing a novel paradigm to assess perceived effort by probing participants’ choices between resistive movements of different costs. They asked human participants to compare 2 different actions and to choose the least effortful one, while moving the handle of a robotic manipulator that resisted the participants’ applied force. The authors dissected space and time by establishing 2 main results: first, duration, not distance, increases the perception of effort on resistive reaching movements; second, the relationship between the force exerted and its associated perceived effort follows a quadratic law.

The first result is consistent with previous evidence showing that energy-related costs are influential in deciding between movements, sometimes even when these costs are detrimental to task performance. In addition, their results also suggest that the previously recorded influence of distance on decisions between movements is likely to be caused by the adjustments to movement duration rather than by distance per se. Whether these results generalize to other movements remains to be established, as their results are constrained to resistive reaching movements.


Optimal movement: From energy to utility

A first hypothesis that relates movement parameters and decisions to energy postulates the optimization of metabolic energy. For example, the metabolic energy of unconstrained reaching has been determined to be an increasing function of distance and a convex function of time, therefore predicting that the optimal movement duration increases with distance and with temporal discounting. Although this may be consistent with experimental observations in some cases, optimizing energy alone cannot explain why other criteria exert a significant influence on movement. First, it is well known that large rewards yield faster movements. Second, some movement parameters, such as the optimal duration for an isometric force contraction, cannot be determined by optimizing energy alone, as energy in this case increases linearly with duration and intensity. Finally, the many formulations of the rate of consumption of metabolic energy for different kinds of movements and conditions strongly suggest that a criterion of movement optimality based on metabolic energy alone is unlikely.


Box 1. Definitions.

Utility: measure of desirability for 1 option/movement, quantified by the difference of benefits and costs.

Temporal discount: devaluation of benefits and costs due to the passage of time, e.g., US$10 is not worth the same if delivered immediately as after 1 year.

Effort discount: devaluation of the benefit associated with an option due to its associated effort expenditure.

Indifference point: Specific level of desirability at which 2 options are reported to be perceived as evenly desirable.

Isometric force contraction: contraction during which the muscles involved are held at a constant length.

By contrast, reviewing movement in the context of embodiment necessarily introduces the notion of goal directedness, thereby leading to the second hypothesis of effort discounting. Importantly, decisions in this context are not driven by the subjectively perceived effort of each option alone but rather by their utility, i.e., the difference between perceived benefits and costs. In other words, if movement is a necessary component of behavior, the specifics of movement should also abide by wagers of benefits and costs aimed at attaining a more favorable state. The supporting evidence is that decisions between movements hinge on the constituent parameters of movements themselves and that generative models implementing this process, which quantify effort as a negative benefit, can be fit to a broad set of movement parameters and decisions between them. Following this line of thought, Morel and colleagues show that models of decision-making assessing the logarithmic difference of the efforts associated with each movement option provide a significantly better fit of the subjects’ choices than those assessing the inverse of efforts, which is consistent with the notion of effort acting as a negative discount in the utility space. The negative discounting of effort reported by Morel and colleagues could therefore be viewed as the part of the subjective perception of effort that effectively influences motor control and decision-making. As an example, shows a set of utility curves plotted as functions of movement time, resulting from the optimization of the utility associated with unconstrained, free reaching movements. In this case, trading benefits and costs yields an optimal movement time T*, which increases with distance and decreases with reward and discount. Complementary to this, the results of Morel and colleagues go one step further in that their analysis extends to movements performed with a haptic manipulator that resists movement, consequently magnifying the influence of effort. Consistently with this, while the subjective effort of force production has been previously characterized as quasilinear in the case of isometric contraction, the results of Morel and colleagues provide compelling evidence that the relationship between force and effort in resistive reaching movements obeys a quadratic law. In summary, this suggests that for the same force exerted, resistive reaching is perceived as more effortful than isometric contraction and that the principles of effort perception are not well understood.


Biomechanics, utility, and decision-making

Biomechanical costs are movement expenditures caused by the structure of the motor apparatus and have been reported by Morel and colleagues insofar as outward movements were perceived as being more costly than inward ones. Although we cannot access the perception of these costs, their manifestation in the selection of motor parameters and between movements is also compliant with the same principle of utility optimization.

Morel and colleagues determined that logarithmic differences of effort best fitted the subjects’ patterns of decision-making. Complementary to this, I next show an example of decisions between movements of different biomechanical cost being predicted by utility. To this end, I used a generative model and incorporated the cost of moving along each direction of movement as the subjective perception of effort (or effort discounting). Utility is therefore a function of 3 parameters (bottom): the scaling of reward (ρ), the sensitivity to effort (ε), and the temporal discount (γ). These were fitted to the times of experimental movements extracted from previous experiments in which subjects chose between movements with different biomechanical costs (R2 = 0.90347; P = 5.62E−5). Next, the set of parameters obtained from fitting a metric purely of motor control (γ = 0.45, ε = 0.61, ρ = 25) was used to predict the pattern of experimentally observed movement preferences as a difference of the predicted utility of each movement.

Although the analysis is based on group-averaged data, the predicted pattern of decision-making matches the experimentally observed choices, thereby reinforcing a unified view of the role of perceived effort in motor control and decision-making, which extends from biomechanical costs to more elaborate forms of effort.


Conclusion

Morel and colleagues have performed experiments aimed at characterizing how physical effort is perceived subjectively by asking subjects to decide between movements that differ incrementally in cost and quantifying the influence of the subjective perception of effort on these decisions. Their results show that despite the increase in mechanical work associated with movements with longer path lengths, the perceived effort associated with these movements does not vary if their duration remains constant. By contrast, movements of longer durations are perceived as more effortful regardless of path length. In other words, only time—and not distance—increases the perception of effort, strongly suggesting that effort is most likely integrated over time. Moreover, their results also suggest that the formulation relating moving force amplitude to perceived effort follows a quadratic law. This is the first specific formulation of moving force amplitude for transport movements, which diverges from the linear relationship observed for isometric force contractions.

In conclusion, the results of Morel and colleagues strongly argue against the idea that metabolic energy is the common determinant of both motor control and decisions between actions, as energy increases linearly with time and depends both on force and speed of contraction. By contrast, a more elaborate conceptualization of control costs centered around the notion of perceived effort seems increasingly likely. Thus, viewing effort perception from the perspective of effort discounting provides a unified framework from which to study the subjective perception of effort—one in which motor-control theory and decision-making can be directly related. The study of effort perception viewed as effort discounting has proceeded incrementally from metabolic energy to effort discounting and utility, thereby establishing a principled backbone for relating motor-control theory to decision-making. However, further research is required to find a general formulation of effort perception that encompasses many different tasks and conditions. Consequently, a future challenge will be to find independent measures of effort that can dissociate the subjective perception of effort and its sizeable influences on behavior.


A review of active learning approaches to experimental design for uncovering biological networks

Yuriy Sverchkov, Mark Craven, Haiyan Huang — PLoS Computational Biology, 2017. PMC5453429, CC BY 4.0.

Various types of biological knowledge describe networks of interactions among elementary entities. For example, transcriptional regulatory networks consist of interactions among proteins and genes. Current knowledge about the exact structure of such networks is highly incomplete, and laboratory experiments that manipulate the entities involved are conducted to test hypotheses about these networks. In recent years, various automated approaches to experiment selection have been proposed. Many of these approaches can be characterized as active machine learning algorithms. Active learning is an iterative process in which a model is learned from data, hypotheses are generated from the model to propose informative experiments, and the experiments yield new data that is used to update the model. This review describes the various models, experiment selection strategies, validation techniques, and successful applications described in the literature; highlights common themes and notable distinctions among methods; and identifies likely directions of future research and open problems in the area.


Introduction

Biological processes are complex, involving many interactions among elementary units. To describe such processes, a common representation is a network model. For example, gene regulatory networks (GRNs) describe activation and inhibition relationships among genes, metabolic networks describe which enzymes yield which metabolites in a metabolic pathway, etc. Such biological networks are often quite large, with GRNs containing thousands of genes, for example. Current knowledge of many such networks is largely incomplete, and the primary means of uncovering details of these networks is through laboratory experiments.

In order to design an experiment that effectively adds to current knowledge, it is necessary to understand the current state of knowledge, as well as to have an idea of what the outcome of the experiment will add. What outcomes are likely? What would one conclude from each outcome? When the biological network in question is complex, and when there is uncertainty about the details of the network, these questions become hard to answer. Furthermore, the number of potential experiments from which to choose is often quite large. For example, when considering single gene knockdown experiments, there are as many potential experiments as there are genes, and when considering double knockdowns, the number of possibilities is quadratic in the number of genes. It is this challenge that creates a need for computational solutions to experimental design. This review discusses various methods that address this problem by using algorithms for the selection of experiments.

Active learning approaches for uncovering biological networks are meant to solve the problem of designing experiments when human decision-making is less than optimal for the task. Active machine learning is a subfield of machine learning that studies algorithms that select the data they need for the improvement of their own models. In a standard machine learning setting, an algorithm learns some sort of model from a sample of data, and the model is subsequently used for one of a variety of purposes (classification, clustering, prediction, etc.). This can be viewed as a linear pipeline from data to some end application of that data. Active machine learning adds an iterative refinement process to the pipeline. In addition to the machine learning component that learns a model from data, there is a component that uses the model to characterize what sort of additional data would best improve the model further. We call this characterization a query. In the context of experimental design, the query specifies the manipulation to be performed in the experiment, such as which gene(s) to knock down in a knockdown experiment or what growth media to use in a growth experiment. The active learner selects a query that would be most informative for improving the model. In response to the query, new data, such as measurements performed under the conditions specified by the query, are used to update the model accordingly. This cycle can be repeated multiple times until the model is sufficiently accurate. This process forms the active learning loop.

In the particular setting of uncovering biological networks, the data is often gene expression data, but it can also be some other measurement of abundances of biological molecules involved in the network of interest or measurements of a reporter variable. The modeling component typically involves a mathematical representation of the network structure, often mirroring the believed causal relationships among the entities involved. Typically, the network inference process yields a collection of possible models that explain prior data equally well (or a distribution of models in which there are multiple likely models), and the challenge of improving the model is that of narrowing down this collection through additional experiments. The details of how this is accomplished depend on the modeling component (specifically, what the mathematical model is and how it is learned from data) and on some criterion or strategy to select experiments based on this model.

This review discusses a variety of works that fall in this category of approaches. The unique contributions of each work are highlighted throughout. Additionally, there are aspects that are present in all methods. First, there is the modeling component, which is essential in every machine learning and active machine learning method. There are many approaches to modeling biological networks in general. The methods we discuss are focused on either inferring a mathematical representation of the biological network from data or constructing it based on a combination of data and prior knowledge. The mathematical models we cover include models that represent variables as having discrete states (e.g., a gene being active or inactive) and models that represent variables as continuous quantities (e.g., protein abundances). Among those models, there are models with deterministic dynamics, wherein the value of one variable is a function of another, and models with stochastic dynamics, wherein the value of one variable is a random quantity sampled from a distribution that depends on the value of another variable. The biological networks covered by these methods include metabolic, signaling, and regulatory networks, as well as networks that describe combinations of these three groups of interactions.

Second, there are the queries that specify the experiments and the various types of responses to the queries. The types of possible queries correspond to various perturbations of the biological network that can be carried out in an experiment. These include changing the activity of specific genes, manipulating the abundances of specific proteins, changing the environment by specifying growth media, or applying some combination of these perturbations. The response to a query—the data collected in an experiment—also varies: it may be a multidimensional measurement that informs of the states of all or many of the entities in the model, such as a gene expression profile, or it may be a one-dimensional measurement, such as cell growth.

Third, there are the criteria for selecting experiments. The essential component that characterizes active machine learning is the criterion by which additional data (experiments) are selected to improve the model. Although the details of the experiment selection criterion are dependent on the particular model representation, there are some general themes that undergird all criteria. Ideally, the criterion selects experiments in such a way that the model can be most improved at the least cost. Each method discussed here uses a criterion based on either entropy, a difference between experimental outcomes, or an expected cost. The generalization of these common principles can direct future work, such as the application of active learning to new models.

Fourth, there is the approach to evaluating the methods. Ideally, to evaluate an active learning approach, one would run a sequence of active-learning-selected experiments and measure the cost (or number of experiments taken) to arrive at a sufficiently accurate model. However, it is typically impractical to do this for the purpose of merely testing the active learning strategy. Additionally, the true model of the biological system is unknown (hence the need for the method). This leads to two common approaches for evaluating active learning methods. One approach is to use some generative model to simulate a system that is like the biological system of interest and use these simulated experiments as input to the active learning method. An advantage of this approach is that the ground truth model is known, and it is easy to check the extent to which the model learned by the active learning algorithm matches the true generating model. Another approach is to use data from real, previously performed experiments. In this setup, data from an experiment is held out until the active learning algorithm proposes to perform that experiment, and the model performance is measured by how accurately it predicts the results of experiments it has not observed or how close the model is to one learned from all available data. In the case of biological networks, models learned from real data can also be validated by checking whether the information they represent matches previously discovered knowledge about the organisms studied. All of these approaches test the method without expending resources to actually perform new experiments.

Finally, a few of the methods discussed here have been applied in practice and validated against the literature or in lab experiments in terms of biological findings. In two cases, experiments were performed according to the algorithms' recommendations, and the experimental results led to gains in knowledge about the systems studied.


Mathematical notation

In mathematical formulae, we use lowercase, nonbold type for the atomic elements of sets, scalar values, and values taken by random variables; uppercase type for sets, random variables, and matrices; and bold type for vectors and matrices. We use ℙ to represent probabilities, f to represent probability density functions, and to represent expectations. The mathematical notation that refers to entities that appear in most methods is kept as consistent as possible throughout this review: m ∈ M represent models (or their closest equivalents); observed states are represented by x or its bold and uppercase variants, depending on whether states are seen as atomic set elements, vectors, or random variables within the context of a particular method; and similarly, e or its bold and uppercase variants represent experiments.

The structure of the remainder of this review is as follows. The reviewed works are divided into two categories that correspond the following two sections, "Active learning de novo" and "Active learning with prior knowledge." We discuss the previously enumerated aspects for the approaches within these sections, and following them, a discussion concludes the review.


Active learning de novo

This section summarizes methods that do not require prior knowledge for inferring networks. The focus in this literature is on the mathematical and computational aspects involved in active learning of biological networks. In such work, generality is considered an advantage, and indeed, most of the methods do not limit themselves to a specific biological domain or specific type of network (regulatory, metabolic, etc.). Value is placed on a method's ability to infer a model from data with minimal or no prior knowledge and expert input. However, note that a method's ability to incorporate prior knowledge (without being completely dependent on the availability of prior knowledge) is also considered a strength.

We group the methods reviewed by the representations used for the models, starting with a review of work by Ideker et al., who use the Boolean network representation. The conceptual simplicity of the Boolean network model makes it a good foundation upon which to build when discussing aspects of the other models. For this reason, our review of the work by Ideker et al. also serves as an introduction to concepts that are used in discussing other methods.


Boolean networks

Ideker et al. consider the task of learning a GRN. A node in the network may represent a gene or a stimulus, where a stimulus may be any factor that influences the network but is itself neither a gene nor a gene product. An edge in the network represents an influence of one gene on another, implicitly mediated by the product of the former gene, or the influence of a stimulus on a gene.

Inspired by the development of microarray technologies making global expression analysis feasible, Ideker et al. suppose that the available data consists of the expression levels of many (but not necessarily all) of the genes in the network. Each gene is represented by a variable, and the expression level of each gene is discretized into a Boolean value: 0 for low values indicating a repressed state, and 1 for high values indicating an activated state of the gene.

The Boolean variables representing the genes correspond to nodes in a directed acyclic graph (DAG) that forms the structure of a Boolean network. In a directed graph, nodes are connected by directed edges (usually represented by arrows when illustrated). We say that a directed edge points from a parent node to a child node. Hence, the parents of a node are all the nodes from which there are directed edges pointing directly to the node. A directed graph is a DAG if it contains no path that follows the directions of the edges and leads back to the node at which it started. The value of each node in the network is defined as a Boolean function of the values of its parents.

Ideker et al. developed a method for uncovering the structure and the Boolean functions of a network that describes the GRN of interest. The data available were gene expression measurements discretized to Boolean values. Global expression data from cells in an unperturbed steady-state yield a Boolean vector of 0s and 1s, with each element of the vector corresponding to a variable (gene or stimulus). There are many Boolean networks that are consistent with such a vector, but the underlying assumption is that one of these networks is the most accurate representation of the underlying biology. In order to uncover the most accurate network, additional data is needed (namely, expression data obtained from experiments in which the organism is perturbed). In such a perturbation, one or more of the genes or stimuli in the network are over- or under-expressed by the experimenter, effectively forcing the values of the manipulated variables to 1 (for over-expression) or 0 (for under-expression). Under the assumption that this perturbation does not change the dependencies that govern the unperturbed genes, the observations (Boolean vectors) produced by these experiments should also be consistent with the structure and functions of the Boolean network to be found. As the number of perturbation experiments grows, the number of Boolean networks that are consistent with all observations from all experiments decreases. The challenge of the task is not only to infer the most accurate network from a sequence of experiments but also to select the perturbations in a way that minimizes the number of experiments needed to infer the network.

Ideker et al. make explicit the division between these two tasks by describing two major components that make up their method: the “predictor,” which infers networks from data, and the “chooser,” which selects the next experiment in the sequence. The predictor takes as input a set of (Boolean) expression profiles and produces as output the set of networks that are both consistent with the profiles and have a minimal number of edges. That is to say that any network with fewer edges would necessarily be inconsistent with the data. See Ideker et al. for a detailed description of the predictor's operation.


The chooser and entropy as an experiment selection criterion

The chooser takes as input the set of candidate Boolean networks produced by the predictor along with a set of queries describing candidate experiments that could be performed and chooses one of those queries. A query for an experiment consists of the list of variables to be perturbed as well as the Boolean values to which these variables are to be set in the experiment. Conceptually, the best experiment is one whose outcome will most discriminate between the available set of networks. An experiment whose outcome is consistent with all candidate networks is least informative, while an experiment whose outcome is only consistent with one network is most informative.

More concretely, given a set M of candidate Boolean networks and a set of candidate perturbation experiments, the chooser does the following. For each candidate experiment e, the network state predicted to result from e is computed according to each network. The network state is an assignment of all the Boolean variables (genes) in the network to values according to the Boolean functions defining the network. A given perturbation e yields a total of Xe distinct states (indexed by x) over the networks (1 ≤ Xe ≤ |M|), and the number of networks that predicted state x is denoted by. The chooser selects the experiment e that maximizes the following entropy score He:

He can be viewed as the expected decrease in entropy or, equivalently, a measure of the information gained in performing experiment e. To better see how this is a useful measure, consider two extreme cases: one in which all networks yield the same outcome (network state), and one in which all networks yield different states in response to experiment e. The value of He is at its minimum (He = 0) in the former case and at its maximum (He = log2 |M|) in the latter, reflecting the intuition that the former experiment is not informative and the latter is maximally informative. Consequently, it is not surprising that entropy is widely used as an experiment selection criterion, both in the context of active learning for biological networks and in other domains of active machine learning.


The maximum difference criterion

Entropy is not the only criterion that might be used for selecting an experiment. Atias et al. propose an alternative approach, which stems from the idea of distinguishing between alternate best-fit models. The maximum difference criterion selects the experiment that yields maximally different states for some pair of models in the set of best-fit models.

The general problem setup considered by Atias et al. is similar to that considered by Ideker et al.: the given data consists of Boolean vectors representing gene expression profiles under a variety of conditions, the underlying model to be learned is a Boolean network, and the aim of the experiment selection strategy is to arrive at a single model after as few experiments as possible. Whereas Ideker et al. used their predictor, Atias et al. use an algorithm by Sharan and Karp for learning a Boolean network given experimental data. The Sharan and Karp algorithm solves an integer linear programming (ILP) optimization problem to find a Boolean network that is a best fit for the data available so far. Like the task faced by the predictor, this optimization problem typically has many equally optimal solutions.

Atias et al. use a modified version of the ILP to find a pair of models, m1 and m2, that solve the original optimization problem optimally and, additionally, find an experiment e that maximizes the difference between the network states that each model predicts for e. More precisely, let and be the binary vectors representing the states of the measurable variables predicted for experiment e by m1 and m2 respectively. The ILP Atias et al. use solves for the experiment e that optimizes

Here, since and are binary vectors, is the Hamming distance between them (the number of variables that are predicted to be different by m1 and m2).


Model evaluations

Ideker et al. evaluated their method by simulation, a common evaluation technique for active learning methods. They generated random networks to act as ground truth and simulated the unperturbed measurements, as well as the outcomes of all single-node perturbations. This set of measurements was the initial dataset given to the method. They then had the method choose a double-perturbation experiment, simulated the outcome of the experiment using the ground-truth network, and fed the result back for the method to iteratively propose the next experiment. This process was repeated until only a single network was consistent with the data.

Atias et al. compared the performance of their method to the entropy-based approach used by Ideker et al. Both simulated and real data evaluations were used for these experiments. Specifically, two models of signaling systems in humans were used as evaluation contexts: a Boolean model of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling constructed by Samaga et al., which contains 112 molecular species (Boolean variables with associated functions), and a Boolean model model of interleukin 1 (IL1) signaling created by Ryll et al. with 121 molecular species.

For simulated data experiments, the Boolean model (either EGFR or IL1) was used to generate Boolean vectors representing the measurements one would observe as a result of an experiment. Atias et al. generated a validation set for testing the performance of the methods. Any model that perfectly predicts the results of the validation set is considered an optimal model. The evaluation consisted of giving each method data from an initial pool of experimental results and measuring the number of additional experiments needed for each method to arrive at an optimal model.

For real data experiments, data published by Samaga et al. and Ryll et al. on phosphorylation levels under different cellular conditions in the two respective systems were used. For the EGFR system, the activity levels of 11 proteins were measured under 34 distinct conditions in Hep2G cells. For the IL1 system, the activity levels of 9 proteins were measured under 14 distinct conditions in primary hepatocytes. The evaluation consisted of starting each method with an initial subset of the available experiments and measuring the number of additional experiments selected from the pool of available experiments (34 for EGFR and 14 for IL1) that were needed to obtain a model as good as the one learned from all available experiments.

The maximum difference approach was found to perform better than the maximum entropy approach, and it was generally less sensitive to variation in the amount of initial data given and the number of unknown Boolean functions. Atias et al. reason that the maximum difference approach performed better because the entropy-based approach relied on estimation of the entropy from a sample of models, whereas the maximum difference approach was implemented using optimization over the full space of possible models.

The Boolean network representation used by Ideker et al. and Atias et al. is appealing in its simplicity and generality. However, one limitation is the representation's lack of robustness to noise in the data: observations are taken as binary values, and it is assumed that any model inconsistent with an observation must be rejected. In reality, measurements can be inaccurate and the outcomes of experiments may be influenced by uncontrolled factors. Thus, the inconsistency of a single observation with the model may not be sufficient reason to reject the model altogether. One approach to addressing the reality of noisy data is to explicitly model the outcomes of experiments as random variables. Probabilistic models do this, and one type of probabilistic model that has been applied to active learning of biological networks is the Bayesian network.


Causal Bayesian networks

Several approaches to active learning using causal Bayesian networks have been developed. A Bayesian network is a probabilistic graphical model that consists of a DAG whose nodes represent random variables X = X1,…,Xp. A Bayesian network is similar to a Boolean network in that the edges in the graph represent direct dependence between variables. The difference is that whereas in a Boolean network, the value of a variable is governed by a Boolean function of its parents in the graph, in a Bayesian network, the value of a variable is governed by a conditional distribution of that variable given the values of its parents in the graph. These conditional distributions may be multinomial if the variable is in a discrete domain or may be some continuous distribution if the variable is in a continuous domain. Taken together, the local conditional distributions in the Bayesian network describe a joint probability distribution over all the variables of the network. For discrete variables, the joint probability that the variables take the values corresponding to a particular instantiation x = x1,…,xp is

where Xpa(i) represents the subset of variables that are parents of Xi in the graph and xpa(i) represents the corresponding values that these variables take in instantiation x. Similarly, for continuous variables, the joint probability density of the variables at x is

Within the context of biological networks, the variables represent measurable quantities such as gene expression levels, as well as potential targets for perturbations such as gene silencing or overexpression.

There is extensive work on approaches to learning Bayesian networks from observational data; Daly et al. provide a broad review. The main challenge in learning Bayesian networks is that of learning the graph structure from data. There are two main categories of approaches to Bayesian network structure learning: constraint-based methods, wherein conditional independencies (CIs) in the data are used to constrain the structure, and score search methods, wherein the space of Bayesian network structures is searched for a structure that has the best score according to some criterion.

Using observational data, Bayesian network structures can be inferred up to Markov equivalence. This concept of equivalence stems from the idea that a Bayesian network graph structure carries information about dependence and independence between variables. Consider a Bayesian network with three variables, X1, X2, and X3. A structure of X1 → X2 → X3 describes a situation in which X1 is independent of X3 given X2, but marginally, X1 and X3 are not independent. The exact same independence also holds in two other network structures: X1 ← X2 → X3 and X1 ← X2 ← X3. Another network structure, X1 → X2 ← X3, implies a different independence relationship: here, X1 and X3 are marginally independent but are not independent given X2. The dependencies and independencies are key to determining how well a particular Bayesian network structure fits observational data. Because observational data is limited in that we can derive associations from it but not causal relationships, it generally cannot be used to distinguish between network structures that capture the same dependence relationships, for example, between X1 → X2 → X3, X1 ← X2 → X3, and X1 ← X2 ← X3. For this reason, such sets of Bayesian networks are called equivalent.

Markov-equivalent structures can differ in the causal relationships they imply. For example, in the network X1 → X2 → X3, perturbing node X1 yields a change in X2 and X3, but in X1 ← X2 ← X3, perturbing node X1 does not affect the other two nodes. For this reason, it is difficult to infer causal relationships from observational data alone. There is existing work on predicting the effects of perturbations based on observational data in large-scale biological systems. To uniquely determine a causal Bayesian network, however, perturbation experiments are needed.

According to a causal Bayesian network, a perturbation experiment changes the joint distribution of observations as follows. A perturbation at Xi affects only its descendants. More specifically, consider a perturbation or a randomized experiment E on a subset of variables XE: E ⊂ {1,…,p}. Effectively, under such an experiment, each variable Xi in the subset is made to follow some new distribution Ui, and the intervention yields the joint probability distribution

for discrete variables or the joint density

for continuous variables, where do(XE ∼ UE) denotes the perturbation. Using this formulation of the expected effect of a perturbation on the probability distribution of observations, structure learning methods can be extended to take advantage of perturbation data. Cooper and Yoo have presented a score for Bayesian networks of discrete variables, which has been extended to Bayesian networks of Gaussian random variables by Pournara and Wernisch. More recently, Rau et al. have presented an alternate method for scoring and efficiently searching for a best-fitting Gaussian Bayesian network from a mixture of observational and perturbation data for reconstructing regulatory networks.


Score-based active learning of causal Bayesian networks

Pournara and Wernisch present a score-based active learning method for learning Bayesian networks. The scores they use capture the property of transition sequence (TS)-equivalence, which is an extension to perturbation data of Markov equivalence. For example, the set of three-node DAGs X1 → X2 → X3, X1 ← X2 ← X3, and X1 ← X2 → X3 form a Markov equivalence class. A perturbation at X1 would affect X2 and X3 in the first structure but not in the latter two; thus, {X1 → X2 → X3} and {X1 ← X2 ← X3,X1 ← X2 → X3} form two TS-equivalence classes with respect to the sequence of perturbations {X1}. The scores used by Pournara and Wernisch capture the property of TS-equivalence by always scoring TS-equivalent networks equally. Moreover, these particular scores are Bayesian marginal likelihoods, which, under the assumption of uniform priors over network structures, are proportional to the posterior probabilities of the networks given the data (see for details).

Pournara and Wernisch use an entropy criterion for experiment selection, wherein the scores are used to define the probability distribution over which the entropy is calculated, as follows. Let represent all previously available observational and experimental data. From, infer the partition of the space of possible Bayesian network structures into TS-equivalence classes, score them, and (for purposes of tractability) keep only the n top-scoring classes. Each class indexed by q,(1 ≤ q ≤ n) is associated with the posterior probability Pq of a network in the class; recall that all the networks in the class have the same score. Let E represent an experiment under consideration. Without knowing the outcome of E, but knowing which variables are perturbed in experiment E, the TS-equivalence class q will be further partitioned into nq ≥ 1 TS-equivalence subclasses. Pournara and Wernisch define a loss function for experiment E as

The most informative experiment to select is the one under which this loss is minimized. Note that this loss function computes the negative of the entropy of the TS-equivalence classes, weighted by the model scores.

Pournara and Wernisch evaluated their method using simulated data, which were generated by Bayesian networks. One part of the evaluation compared their method to a previous method for active learning of Bayesian networks by Tong and Koller. The evaluation was performed using data generated by the Cancer network used by Tong and Koller, a discrete domain network with five variables. The evaluation showed that Pournara and Wernisch's method performed better in terms of L1 edge error, a measure of agreement with the true generative network. The measure is described in detail by Tong and Koller and Murphy.

A larger-scale evaluation compared Pournara and Wernisch's approach to a random experiment selection strategy using data from randomly generated discrete-domain networks with up to 10 nodes and continuous-domain networks containing up to 60 nodes. The results showed that the active learning strategy identified more causal relationships correctly, especially when fewer experiments had been performed.


Constraint-based active learning of causal Bayesian networks

He and Geng approach constraint-based active learning for Bayesian networks by considering the chain graph representations of equivalence classes. A chain graph is a graph that contains both directed and undirected edges, with the additional constraint that it contains no directed cycle. A Markov equivalence class of Bayesian networks can be represented by its essential chain graph, a graph that has the same skeleton as all the DAGs in the class. Each edge in the essential graph of a class is directed if and only if it is also directed in each DAG in the class. The task of identifying the causal DAG then becomes reframed as the task of correctly orienting all the edges in the essential chain graph. He and Geng show in a series of theorems how a randomized experiment (as described above) that perturbs a single node gives information about the orientation of undirected edges in the essential chain graph. They also show how similar orientation information can be obtained from quasi-experiments, in which a target variable may be affected by an experimenter but not perfectly isolated from its parents in the causal graph. Analogous to constraint-based graph structure learning, this yields a framework in which we can determine constraints on the graph structure by performing conditional independence tests on the observations that result from perturbations. In particular, a perturbation of the i-th variable Xi may yield one of n resultant edge orientations. An observation of orientation s ∈ {1,…,n} results in a reduced equivalence class containing DAGs.

For sequential experiments in which one variable is perturbed at a time, He and Geng propose two experiment selection criteria: a minimax criterion and an entropy criterion. The minimax criterion selects the variable Xi that minimizes. That is to say that it selects the perturbation such that the least informative experimental outcome for that perturbation is most informative as compared to the least informative outcomes from perturbing other variables. The entropy criterion selects the variable Xi that maximizes the entropy:

where. Selecting the variable to perturb that maximizes this score favors yielding small, equal-sized classes post-perturbation, which parallels the rationale behind the entropy criterion for Boolean networks. Note that, for large graphs, the number of possible postintervention orientations and the number of DAGs in each class make exact computation of the entropy infeasible, and the authors propose to randomly sample the space of DAGs to obtain an estimate of the quantity.

He and Geng also present a batch algorithm for proposing a set of single-node perturbations that would identify the causal graph at once, rather than by sequentially selecting experiments. The algorithm exhaustively searches all possible combinations of variables to perturb to identify the smallest set that would guarantee that only one DAG satisfies all edge orientations, in every possible outcome. This approach is also computationally intensive, since it requires one to compute every possible edge orientation that results from every possible single-node perturbation and, in the worst case, it iterates over the power set of variables.

He and Geng evaluated their algorithms on simulated data using a five-node graph as a generating model and found that the sequential methods are more efficient (require fewer experiments to determine the graph structure) than the batch algorithm. Among the sequential methods, they found that the entropy criterion is most efficient.

Hauser and Bühlmann similarly use the constraint-based framework. They present an alternative minimax criterion for sequentially selecting single-node perturbations. Denote by ε the set of perturbations performed thus far, each of which is a set E of indices of variables that are simultaneously perturbed in each intervention, and let Cε denote the equivalence class of DAGs that is consistent with those prior perturbations and the associated observations. Note that the initial state in which only observational data are available can be denoted by ε = {∅}. The proposed criterion selects

where ξ(C) is the number of undirected edges in the essential chain graph of the equivalence class C, and Cε∪{{j}}|G is the equivalence class that results when adding the outcome predicted by DAG G of the single-node perturbation of Xj. The rationale behind this criterion is based on the idea that undirected edges in the essential chain graph of an equivalence class are a measure of uncertainty. This criterion picks the single-node perturbation that would minimize the maximal (worst-case) number of undirected edges in the post-perturbation class. Here, worst-case is considered in terms of the the causal graph G in the pre-perturbation class Cε that would yield the most undirected edges post-perturbation if G were indeed the underlying causal model.

Hauser and Bühlmann also present a criterion for multiple-node interventions. This criterion computes a set of nodes

where ω(C) denotes the size of the largest undirected clique in the essential chain graph of class C. Similar minimax reasoning behind this criterion applies, with the additional intuition that large undirected cliques represent high uncertainty about the causal flow between the nodes in the clique. Hauser and Bühlmann also prove that maximally reducing the clique number after each perturbation yields full identifiability of the DAG with a minimal number of (multiple-node) perturbation experiments.

Hauser and Bühlmann evaluate their algorithms for optimizing these two objectives on simulated data from 4,000 randomly generated causal DAGs with p ∈ {10,20,30,40} nodes. Their results show that the single-node criterion recovers the DAG while perturbing the fewest number of nodes, while the multiple-node criterion recovers it using the fewest number of perturbation experiments (although, since multiple nodes are perturbed in each experiment, more nodes are perturbed in total).


Probabilistic temporal Boolean network

Dehghannasiri et al. apply the mean objective cost of uncertainty (MOCU) criterion for optimal experiment selection. Unlike other experiment selection criteria, MOCU is meaningful in the context of applying an intervention that may have undesirable outcomes. The motivation for this context is that of altering pathological phenotypes, a task of major interest in translational genomics. The objective is not simply to select experiments that are informative but to select experiments that would inform us in such a way that the probability of producing undesirable outcomes when using the model to select an intervention is minimized. MOCU can be generally computed when there is a distribution over states, some of which are undesirable.

Dehghannasiri et al. use probabilistic Boolean networks that model gene activity over time. Recall that Ideker et al. and Atias et al. use the Boolean network to model the steady state of the network directly. In contrast, Dehghannasiri et al. use the Boolean network as a discrete-time model of a GRN. In this context, the state of a gene at time t is a Boolean function of the states of its parents in the network at the previous time point t−1. The model is made probabilistic by further assuming that each variable has a small probability to take the value opposite to that which is governed by the Boolean function at each time point. This description of network dynamics is used to define the transition probabilities in a Markov chain and arrive at a steady-state distribution that describes the probability that a given gene is active at any given moment in the steady state.

Given the goal of applying an intervention to the GRN, assume that there are some undesired states (i.e., we prefer that some specific genes be activated/repressed). This is translated to a cost associated with seeing a given gene activated or repressed. Given these costs and a probabilistic steady-state distribution, a cost is associated with the steady state by taking a weighted average over the probabilities of the undesired states in the steady-state distribution. Suppose that we have a prior distribution over GRNs and a given intervention. We can compute the expected cost of performing the intervention as a weighted average according to the GRN distribution over the steady state costs of the GRNs post-intervention. Dehghannasiri et al. call the intervention that minimizes this expected cost the intrinsically Bayesian robust intervention. The MOCU is then defined as the expected cost of applying the robust intervention over all networks.

The uncertainty about the GRNs is represented in terms of parameters about which we are uncertain, and we call the set of all possible realizations of such parameters an uncertainty class of GRNs. Starting with a prior uncertainty class of GRNs, each potential experiment reduces the uncertainty class of GRNs. Note that Dehghannasiri et al. assume that each experiment can determine an unknown parameter, which in the case of a GRN means determining whether one particular gene up-regulates or down-regulates another, and they do not specify any particular lab technique to which this corresponds. The experiment to select is then defined as that which minimizes the MOCU of the reduced uncertainty class.

Dehghannasiri et al. tested their approach in simulations in which data were generated from both randomly generated networks and a 10-gene regulatory network of the mammalian cell cycle and a 6-gene network of p53, a tumor suppressor gene. In both cases, they considered the task when 2, 3, 4, or 5 regulatory relationships were unknown. The results with the randomly generated networks showed that the less uncertain the initial network, the larger the gain of selecting an experiment using MOCU over a random selection, where gain was measured in terms of the cost of applying the resultant robust intervention to the true network. Another evaluation metric used was the rate of success and failure of the intervention preventing undesirable states, which showed that MOCU led to a better success rate. The experiments with the mammalian cell cycle network and the p53 network showed similarly a general improvement in intervention success when using MOCU.


Differential equation models

Another approach to modeling a biological network is that of differential equation models of expression levels. Steinke et al. represent the expression levels of the N genes in a model at time t by a vector x(t) ∈ ℝN, which is governed by the stochastic differential equation (SDE)

where g: ℝN → ℝN describes the nonlinear system dynamics of gene regulation, e(t) represents perturbation caused by an experiment, and dW(t) is white noise. Tegnér et al. use an ordinary differential equation (ODE) variant of the model without the dW(t) term. In both formulations, the goal is to uncover the unknown system dynamics g.

The problem of recovering g directly is underspecified. A common approach is to restrict the problem to that of discovering a linear approximation of the dynamics around the system's unperturbed steady state instead. Given that the system settles in a steady state x0 subject to the absence of perturbation (that is, e(t) ≡ 0), linearization of the system about that point yields a linear model of a new steady state xe that would result from applying a constant perturbation e(t) ≡ e:

Here, A is the matrix describing the local linear system dynamics, and ε is a noise term from the stochastic model, which Steinke et al. assume to be component-wise independent identically distributed (IID) Gaussian with variance σ2. Nonzero aij entries correspond to edges in the gene regulatory network. Both Tegnér et al. and Steinke et al. take a common approach and focus on the steady-state differences x = xe − x0. This notation simplifies Eq to

The task of learning the gene regulatory network is therefore translated to the task of inferring A from observations of expression level differences x subject to perturbations e.


Sparse Bayesian model

Steinke et al. employ a Bayesian approach. They treat A, e, and x from Eq as random variables, thus converting the task of learning the matrix A to that of estimating the posterior distribution ℙ(A|E,X) of A given data consisting of the known perturbations E and measurements X. To estimate this probability, Bayes' rule is employed:

The distribution ℙ(E|A,X) is given by the linear model described in Eq: For a given A and x, adding the Gaussian noise term ε yields a Gaussian centered at Ax with covariance matrix σ2I, or equivalently,. GRNs are known to be sparsely connected, typically averaging less than two transcriptional regulators per gene. To reflect this, the prior distribution of A is taken to be a Laplace sparsity prior,

The experiment selection criterion used by Steinke et al. is an information-theoretic one, conceptually similar to the entropy-based criteria described in methods above. The main principle at work is the estimation of the change in the posterior distribution of A that the next experiment (to be selected) would yield. Denote the data available thus far by and denote the posterior given data by. Let (e*,x*) represent an experiment and its outcome, and denote the posterior after the additional experiment by. A measure of the uncertainty in Q is the differential entropy, hence, given the posterior Q′, the change in uncertainty due to observing the experiment is the Kullback–Leibler divergence between Q′ and Q,

The choice of model in this setting enables efficient computation of the information gain for a specific experimental outcome (e*,x*). The outcome of an experiment, however, is not known before it is performed. The current model, however, can yield a distribution Q(X*|e*) for the outcome as a random variable X* predicted based on e*, according to the current distribution Q(A). This distribution is used to obtain the expected information gain

which is used as the criterion for selecting an experiment. Given a list of candidate perturbations to perform, the method identifies the perturbation e* which maximizes this score.

Steinke et al. evaluated the method on simulated data generated by randomly constructed networks with nonlinear Hill-type kinetics. They also evaluated the method using the Drosophila segment polarity network.


Reverse engineering a linear gene network model

Tegnér et al. approach the task of reconstructing a GRN as that of fitting a linear gene network model. They take the approach of approximating the ODE by a linear function around the unperturbed steady state

where e is a vector representing the perturbation, and x is a vector representing the observed change from the steady state of gene expression levels. In order to fit this model, the system under study must be observed across a variety of deviations from the steady state.

Tegnér et al. present a reverse-engineering algorithm that ensures that changes are observed in all genes of interest (in the context of this review, “perturbation” means that a gene was directly manipulated by an experiment, while “change” encompasses all changes of expression [either from direct perturbation or indirectly as a result of perturbation in a different gene]; Tegnér et al. use slightly different terminology). Experiment selection is broken up into several stages. Initially, when no data is available, two measurements are performed: one of the unperturbed steady state and another of the steady state resulting from the perturbation of a single randomly selected gene. Presumably, the outcome of perturbing this gene will yield changes of varying degree in other genes as well.

The second phase ensures that the expression level of every gene has been changed beyond a prespecified threshold in some experiment, either from direct perturbation or indirectly as a consequence of perturbing another gene. The algorithm dictates that the next gene to be perturbed (of the genes that have not yet been perturbed) is the one that has shown the least change in any of the previous experiments. This is repeated until all genes have shown a change beyond the prespecified threshold.

In the third phase, genes to perturb are selected iteratively until the model matrix A is reconstructed. For each previously done experiment and each gene, a solution to Eq is produced that estimates the inputs to the gene (a gene j is an input to gene i when the corresponding entry in A is nonzero). Next, for each gene i and each gene j, the variance of the level of j when it is taken as input to gene i across all solutions is computed, and a ranked list of genes j is produced for each gene i. The ranking for each gene j is summed to produce a single number that represents how much that gene varies across solutions in a relative sense. The highest ranking genes are selected for perturbation experiments, and the process is repeated until sufficient perturbations have been performed to reconstruct A.

Tegnér et al. tested their method in simulations on a model of the segmentation polarity network in Drosophila and showed ability to recover the network structure even when the simulating model is nonlinear, in spite of the fact that the inferred model is linear.


A difference criterion for differential equation models

Another experiment selection criterion that has been proposed for differential equation models is based on the idea of maximizing differences between the outcomes of an experiment under competing models. The maximum difference criterion of Atias et al. discussed above parallels a similar approach for ODE models by Mélykúti et al.. Mélykúti et al. focus abstractly on the problem of designing the experiment that would distinguish between a pair of ODE models. Specifically, experimental design consists of specifying the values of a subset of input variables that can be manipulated experimentally. Given that the system has a set of output variables that are measured and two rival models that need to be distinguished, the approach designs an experiment that maximizes the L2-norm of the difference between the predicted outputs of the two models considered.


Purely structural model

Ud-Dean and Gunawan take an approach to learning GRNs in which only the network structure is explicitly modeled. This is unlike Bayesian and Boolean networks, which explicitly model the expression levels or abundances of genes or proteins that correspond to nodes in the graph structure. Ud-Dean and Gunawan make the assumption that a knockout (KO) of a gene causes differential expression in all genes that are downstream of it (its descendants) in the network. This assumption is used to eliminate network structures that are inconsistent with data.

Taking in gene expression profiles under various single KO conditions as initial data, the algorithm determines ancestry relationships among all the genes in the network. The ancestries are determined by following the assumption above: if gene j shows differential expression between the wild-type and a knockout of gene i, then gene i is taken to be an ancestor of gene j in the network. Differential expression is determined by performing a two-sample t test on expression level measurements. These ancestry relationships are then translated into an “upperbound” network and a “lowerbound” network. The lowerbound contains only edges that are necessary to satisfy the ancestry relationships, meaning that removing any edge from the lowerbound network would make some node i a non-ancestor of node j when it was determined that i is an ancestor of j. The upperbound contains all edges that can possibly satisfy the ancestry relationships, meaning that adding any edge to the upperbound network would make some node i an ancestor of node j when it was determined that i is not ancestor of j. Edges that are present in the upperbound network and are absent in the lowerbound network are then considered uncertain.

The task of the active learning procedure is to test hypotheses about the presence of uncertain edges. The query that the procedure constructs consists of a collection of multiple-KO experiments, characterized by a background deletion of one or more genes and a set of genes I* to be individually deleted in the presence of the background deletion. For example, referring to genes by numbers, if and I* = {2,4}, one would perform the background triple-knockout {1,3,5} and the two quadruple-knockouts, {1,2,3,5} and {1,3,4,5}.

The purpose of using a background KO is to eliminate indirect paths from genes i to j when testing a hypothesis about the presence of an uncertain edge from i to j. The expression of gene j is measured subject to the background KO and subject to the KO of gene i in conjunction with the background KO, and a two-sample t test is used to determine differential expression of j between these KO conditions. Rejection of the null hypothesis indicates the presence of the edge from i to j, and the edge is consequently added to the lowerbound, while failure to reject the null hypothesis indicates the absence of the edge, and the edge is consequently removed from the upperbound.

The criterion that Ud-Dean and Gunawan use maximizes the number of uncertain edges that can be verified using a particular background KO. They apply some constraints to reduce the complexity of the optimization problem and use a genetic algorithm to solve it, meaning that the background KO's selected might not be perfectly optimal. Some other practical considerations include constraining the number of KOs that can be selected, as well as restricting the algorithm from selecting KO combinations that are known to be lethal. Simulations showed that the method was able to recover a GRN more faithfully than one can from the set of all double-KOs, using significantly fewer experiments. Moreover, the GRN was perfectly recovered in simulations with no noise in the data (that is, ones where differential expression was correctly identified) and the assumption about differential expression happening downstream of a perturbation knockout held.


Active learning with prior knowledge

This section summarizes methods that extensively incorporate prior knowledge about the biological system of interest in modeling the networks and designing experiments. While reliance on prior knowledge sacrifices generality, it often facilitates more accurate modeling of biological systems when targeting specific questions about those systems. Each work summarized here aims to answer a specific question in a specific biological domain. As a result, the type of model used, prior knowledge incorporated, and knowledge discovered in each method is different.


Validation and refinement of gene regulatory models in yeast

Yeang et al. aimed to elucidate regulatory relationships among genes and proteins in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). They combined data from prior knowledge and data from knockout experiments in order to produce a network representation of the regulatory relationships, the physical network model. In a physical network, nodes represent genes and proteins, and the edges between them represent induction/repression for protein–DNA interaction and activation/inhibition for protein–protein interactions. In this setting, multiple networks can provide equally probable competing explanations for the data available, and the role of active learning is to design additional knockout experiments that would resolve such uncertainty.

The prior knowledge Yeang et al. use comes from databases of protein–protein and protein–gene interactions. Specifically, they used promoter-binding interactions for transcription factors measured by Chromatin immunoprecipitation microarray (ChIP-chip) and protein–protein interactions recorded in the Database of Interacting Proteins (DIP). This data is combined to build a skeleton graph of possible interactions between proteins and genes. In the skeleton graph, protein–protein interactions are undirected. Protein–gene interactions are directed from the proteins to the genes, since these are promoter-binding interactions. The resulting skeleton graph constitutes a summary of potentially relevant interactions. Yeang et al. developed a method that takes this information and combines it with experimental data (specifically, mRNA expression profiles from individual gene-deletion experiments) to produce an output network that contains a subset of the skeleton graph's edges and in which all edges are directed and have signs (are annotated as inducing/repressing for protein–DNA interactions and activating/inhibiting for protein–protein interactions).

To infer a fully specified physical network from the skeleton graph, prior knowledge, and experimental data, Yeang et al. use a factor graph, a type of probabilistic graphical model, to formalize the problem mathematically. In a factor graph, a joint probability distribution is defined over a collection of variables Y = Y1,…,Yp (taking values in some space) in terms of a collection of factors (also known as potential functions). Each factor is a function of a subset of the variables Yi ⊂ Y. The joint probability of a particular assignment of all variables to values y is then defined as proportional to the product of all factors evaluated at y:

In order to frame the problem of finding a physical network as a factor graph, Yeang et al. define binary variables that represent edge presence and direction for every possible edge (based on the skeleton graph); they define factors that correspond to evidence for protein–gene edge presence from chIP location analysis p-values, factors that correspond to evidence for protein–protein edge presence based on expression profile reliability (EPR) and paralogous verification method (PVM) tests; and they define factors that correspond to each knockout experiment (representing the constraint that there must be a causal path from a knockout to its observed effects). Once the factor graph is defined, the maximum a posteriori (MAP) physical network is produced using the max-product algorithm, an efficient algorithm for finding the MAP variable assignment of a factor graph. When there are multiple output networks that are equally most probable, additional experiments are necessary to arrive at a single network.

To efficiently select experiments, Yeang et al. use expected information gain as the criterion for selecting experiments. The information gain is computed as follows: let M represent the set of most-likely networks that were inferred from available data, and let X be the set of possible expression changes (outcomes) due to an experiment e. The information gain is a difference between the entropies of the model space before and after an experiment:

The factor graph is used to compute the probabilities to obtain the information gain for each potential deletion experiment e, and the experiment that maximizes this quantity is selected. This follows the common theme present throughout this review, wherein the experiment is selected based on the decrease in model-space entropy it is expected to yield.

In the process of refining and validating the GRN of yeast, Yeang et al. used factor graph inference to account for 273 individual gene-deletion experiments, wherein gene expression profiles were measured by microarray. The effects of the knockouts were explained by paths in the physical network produced by the factor graph inference; these paths covered 965 interactions, of which 194 effects were uniquely determined and 771 were ambiguous. An example of an ambiguous interaction that they present is the explanation of up-regulation of promoters bound by Msn4p in a swiΔ knockout: "[O]ne scenario is that SWI4 activates SOK2 and SOK2 represses MSN4, whereas another is that SWI4 represses SOK2 and SOK2 activates MSN4." Paths with such ambiguous interactions were partitioned into 37 independent network models (numbered 1–37), and all remaining unambiguous interactions were put into one model (numbered as Model 0). Yeang et al. found confirmation in the literature for 50 of the 132 interactions in Model 0. To validate the ambiguous models, the information theoretic criterion was used to produce a ranked list of knockout experiments and found that 3 of the top 10 highest ranked experiments were targeting Model 1. For this reason, they focused on Model 1 in their analysis and reported that the four highest-ranking knockouts for Model 1 were conducted (namely sok2Δ,yap6Δ,hap4Δ, and msn4Δ). Using the data from these experiments, factor graph inference fully disambiguated Model 1 by disambiguating 60 protein–DNA interactions.


Adam the Robot Scientist

King et al. aimed to identify the genes that encode orphan enzymes in the aromatic amino acid (AAA) synthesis pathway in S. cerevisiae. Orphan enzymes are those for which the encoding genes are not known. These enzymes are nevertheless believed to be present because they catalyze reactions that are thought to occur in the given organism. King et al. combine knowledge of the yeast metabolic pathway and a database of genes and proteins involved in metabolism to design experiments that test whether a particular gene codes for a particular enzyme. The role of active learning in this setting is to select experiments in a manner that minimizes the total cost of identifying the genes that code for all the orphan enzymes in the pathway.

To accomplish this task, King et al. designed and implemented Adam the Robot Scientist. Adam was remarkable in that it was more than just a software system that selects experiments: it autonomously controlled lab equipment that conducted the proposed experiments, recorded the results, and used the results to update the model without any human intervention at any point of the active learning loop (beyond maintenance of the equipment and replenishment of supplies for experiments). Adam combined prior knowledge of the AAA pathway and results from its own experiments to iteratively perform auxotrophic growth experiments until all orphan enzymes were associated with their genes.

The prior knowledge that Adam used consists of a model of yeast metabolism and a database of genes and proteins involved in metabolism. This knowledge was encoded manually into a Prolog program. The resultant model could then be used to infer how the AAA pathway would behave in the absence of a particular enzyme in a particular growth medium. The uncertain component of the model is the assignment of orphan enzymes to genes, and the goal was to find the correct assignment.

Auxotrophic growth experiments are a common technique for discovering the details of a metabolic pathway. In such an experiment, a deletion mutant is grown in a specified growth medium, and growth is measured. For example, to test whether a gene codes for a specific enzyme, one would grow mutants where that gene is deleted. When grown in a medium that contains the metabolite product of the enzyme's reaction, the cells should grow as normal, but growth in the absence of the metabolite should be hindered. The outcome of each experiment can be viewed as either positive or negative, depending on whether growth was hindered. Therefore, to design an auxotrophic growth experiment, a decision must be made about what gene is to be deleted and what metabolites the growth medium should contain.

The experiments in this study were designed using a cost function. Many of the approaches discussed in this review focus on minimizing the number of experiments performed, which can be viewed as minimizing a cost function where each experiment has equal cost. King et al., however, use a cost function that also factors in the monetary cost of the materials used. The cost function calculates the expected cost of narrowing down from a set of mutually exclusive hypotheses to a single hypothesis using a set of possible experiments, where each hypothesis is an assignment of a gene to an enzyme. The idea is that each experiment e divides a set of mutually exclusive hypotheses M into two subsets, M[e] and, representing, respectively, those hypotheses that are consistent with a positive outcome of e and those that are consistent with a negative outcome. Given a set of hypotheses M and a set of possible experiments E, the minimum expected cost of arriving at the single correct hypothesis by experimentation is defined by the recurrence:

where Ce is the cost of experiment e and ℙ(e) is the probability that the outcome of e is positive. Eq represents the case in which we have no plausible hypotheses remaining and the expected cost is therefore 0, since no more experiments are needed; and Eq represents the case where we have successfully narrowed down our hypothesis set to a single hypothesis m, and the expected cost is again 0, since no additional experiments are needed. The probability of a positive experiment outcome is computed as the sum of the probabilities of the hypotheses that are consistent with that outcome. It is generally intractable to compute the expected cost exactly, because every possible sequence of experiments with both positive and negative outcomes for each experiment would need to be considered. Consequently, the system uses an approximation to this cost function

In this approximation, the term is the average cost of an experiment in E excluding e (the cost Ce of e is added directly), and the term is an estimate of the number of future experiments that would be performed after e. The estimate for the number of future experiments is based on Shannon's source coding theorem. Given the task of designing a code to transmit a message, where the probability of encountering a message i is ℙ(i), the length of a binary code for i in an optimal coding scheme is −log2ℙ(i). If we consider the outcomes of experiments to be analogous to bits in a coding scheme, where the outcomes of a series of experiments “encode” each hypothesis by eliminating all other hypotheses, then we get that the number of experiments needed to eliminate all hypotheses except m is at most ⌈−log2ℙ(m)⌉, where the quantity is rounded up to ensure an integer number of trials. JM in Eq is simply the probability-weighted average of this quantity for any hypothesis in M, and it corresponds to the entropy of the set of hypotheses. Adam used the approximation in Eq to select the next experiment e at each iteration of the process of narrowing down the hypothesis space.

King et al. document development of the system, including testing of the cost function against previously collected data on known-function genes. The tests showed that the system outperformed both a random strategy and a "cheapest trial" strategy—one in which the next cheapest available experiment is selected at each iteration, without consideration of the hypotheses it rejects or the projected cost of future experiments. Additionaly, performance was comparable, in terms of cost and number of trials, to that of humans (computer science and biology graduate students).

King et al. report that Adam formulated and tested 20 hypotheses concerning gene encodings of 13 orphan enzymes. Twelve hypotheses with no previous evidence were confirmed. A hypothesis about one enzyme was confirmed experimentally. A literature survey confirmed strong empirical evidence for the correctness of six of the hypotheses (i.e., the enzymes were not orphans in retrospect).


Regulatory mechanisms downstream of a signaling pathway

Szczurek et al. aim to reveal mechanisms of transcription regulation in the cell (specifically, to match transcription factors in a signaling pathway to the genes they regulate based on expression profiles under gene knockout and overexpression experiments). They identify two major challenges that cause ambiguity in inferring such relationships from expression profile data. One issue occurs when a transcription factor is inactive in all experiments conducted. In this case, its targets cannot be revealed. The second issue occurs when two transcription factors in two distinct pathways are both activated in a set of experiments. In this event, genes that are regulated by either one of the transcription factors erroneously appear to be coregulated by both, even if there is no coregulation. The role of active learning in this setting is to design experiments that reduce such ambiguities.

Szczurek et al. introduce model expansion experimental design (MEED), an active learning algorithm for the task. MEED requires knowledge of the signaling pathway as input in the form of a predictive logical model. The process MEED uses has two parts: an expansion procedure that identifies regulatory modules and an experimental design step that uses the model to propose a collection of experiments that would disambiguate any ambiguous modules.

A regulatory module is a group of genes such that all the genes in the group are regulated by the same transcription factor. A simplifying modeling assumption that Szczurek at al. make is that each gene is regulated by only one transcription factor. A regulatory module is considered ambiguous when there are multiple possible transcription factors that may regulate a gene in a manner that is consistent with the data.

The matching of transcription factors to genes is done by the expansion procedure. The procedure uses the model of the signaling network and data from previous experiments. The type of experiment conducted may involve the manipulation (deletion or overexpression) of a gene in the signaling pathway and some input stimulus. The data measured in the experiment represent levels of gene expression. The signaling network model is used to predict the activation of the downstream genes in the network based on the stimulus and manipulation. Some of these downstream genes code for potential transcription factors. The expansion procedure searches for genes whose activation patterns are statistically associated with the predicted activation patterns of the potential transcription factors. Thus, a set of genes that matches the activation pattern of a particular potential transcription factor is identified as a regulatory module that is regulated by that transcription factor. When there are multiple transcription factors that show the same activation patterns throughout all experiments observed, a regulatory module that matches any one of the factors consequently matches the others in that group as well. When there are multiple transcription factors that match a regulatory module, the module is ambiguous in the sense that it is unknown which transcription factor regulates which genes in the module. In order to disambiguate ambiguous regulatory modules, the goal of MEED is to propose a set of experiments that maximizes the number of different activation patterns exhibited by all potential transcription factors and, moreover, to do so using the smallest possible number of experiments.

The principle that the experimental design follows is that of maximizing entropy. Specifically, for a set of experiments E, the calculation is as follows. A set of transcription factors that show the same activation patterns and regulate genes in the same manner form a regulatory program. Let r be the number of possible regulatory programs. A set of experiments E partitions the space of possible regulatory programs into n disjoint blocks with nb,(1 ≤ nb ≤ r) programs in each block indexed by b,(1 ≤ b ≤ n). Each block is consistent with a different potential set of gene expression profiles as outcomes of the set of experiments. The entropy of this partition is

Ideally, the set of experiments E selected is one that maximizes this entropy. However, because it is intractable to consider all possible sets of experiments E, MEED instead constructs a list of experiments e1,e2,e3,… in a greedy fashion. The first experiment e1 is the single experiment that maximizes the entropy H({e1}) for sets of one experiment. Each subsequent experiment ej is chosen such that it maximizes the entropy of the list H({e1,…,ej}) given that the the selections of the preceding experiments e1,…,ej−1 have been fixed. MEED adds experiments to the list in this manner until either all potential experiments are listed or the entropy cannot be further maximized. The top several experiments in the resulting list can then be conducted in the laboratory, with practical considerations dictating the precise number of experiments.

MEED is unlike most other active learning methods discussed in this review in that it is designed to select sets of experiments rather than a single experiment at a time. If the active learning procedure selects one experiment at a time, this necessitates performing the experiments sequentially, performing a single experiment before feeding its results to the method to select the next one. In practice, performing multiple experiments in parallel rather than sequentially can be more time- and cost-efficient. Szczurek et al. tested whether it is actually necessary to score experiments jointly as MEED does or whether selecting top-ranked (by H({e})) individual experiments suffices for parallel experimentation. Using a simulation, they found that the MEED strategy performs much more efficiently.

In quantifying the performance of compared methods, Szczurek et al. measure the fraction of undistinguished pairs (FUP) for a set of experiments E. This is defined formally as

where nc, C, and r are as above. This score computes the fraction of regulatory program pairs that were not distinguished by the set of experiments out of the total set of regulatory program pairs; a value of 0 corresponds to distinguishing all regulatory programs, while a value of 1 corresponds to distinguishing none.

Szczurek et al. applied MEED to the yeast signaling pathway responsible for cellular response to hypersonic and pheromone triggers. They report that MEED outperforms other methods (including the method developed by Ideker et al.) when tested with real data from 25 experiments previously reported in the literature. Performance was evaluated by plotting a learning curve of FUP score over number of experiments performed, with MEED showing consistently lower (hence, better) FUP scores throughout the learning process. As additional validation, having provided MEED with all available experimental results, they examine the regulatory modules identified by the expansion procedure and identify corroborating evidence for their validity in the literature.


Conclusions

There are several dimensions across which methods for active learning of biological networks can be readily compared. summarizes the models discussed in this review in terms of these dimensions. The defining feature of active learning is the selection of experiments to improve the underlying model. The majority of methods reviewed here use entropy or a related measure (such as information gain or Kullback–Leibler divergence) to select experiments. The intuitive explanation for the effectiveness of these measures is that the experiments that lead to high entropy in the model space or outcome space highly fragment those spaces. This means that a single outcome of the experiment will select one of many small fragments of the space, thereby significantly narrowing down that space.

Other experiment selection criteria also share themes across approaches. Both King et al. and Dehgahannasiri et al. minimize a variant of expected cost. Both Atias et al. and and Mélykúti et al. maximize the difference between predicted outcomes of competing models. Somewhat similarly, Tegnér et al. select experiments that maximize variation in predicted expression among perturbed genes across competing solutions. Minimax criteria are explored by He and Geng as well as Hauser and Bühlmann. Ud-Dean and Gunawan select background knockout combinations that can be used to test a maximal number of hypotheses about individual edges.

also characterizes multiple modeling aspects in the methods. The models by Ud-Dean and Gunawan and by Yeang et al. only represent characteristics of the edges in the network structure and treat those as discrete variables. The other approaches reviewed involve some modeling of gene expression levels or molecular abundances, which may be represented as discrete or continuous variables, where the values of the variables are viewed as deterministic quantities or as random quantities. The methods also differ in whether they have mechanisms for incorporating prior knowledge and how this knowledge is incorporated.

We find that the entropy-based criteria have the advantage of following a simple mathematical paradigm that translates well across models: there is typically a natural way to express entropy in a model space, whether the model is a Boolean network, a Bayesian network, a differential equation, a physical network, etc. The main weakness is that the entropy calculation requires counting models in the model space or having an expression for the probability distribution over models. Since the model space is often large, this makes entropy computationally intractable to compute in many cases, and approximate methods such as sampling the model space need to be used. The problem of computational complexity applies to all the methods discussed here, as none of the methods have been demonstrated to scale well to large datasets of thousands of nodes.

Prior knowledge can be incorporated into the model in a "soft" way, as in Yeang et al., or in a "hard" way, as in Szczurek et al. and King et al. In the soft approach of Yeang et al., the prior knowledge contributes to the inference of the model, but it can be outweighed by evidence from experimental data. For example, a protein–protein interaction may have strong prior knowledge support but not be included in the final model if there are no experiments that support it. In the hard approach of Szczurek et al. and King et al., on the other hand, the prior knowledge is used as a fixed part of the inference logic, and inference is performed only about those parts of the model that are not determined by prior knowledge. The model in Szczurek et al. uses a fixed model of signaling pathways to infer relationships downstream of them, and the model in King et al. uses a fixed model of metabolic reactions to infer which genes code for which enzymes. The decision regarding how prior knowledge should be incorporated boils down to the relevance of the knowledge to the experimental data and amount of certainty one has about the knowledge: Yeang et al. allowed the possibility of data outweighing prior knowledge because the prior knowledge about interactions in the network was known to be uncertain and because many interactions may exist that are not relevant to the experiments performed. Conversely, the metabolic pathways used by King et al. and the signaling pathways used by Szczurek et al. are well-studied, and there is much less uncertainty about their validity, justifying the hard incorporation of this kind of prior knowledge.

There are tradeoffs in modeling decisions that apply more generally, beyond active learning. In general, discrete variable modeling and deterministic dynamics yield simpler modeling, both computationally and conceptually, which in turn makes these models easier to implement and easier to interpret. The main weakness of discrete variable modeling is the danger of oversimplification; for example, if genes are considered to follow a binary on-or-off state model, one might miss nuances in gene expression data in which a gene's expression may decrease partially in response to a perturbation. The main weakness of deterministic modeling is that if inherent noise is present in the data from variations in instrument performance, biological variation, or uncontrolled-for variables, a deterministic model may not be able to account for this variation. Conversely, continuous variable modeling and stochastic dynamics address these weaknesses but do so at the cost of higher complexity, which may lead to models that are more difficult to interpret and harder to implement in practice.

The approaches reviewed also vary in the types of queries that specify each experiment and in the types of data that an experiment yields. The query specification is often constrained to a perturbation in only one or two elements in the network, such as single-gene knockout/overexpression or a single- or double-gene perturbation paired with a simple environmental perturbation. The approaches that select these simpler queries typically select from a predefined set of possible experiments to perform. In contrast, the approaches that select arbitrarily complex perturbations or higher-order multiple-gene knockouts form queries constructively, rather than selecting from a set of possible experiments. An even clearer trend is seen in the sort of data that experiments yield, wherein most of the methods rely on multidimensional data from each experiment, such as a gene expression profile or a profile of differential expression calls. Only the method by King et al. views each experiment as yielding a one-dimensional binary outcome.

The approaches reviewed are diverse in the particular type of biological knowledge captured, the details of the mathematical models used, the degree of reliance on prior knowledge, robustness to noisy data, the type of data used, and the the type of query that specifies each experiment. Most of the approaches reviewed use entropy-based criteria for experiment selection. It is likely that future active learning approaches will continue to use entropy and similar criteria, based on previously demonstrated success as well as a strong conceptual motivation. The main challenge for future active learning approaches is that of scaling to big datasets, as high-dimensional screens have become the norm in systems biology. Another scaling problem to overcome is that of proposing not single experiments but batches of experiments, something that is explicitly explored by Szczurek et al. in the context of discovering regulatory relationships downstream of a given signaling pathway. The method by Ud-Dean and Gunawan also explicitly considers batches of experiments but relies on the ability to determine the presence of individual interactions in a targeted way. There is still a need for methods that design batches of experiments outside of these specific settings. The ability to propose batches of experiments is important for real-world application because it is often more practical to perform multiple perturbation experiments simultaneously in the lab. The nature of experimentation is such that noisy observations are a reality due to uncontrollable factors and measurement errors. It is therefore important to develop methods that are robust to noise in observations, a challenge better addressed by models with stochastic dynamics. Finally, existing work demonstrates that the leveraging of prior knowledge has been essential in fruitful discovery of biological knowledge using active learning.


Funding Statement

This work was funded by NIH training grant T15 LM007359 (YS), NIH grant U54 AI117924 through the BD2K program (MC), and NSF grant IIS-1218880 (MC). The funders had no role in the decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.


Modelling auditory attention

Emine Merve Kaya, Mounya Elhilali — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2017. PMC5206269, CC BY 4.0.

Sounds in everyday life seldom appear in isolation. Both humans and machines are constantly flooded with a cacophony of sounds that need to be sorted through and scoured for relevant information—a phenomenon referred to as the ‘cocktail party problem’. A key component in parsing acoustic scenes is the role of attention, which mediates perception and behaviour by focusing both sensory and cognitive resources on pertinent information in the stimulus space. The current article provides a review of modelling studies of auditory attention. The review highlights how the term attention refers to a multitude of behavioural and cognitive processes that can shape sensory processing. Attention can be modulated by ‘bottom-up’ sensory-driven factors, as well as ‘top-down’ task-specific goals, expectations and learned schemas. Essentially, it acts as a selection process or processes that focus both sensory and cognitive resources on the most relevant events in the soundscape; with relevance being dictated by the stimulus itself (e.g. a loud explosion) or by a task at hand (e.g. listen to announcements in a busy airport). Recent computational models of auditory attention provide key insights into its role in facilitating perception in cluttered auditory scenes.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘Auditory and visual scene analysis’.


Introduction

While at a cocktail party, we often find ourselves flooded by a cacophony of sounds that impinge on our ears from a multitude of sources. The challenge of directing our attention despite numerous prominent distractors, referred to as the ‘cocktail party problem’, engages intricate neural networks and cognitive processes that enable the brain to parse information in the environment. These processes allow us to navigate our surroundings, focus on conversations of interest, enjoy the background music and be alert to any salient sound events such as someone calling our name or the ringtone of our phone. Throughout this scene analysis process, attention plays a crucial role in mediating both perception and behaviour by focusing both sensory and cognitive resources on pertinent information in the stimulus space. This article provides a review of modelling studies of auditory attention and their impact on studies of attention in audition.

Attention is not a single, unidirectional process. It can be modulated by ‘bottom-up’ stimulus-driven factors, as well as ‘top-down’ task-specific goals, expectations and learned schemas. Ultimately, attention is a form of information bottleneck that samples the massive sensory input constantly impinging on our ears and directs sensory and cognitive resources to the most relevant events in the soundscape. Owing to the complexity of auditory scenes, the relevance of a sound event can be dictated by the scene itself (e.g. a conspicuous sound event such as a gunshot that would attract attention) or by a task at hand (e.g. to follow a conversation with a friend amidst competing sound sources).

While attention has started to garner increasing interest from the auditory research community, there is not much tradition of developing computational models of attention in the context of sound systems. Such models would need to account for the auditory system's ability to adapt to the demands of an ever-changing acoustic environment and task goals. Recent physiological findings have been amending our views of processing in the auditory system, replacing the conventional view of ‘static’ processing in sensory cortex with a more ‘active’ and malleable mapping that rapidly adapts to the tasks at hand, sound context and listening conditions. Numerous studies have revealed that our auditory experiences can have significant local effects by transforming receptive field properties of individual neurons, and profound global effects by reshaping cortical circuits. These effects extend beyond early sensory areas and indicate attentional modulation throughout the auditory cortex, shedding light on the distributed nature of processing in auditory pathways in the context of cocktail party settings.

Although research on the neural underpinnings of these networks is thriving, our understanding of the exact role of adaptive stimulus- or task-directed processing remains in its infancy. The field is particularly challenged by the lack of theories that integrate our knowledge of cortical circuitry in the auditory pathway with adaptive and cognitive processes that shape behaviour and perception of complex acoustic scenes. By contrast, active and adaptive processing has more commonly been explored in models of the visual system. These implementations typically model predictive coding in the visual thalamus (LGN), contextual modulation in primary visual cortex (V1), attentional modulation in higher cortical areas (V2 and V4, area MT) and decision-making in parietal and frontal cortex. That being said, recent theoretical studies are providing insight into common processing traits of active attention across modalities.

A number of perspectives have emerged about conceptual frameworks for understanding the role of attention in auditory perception. Much of this work closely parallels theories from vision in which attention is viewed as a multifaceted phenomenon that encompasses mechanisms of selection, integration and sampling. In one view, attention can be considered as a filtering or a selection mechanism. This interpretation ties in directly with findings of receptive field properties in sensory cortex, whereby neurons can be viewed as filters whose properties are modulated by task-directed attention and whose activity can be adapted depending on sensory contexts. At a larger scale, this view extends to object-based or semantic selection processes whereby attention to a specific target or class of sounds (e.g. speech, music) would engage specific neural circuits. This view parallels selection theories in vision, which present frameworks for funnelling only relevant information to the processing pipeline, either at an early or later stage, acting as an informational bottleneck that mitigates the limited computational resources of the sensory system. An alternative view of attention frames it as an integration mechanism, whereby attentional feedback acts as a prior to bias processing of certain stimuli of interest. Many theories of sound perception in complex settings favour this view, under which attention operates as a ‘glue’ that binds together elements belonging to the same event. This interaction between object formation and selective attention is instrumental in guiding the organization of the foreground and background, and the interaction between the perceptual representations of sound targets and interferers.

The present review aims to provide a synopsis of current computational efforts in modelling attention in the context of auditory scene analysis. provides a general overview of models included in this review. These models often cluster around accounts of bottom-up or top-down processing, though they remain confined by hand-picked experimental observations. The article reviews the relevant perspectives for both sensory- and task-driven attentional models and discusses some efforts to validate such models. The review also touches on relevant applications of such models in audio systems and hearing technologies.


Models of auditory attention


Bottom-up attention

Models of bottom-up attention remain very scarce in the auditory literature. The limited efforts in this direction have greatly benefited from the very prolific research on bottom-up attention (or salience) in vision. Indeed, visual salience is a thriving research field that has resulted in a rich body of work examining the perceptual attributes underlying visual salience, as well as its behavioural correlates and underlying neuroanatomy. In parallel, computational models of visual salience have built on this knowledge and made use of the availability standardized eye-tracking datasets to develop detailed Bayesian and hierarchical accounts of visual perception. These models can not only account for human behaviour in natural scenes, but are able to expand the possibilities of computer vision applications to tackle challenging visual scenes in fields such as robotics, medical imaging and surveillance systems.

Building on this tradition in the visual modality, early models of auditory bottom-up attention adapted popular visual salience models to the domain of sound. Kayser et al. presented one of the early efforts in this direction. This work treated the time–frequency representation of sound as an ‘auditory image’ from which spectro-temporal features such as intensity and spectro-temporal contrast can be extracted to parallel the feature analysis process in vision models. The back end of the model was essentially a visual salience model, in which all features were scaled to generate multi-scale maps which were then normalized to highlight conspicuous peaks and integrated to provide an auditory salience map. Though operating on relatively simple features and adopting a vision-based integration architecture, this model was able to reliably match both human and monkey behavioural responses in tasks involving detection of salient sounds embedded in different backgrounds. This work not only demonstrated that salience processing in the brain may share commonalities across sensory modalities, but it also provided a guide to designing psychoacoustical experiments to probe auditory bottom-up attention in humans.

This initial effort was later expanded to incorporate more intricate analyses of auditory features. Work by Kalinli & Narayanan operated on the same auditory image and salience extraction architecture but extended the feature set to include pitch and orientation along both time and frequency, hence incorporating more relevant auditory cues. It also provided an improved contrast computation scheme to derive feature maps, making them more robust to noise and multiple salient locations. Duangudom & Anderson extended the feature analysis to incorporate more biologically plausible mechanisms that mimic processing in the peripheral and central auditory system. This analysis allowed the derivation of spectro-temporal modulation features that simulate neural responses in the mammalian auditory cortex. These neural-like processes provided a multi-scale mapping of the incoming auditory stimulus, effectively replacing the parallel feature maps favoured in earlier auditory salience models. While the salience analysis was similar in essence to that for vision-based models, this study began to steer the literature towards placing an emphasis on biological plausibility.

Despite their relative success in extending vision-based frameworks to audition, all of the aforementioned models failed to account for an important distinction between auditory and visual processing, notably the nature of sound as a temporally evolving entity. By treating the time (T)–frequency (F) spectrogram as an auditory image, these models treated the T–F dimensions as spatial X–Y axes, failing to process the time axis as a special dimension. Effectively, the auditory image approach ignores temporal build-up and short- and long-term dependencies, and results in non-causal analyses of current events based on future information. Consider for instance a musical scene such as Haydn's Surprise Symphony: a mellow string passage abruptly interrupted by a loud, full orchestra chord—a highly salient section. If the chord was repeated shortly after, you might be surprised again, but not as much as the first time, as you have now adjusted your expectations as to what might occur in the piece. If this chord were to start regularly repeating, it would eventually blend into the music and attract little attention. Now consider if this scene were played backwards, so the loud chord was heard repeatedly from the onset. None of the occurrences would surprise the listener—the salience has disappeared. The surprise only works when the music is considered as a temporal entity.

One of the first models to address this problem computed a temporal salience map similarly to the model of Kayser et al., but considered all of the features as evolving temporally, rather than as two-dimensional images. The feature space was expanded to include perceptual properties of sound: loudness, pitch and timbre. All features were analysed over time to highlight their dynamic quality before normalizing and integrating across feature maps in line with vision-based models. By contrast, Tsuchida & Cottrell adapted a different, statistics-based approach from the vision literature. Their implementation combined long-term scene statistics computed from natural sound samples with local, rapidly changing statistics of the current incoming sound. In this framework, salience became a probabilistic account, where a sound is flagged as salient if it is determined to be unusual relative to learned statistics. This model was also the first to consider the computational efficiency of the features used, where a cochleogram was adopted instead of a spectrogram and principal component analysis was applied to reduce feature dimensionality while retaining significant variations in the features.

Even with the advances achieved by temporal salience models, basing attentional mechanisms on processes from the visual domain inherently limits the capabilities of an auditory salience model. Recognizing this, efforts in modelling auditory attention began shifting from adaptations of the visual literature to building upon inspiration from mechanisms known or hypothesized to take place in the auditory pathway. As this research area is yet in its early stages, there is an array of possible mechanisms to explore, and the following models have explored different avenues to modelling bottom-up auditory attention.

Kaya & Elhilali proposed the first auditory attention model that was not based on a vision equivalent, but was rather motivated by processing known to occur in the auditory pathway. This model explored the role of predictive coding and theories of auditory deviance detection as possible underlying mechanisms determining auditory salience in the brain. This approach puts great emphasis on the role of processing events over time and shaping neural responses of current sounds based on their preceding context. Kaya & Elhilali employed a rich feature space modelling human perception of sound. This model mapped the acoustic waveform onto a high-dimensional auditory space that explicitly encoded perceptual loudness, pitch and timbre of the incoming sound, building upon evolving temporal features. The attention model collected feature statistics over time and made predictions about future sensory inputs. Salient times were flagged as those for which the incoming features differed significantly from expectations. Another novel aspect of this model was the role of integration across features in guiding salience predictions. Earlier models typically employed a simple linear combination across features with a fixed weight for each feature. The Kaya & Elhilali model rejected the notion of independence across auditory features of a complex scene in guiding salience perception. Instead, the model proposed a nonlinear interaction across the feature space, implemented by asymmetrical weights between pairwise features, and guided by psychoacoustic experiments.

Two trends emerged from this work that are reflected in most current auditory attention models: building probabilistic expectations of sound to derive salience, and employing behavioural responses from perceptual experiments with human listeners to learn properties of acoustic features relevant for salience perception. The idea that salience is derived from statistics gathered over the scene was further explored in the work of Wang et al.. This study computed Shannon entropy as a measure of the informational value of incoming sound segments, and classified them as salient or ordinary depending on whether they contained a high amount of information. This is in line with the concept that bottom-up attention alerts us to important events in a scene. Moreover, the study by Wang et al. offered a composite system that combined parallel paths including: (i) a temporal analysis of sound features operating on different components derived from mel-frequency cepstral coefficients, an alternative and very popular way to represent frequency features based on perceptual measures of pitch; (ii) a spectral mapping analysing the power spectral density of the stimulus and (iii), the image salience model based on mechanisms by Kayser et al.. This composite system demonstrated the benefits of extending the vision-based model and provided further robustness to salience estimates especially in real noisy soundscapes.

In contrast with more theoretical approaches to auditory salience, Kim et al. took a more data-driven approach by employing human behavioural judgements of salience to train a linear classifier that performed a simple filtering followed by feature integration based on data-driven weights. Behavioural data were gathered by subjects annotating salient locations in natural recordings of conference room meetings, and these data were used to train a model that maximized the separation between the salient and non-salient sound segments in the feature space. The results revealed that the emerging discriminant was shaped to detect temporal and frequency contrasts, and most specifically worked as an onset detector. Tordini et al. approached the problem from the opposite direction: while Kim et al. used no prior knowledge of acoustical features to guide their feature estimation, Tordini et al. tested the contribution of acoustic features in defining auditory salience. Features such as temporal centroid, spectral centroid, harmonicity, effective duration and tempo were all found to correlate with salience ratings. The results also revealed interactions between some of these features in line with observations from Kaya & Elhilali.

It is worth highlighting that one of the challenges of studies of auditory salience is the open interpretation of what auditory salience refers to. Visual salience has historically relied on measures of eye gaze despite their shortcomings. In audition, the lack of unified metrics to define salience remains a major challenge. Unmistakably salient scenarios such as a loud explosion or a male talking amongst females result in large enough loudness or pitch differences that every auditory salience model should be able to detect outlier events. However, more intricate processing is necessary for auditory events that are not as objectively salient, such as noticing a cricket among cicadas. The simple image-based features extracted in most of the aforementioned models are insufficient to capture subtle changes in temporal dynamics. Furthermore, feature interactions play an important role in determining perceived salience—a factor unaccounted for in most models.


Top-down attention

In contrast with bottom-up attention, top-down models of auditory selective attention build on a richer body of work investigating the neural underpinnings of task-driven attention in the auditory system. It is well established that neural activity across the auditory cortex is heavily modulated by directed attention. Hubel et al.'s early findings in the late 1950s showed modulation of neural activity of single units in cat auditory cortex when animals paid attention to novel or surprising acoustic events, such as jingling of keys. They dubbed such neurons ‘attention units’ in the auditory cortex. Since then, many studies have reported similar ‘attention’ effects under controlled behavioural conditions, in different animal models and across various auditory cortex regions.

Characterization of the tuning properties of cortical neurons using computational techniques has played a major role in investigating adaptive effects of attention on cortical activity. Specifically, spectro-temporal receptive fields (STRFs) are mathematical descriptions of the selectivity of individual neurons in response to sound events. The STRF is a two-dimensional time–frequency representation of the tuning properties of cortical neurons. From a systems theory viewpoint, each neuron can be thought of as a filter whose STRF describes the time–frequency attributes that excite the neuron. Evidence from behaving animals revealed that as behavioural goals changed, the tuning characteristics of individual neurons as captured by their STRFs adapted rapidly. This neural adaptation, or rapid plasticity, plays a role in enhancing neural responses to temporal and spectral modulations belonging to the target sound events, the foreground, and suppressing those that fall outside the target, the background. Effectively, under control of attention, the neural population appears to increase the contrast between the target and background, hence facilitating focusing on sound events of interest. Crucially, this process appears to be rapid, induced by attention, dependent on task and reward structure. It reflects the behavioural state of the animal and spans both primary and higher auditory areas.

Beyond findings at the single-neuron level in animal models, various non-invasive techniques have been used to investigate the extent of attentional modulation across auditory cortex for more complex auditory scenes in human listeners. Results using functional magnetic resonance imaging and electroencephalogram (EEG) have confirmed attention-driven increase of neural activity in the auditory cortex. Neural effects revealing distributed activity induced by spatial and non-spatial forms of auditory attention have also been observed. Different types of attention, notably feature-based versus object-based attention, appear to induce differential activation engaging areas such as planum temporale and different regions of the superior temporal gyrus. Tying back to results from single units in animal models, recent advances in computational methods allowed analysis of neural recordings in human listeners using magnetoencephalography (MEG) and surface electrodes that revealed greater activation to attended sounds relative to unattended sounds. Going further, mathematical tools are now being developed to allow estimation of ensemble receptive fields from MEG and EEG recordings, laying promising groundwork to unify results across different paradigms for a complete account of selective attention processing in the brain.

Despite the growing body of work supporting evidence that responses across auditory cortex are modulated by attention, translating such knowledge into computational models has been slow. One avenue in modelling has been to explicitly characterize the adaptation mechanism of STRFs. Mesgarani et al. hypothesized that the spotlight of attention works to enhance the separation between task-relevant target stimuli and the distractor background. Thus, the optimal STRF can be modelled as the filter that gives the highest discrimination between the neural responses to target and background acoustics, resulting in a deterministic linear system that can apply gain to physical features of the auditory input. In this framework, selective attention can work in a multitude of ways by enforcing different constraints based on perceptual goals, e.g. when listening for short dripping sounds to find the source of a water leak, optimization cost would be increased for slow temporal dynamics, or when attending to a male in a busy room full of children, lower pitches would be enhanced. While relatively simple, this model provides a powerful account of attentional effects at the single-neuron level. Still, it is limited in its ability to extend beyond orienting attention to physical properties of sound (e.g. attend to a class of sounds as opposed to a specific exemplar) and is invariant to task structure due to its implementation. In the last example, if the task were to ignore the male, the adaptation result would not be guaranteed to be different from that for the attend task, as the model separates two signals (male, children) without a conceptual knowledge of task demands (target/distractors).

Recognizing these limitations, Carlin & Elhilali proposed a framework to account for an explicit notion of foreground and background, assigning binary labels to distinguish target sound segments from reference segments as defined by a behavioural task. The addition of task structure to the model resulted in opposite adaptation patterns when the task was switched between reward (foreground) and evasion (background), in line with observed neurophysiological responses at the level of primary auditory cortex in behaving animals. The model was expanded to allow for object-based attention selection, which can ‘focus attention’ on simple abstractions based on physical properties of sound, rather than the acoustics themselves. For instance, attending to speech as a sound class (regardless of specific utterances and who the speaker is) requires ignoring details of specific acoustic instantiations and responding to abstracted representations of speech that distinguish its characteristics from those of other classes (or objects). The authors modelled such object-based selection as constraints on magnitude and phase profiles of the spectro-temporal dynamics of sound, and provided simulation results to show that modelled STRFs sharpen and orient to target modulations in line with reported physiological effects. Future research is necessary to unify the feature and object-based attention models, and provide neural recording data that better account for attention to complex abstractions of sound.

Another body of work modelled selective attention in a more abstract way by incorporating the attentional gains observed in neurons across physiological experiments into computational models implementing various components of auditory scene analysis. Kalinli & Narayanan extracted the ‘gist’ of an auditory scene from the biologically motivated acoustic features used in their model of salience, and employed a neural network to automatically learn optimal gains given specific tasks, such as scene classification. Patil & Elhilali implemented the hypothesis that attention acts as a prior in a Bayesian representation of the information from the senses. This model used a two-stage computational framework for recognition of acoustic scenes: a feature-extraction stage that mimicked processing in the auditory pathway from cochlea to primary auditory cortex, and an object-mapping stage that performed classification of features into scene types. Top-down attention worked at both the feature and the object level by applying gains onto the spectro-temporal filters that extract the features, and by adjusting the parameters of a scene classifier to optimize detection of the target scene.

The studies described thus far have taken a forward approach to modelling attention: given the sound input, they predict neural responses and compare the model output with brain responses. Some recent studies have taken a reverse approach to characterizing attention by reconstructing the sound input from recorded neural signals and comparing the reconstructed acoustic waveform with the input to illuminate the aspects of the soundscape that are most prominently represented in the recorded cortical area. While employing regression methods to reconstruct the sensory input from neural recordings is not new, the potential of this paradigm to study the effects of attention has only recently been used to demonstrate exciting results. Mesgarani & Chang reconstructed the spectrogram of the input from intracranial recordings to show that neural representations code salient acoustic features of sound; the reconstruction correlated most strongly with spectro-temporal areas of high energy in the attended source. Further, Ding & Simon reconstructed the input sound envelope from MEG recordings to show that it correlated more closely with the attended speech than the unattended speech in a scene of competing concurrent speakers. This set-up has been extended to reconstruct the attended speech from noisy single-trial EEG recordings, an especially important development for the EEG domain where noise reduction techniques coupled with averaging a high number of trials are typically necessary to estimate the neural signal. With this established framework, biologically plausible models are being designed to reconstruct the input sound from neural recordings, using dynamic state-space models and deep neural networks, extending our understanding of attentional gain at the systems level.


Validation of auditory attention models

While eye-tracking data provides objective evaluation metrics for vision models, attention models in audition have suffered from a lack of clear salience metrics. Most attention models mentioned in this review use their own validation data and metrics, ranging in scope from single-neuron activity to human responses or carefully selected sound events or scenes with attended or salient ‘ground-truth’ determined conceptually by the experimenter. Unfortunately, there is so far little consensus on the best way to probe effects of attention on auditory perception, whether it is task-directed or purely based on salience.

With the first auditory salience models, behavioural experimentation was employed merely to illustrate that the model could detect objectively salient events, such as an animal call amidst pure noise. These studies had subjects choose the more salient of two presented scenes, and used a variety of natural environmental sounds as the salient events. Later models adapted more sophisticated paradigms where the background had a predictable structure, and the task was the detection of the salient event, which had a deviation from the predictable pattern, such as a violin note popping out of a stream of piano notes. While these efforts provide a structured way of investigating the precise characteristics of salience perception, their artificial structure limits their account of salience in realistic settings. Attempts at using unstructured natural soundscapes to probe the perception of auditory salience are being made, where subjects listen to real recordings and denote by an interface the time instances they think are salient or interesting. However, unlike the visual domain, in which automatic eye saccades can be rapidly recorded for many scenes, the auditory method is not only much slower and inefficient, but suffers from conscious decision-making, and arguably does not represent purely bottom-up processing as well as its visual counterpart. An intuitive and objective ground-truth dataset for auditory salience would probably lead to a significant increase in modelling efforts, both in designing specialized computational systems that perform robust and efficient computations that can be incorporated into real-time naturalistic applications, and in comparing the performance of various mechanisms hypothesized to underlie neural attentional processing.

On the neural front, single-unit recordings from cats, monkeys and ferrets provide the most direct access to effects of attention on neural activity in the auditory system. While very informative about neural correlates of attentional modulation on brain networks, they are costly to perform, too invasive for human research and are limited in the amount of information that can be extracted about the intricate cortical networks engaged in auditory perception. They are also restricted to relatively simple or constrained behavioural paradigms that can be used to train animals in a laboratory setting.

The closest correlate to single-unit recordings for humans is electrocorticography (ECoG). Though highly invasive and applicable only to neurosurgery patients, this technique uses electrode grids placed on the exposed brain to investigate attentional modulation of cerebral cortex using rich and complex stimuli. By contrast, MEG and EEG offer non-invasive alternatives that are applicable to a more general population, even though they lack the spatial resolution of EcoG, and are more susceptible to artefacts. Unlike other behavioural measures, MEG and EEG also allow direct insights into neural processes without engaging explicit perceptual decision. However, analytic techniques need to be improved to balance the elimination of noise and preservation of neural information about attentional and perceptual states of subjects, especially in complex sound environments. Further, particularly in studies of bottom-up attention, a common experimental design is such that the subject is instructed to ignore the auditory input and remain engaged in a visual task such as watching a silent film or reading a book. This paradigm is vulnerable to top-down attentional confounds in the absence of distracting auditory stimuli or sufficiently engaging visual tasks.


Applications of auditory attention models

Aside from providing important contributions to theoretical neuroscience, models of attention play a significant role in a large variety of engineering applications. Particularly, performance on tasks for which humans effortlessly outperform computers could be improved with attention mechanisms, where the attention component would act as a filter to guide computational resources to areas of maximum information, effectively reducing system noise by ignoring irrelevant parts of the scene. One such task is speech and sound recognition: although a trivial task to perform for humans, automatic recognition suffers from significant performance degradation in noisy environments. Some of the surveyed modelling studies have demonstrated various ways in which attentional mechanisms could work to improve existing recognition technologies. Feature-based approaches make use of the feature-extraction schemes of salience models as a way to get a perceptually informative representation of sound input. This representation can be used to detect prominent syllables from speech or as an intermediate step for traditional speech feature extraction and recognition, or fed directly into a clustering mechanism for sound or emotion classification. Top-down task–based adaptations have been incorporated in attention systems by modelling the attentional gain as weights in the classifier to optimize performance based on specific task goals, or as a separate cognitive model deciding which speaker to attend to among competing sources. A more holistic attention mechanism has instead used the goal-directed adaptation framework of physiological STRFs as a pre-processing stage to speech recognition, by enabling the separation of the target speech stream from the distractor soundscape it is embedded in. The attentional filter provides significant gain to the target speech while being robust to previously unseen noise types. This system was further generalized to use model STRFs optimized for the task, where STRFs are designed as two-dimensional filters, with their parameters estimated from training data. Parametrizing the STRFs allowed for greater flexibility in implementing plasticity. While the authors demonstrated that this model resulted in better identification of speech in noise, the underlying framework can also be applied to a variety of auditory scene analysis problems by training STRFs for specific tasks.

The beneficial effect of attention has also been incorporated into numerous computational auditory models; we give some illustrative examples here. One computational system incorporated both bottom-up and top-down components to mimic human attentional orienting in a busy acoustic environment, allowing a soundscape designer to evaluate how the sound in planned urban environments might affect people. A bottom-up attention mechanism specifically designed for efficient auditory surveillance demonstrated powerful detection of alarming sound events such as gunshots and screams in natural scenes. It has been suggested that attention models are of great importance for improvements in sonification systems aimed at converting information into sound (e.g. as aids for the blind). An integration of bottom-up and top-down modelling techniques replicating processes in the auditory pathway was demonstrated to improve sound localization in reverberant environments. Auditory salience has been demonstrated to be an effective criterion for compression to reduce data size while retaining meaningful segments of large datasets of sound and video. Salience extraction has also been used as an abnormal sound detection mechanism for temporal signals, and generalized to lung sounds to use for finding medical abnormalities.

Finally, auditory attention models are an important component of audio–visual models and applications. In recent years, the necessity of incorporating auditory salience information in visual attention models is becoming increasingly recognized. This has led to the emergence of models using auditory salience direction to guide visual attention, along with audio–visual models where the two domains have equal weight in determining attentional orientation. These models show better performance than visual-only salience models in predicting eye gazes in videos.

Mechanisms of multimodal attention are especially crucial in efficient designs of robotic systems and brain–computer interfaces (BCIs). EEG being the most portable method by which brain signals can be recorded, models extracting cognitive information from EEG recordings are of particular significance for BCI systems. The surveyed stimulus reconstruction mechanisms that demonstrate the ability to detect who the subject is listening to have significant implications for powerful naturalistic BCIs. It is of particular interest that these methods are being optimized to use fewer electrodes and faster paradigms to achieve more portable, real-time interfaces. Artificial intelligence systems need attentional filters to select sensory input to process in a goal-oriented manner, and to be able to adapt to unpredictable natural environments. Attention mechanisms have been modelled in various robot and machine-sensing applications [94]. However, these systems use platform-specific definitions of salience and attention, and do not have a direct correlate in the purely computational attention models described here. The computational modelling field has seen significant advances since these robotic sensory designs. Exploring the applicability of new models in robot perception can provide valuable direction to future models, and as computational architectures develop refined biologically plausible mechanisms, human-like robots will become a closer reality.


Resolving the neural dynamics of visual and auditory scene processing in the human brain: a methodological approach

Radoslaw Martin Cichy, Santani Teng — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2017. PMC5206276, CC BY 4.0.

In natural environments, visual and auditory stimulation elicit responses across a large set of brain regions in a fraction of a second, yielding representations of the multimodal scene and its properties. The rapid and complex neural dynamics underlying visual and auditory information processing pose major challenges to human cognitive neuroscience. Brain signals measured non-invasively are inherently noisy, the format of neural representations is unknown, and transformations between representations are complex and often nonlinear. Further, no single non-invasive brain measurement technique provides a spatio-temporally integrated view. In this opinion piece, we argue that progress can be made by a concerted effort based on three pillars of recent methodological development: (i) sensitive analysis techniques such as decoding and cross-classification, (ii) complex computational modelling using models such as deep neural networks, and (iii) integration across imaging methods (magnetoencephalography/electroencephalography, functional magnetic resonance imaging) and models, e.g. using representational similarity analysis. We showcase two recent efforts that have been undertaken in this spirit and provide novel results about visual and auditory scene analysis. Finally, we discuss the limits of this perspective and sketch a concrete roadmap for future research.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘Auditory and visual scene analysis’.


Introduction

Imagine walking through the marketplace in an old town square. You traverse the large open space, filled with stalls, ringed by distant buildings and dominated by a cathedral at one end. Passing groups of chatting shoppers, shouting vendors and singing birds, you enter the cathedral and find yourself in the dark entryway. Close grey walls surround you, and outside sounds are damped so that you only hear your own footsteps in the space. Your percepts change dramatically a third time as you proceed to the light-filled nave, your footsteps now reverberating from the high ceilings and walls. The instantaneous and effortless parsing of every scene in this everyday sequence belies the enormous computational complexity of this task. Ambiguous, noisy input—both visual and auditory—is rapidly converted into a percept of the spatial layout that can guide your navigation and distinguish meaningful objects. Reflecting this complexity, the first few hundred milliseconds of processing a stimulus feature a large cascade of rapidly activated brain regions, transforming sensory representations at each step.

Understanding these spatio-temporal neural dynamics poses major methodological and conceptual challenges for contemporary cognitive neuroscience. We identify three major methodological stumbling blocks: the noisiness of current brain imaging data; the inherently sparse and nonlinear relationship between stimuli and neural response patterns; and the lack of non-invasive brain measurement techniques highly resolved in both time and space.

In this opinion piece, we suggest a tripartite approach as a remedy, addressing each stumbling block, respectively: multivariate pattern classification techniques, complex computational modelling inspired by computer science, and a common quantitative framework for combining different neuroimaging and modelling results. To elucidate the proposed approach, we summarize two recent research efforts investigating visual and auditory scene perception. Finally, we discuss limits of the proposed approach and suggest concrete examples for further research in visual and auditory scene perception along the presented methodological lines.


Three current methodological challenges in unravelling human visual and auditory scene perception


Brain signals measured non-invasively in humans are inherently noisy

The first challenge exemplifies the difficulty of in vivo physiological measurements. The neuroimaging methods in standard use throughout cognitive neuroscience are non-invasive and thus inherently noisier than direct neuronal recordings. The most common techniques are functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electro- and magnetoencephalography (M/EEG). fMRI is sensitive to blood oxygenation levels, which correlate with local neuronal activity. Owing to thermal and physiological noise, signal changes from neuronal activity–related blood oxygenation typically amount to only a few per cent of the measured signal. While M/EEG measures neuronal activity more directly compared with fMRI, it is equally affected by instrumental, physiological (e.g. muscle artefacts from breathing and heartbeats) and environmental (e.g. all other electrical equipment in the vicinity) noise.

Future improvements in recording techniques, such as ultrahigh-field fMRI and new types of MEG sensors, will probably continue to improve signal-to-noise (SNR) ratios. However, immediate benefits are available from current analysis techniques that make the best use of weak information in noisy brain data.


The sparseness and nonlinearity of neuronal responses obscures the computations underlying scene perception

The second challenge is a consequence of incomplete mechanistic information. Fully understanding a complex system—such as the neural systems underlying visual and auditory scene perception—requires a quantitative model of the neural computations involved. A common and principled approach is decomposition of the system into parts, and the stepwise sequential modelling of the computations in each part from bottom to top, e.g. from sensory input to the high-level representation of the scene.

However, for this approach to work, what is to be modelled must be known in quantitative and detailed terms: the brain regions involved in the computation and the neuronal response properties in those regions. These preconditions pose a problem. The regions involved in visual and auditory scene processing can be inferred from sources such as neuropsychology, anatomy and brain imaging, but this knowledge is incomplete. Further, along the neural processing cascade, neurons respond increasingly sparsely and nonlinearly to sensory stimulation, making systematic investigation of detailed response properties difficult. In effect, for both visual and auditory processing, the bottom-up approach has been most successful in modelling early processing stages, and less so for higher processing stages in mid- and high-level cortical areas.

Further progress necessitates an alternative modelling approach to visual and auditory scene perception that does not depend on a priori detailed knowledge of neuronal response properties and step-by-step sequential discovery of processing stages from bottom to top.


No single non-invasive brain measurement technique provides a spatio-temporally integrated and algorithmically informed view of scene perception

The third challenge stems from the limitations of imaging modalities. Existing non-invasive brain measurement techniques commonly used in humans provide either high spatial or temporal resolution, but not both simultaneously. fMRI provides relatively high spatial resolution, typically on the order of a few millimetres or even below, but suffers from limited temporal resolution due to the sluggishness of the BOLD response. M/EEG, by contrast, provides high temporal resolution at the level of single milliseconds, but suffers from comparably low spatial resolution. Thus, for a spatio-temporally resolved view of brain function, information from several brain imaging techniques must be integrated and related with modelling results, as described above for algorithmic information. However, there is no direct and easy mapping between sensor spaces in fMRI, MEG and computer models: it is difficult to determine how activity in any particular voxel would relate to activity in any particular MEG sensor or any particular model part. Thus, a principled alternative indirect approach is needed to quantitatively relate different brain measurements and models to each other.


A tripartite approach to tackle current methodological challenges

Here, we argue that progress can be made by a concerted effort based on three pillars of recent methodological development: (i) multivariate analysis techniques such as decoding and cross-decoding to increase sensitivity for low-SNR neuroimaging data; (ii) top-down modelling of brain activity by complex models—in particular, deep neural networks (DNNs)—to understand neuronal representations and algorithms; and (iii) the integration of imaging methods and models in a common quantitative framework using representational similarity analysis (RSA). Together these pillars support a common quantitative framework for a spatio-temporally resolved and algorithmically informed account visual and auditory scene perception. We describe the rationale of each methodological pillar below.


Multivariate pattern classification for noisy brain data

The overall goal of neuroimaging is to establish statistical dependencies between measurements of brain activity and experimental conditions. The received analysis approach towards this goal for M/EEG and fMRI is a mass univariate approach: brain activity is measured with a large number of sensors, and then signal in each sensor is analysed separately. Activation differences between nearby sensors are assumed to stem from noise, motivating signal averaging across sensors to increase the SNR ratio. Thus, any signal in activation differences between sensors is lost, and only signal in mean activity is considered. Contrary to this expectation, it has emerged over the last decade that fine-grained differences between nearby sensors do contain valuable information, for both M/EEG and fMRI research on both visual and auditory perception. Thus, instead of averaging across sensors, a multivariate approach that captures dependencies between activity in multiple sensors in combination and experimental conditions is called for.

A growing number of researchers in auditory and visual scene perception are making use of multivariate analysis methods (e.g. a small sample due to space constraints:). We believe that further popularization of the multivariate analysis approach—for which a multitude of software toolboxes are readily available, e.g.—will benefit future investigations of visual and auditory scene perception.

Here we illustrate the general approach for the analysis of M/EEG data (for recent in-depth reviews focusing on fMRI). The basic idea for establishing a statistical relationship between activity in multiple sensors and experimental conditions is to conceptualize activity in multiple sensors as patterns and to treat the analysis as a pattern classification problem. This turns the task into a straightforward application of pattern classification techniques readily available from machine learning (for detailed explanation, a). In short, an algorithm called a machine learning classifier learns a mapping between activation patterns and experimental conditions. Then, the classifier is tested on independent data. Successful prediction of experimental conditions by the classifier indicates the presence of information about experimental conditions in the activation patterns. This establishes a dependency between activation patterns and experimental conditions, which can subsequently be tested for statistical significance.

Classification reveals statistical dependencies between experimental conditions and brain activity, but does not characterize the neural representation further. In an extension of the classification approach known as cross-classification, different conditions are assigned to the training and testing sets (c). Correct cross-classification indicates similarity between the sensor patterns underlying the different conditions of the training and the testing set. This in turn is interpreted as tolerance of neural representations to whatever factors distinguish the conditions in the training and testing sets. For example, a classifier may be trained to distinguish between brain responses to animate and inanimate objects in a training set of images. High classification accuracy on brain responses to a second, independent (testing) set of images would be interpreted as sensitivity to the general property of animacy, rather than specific differences in the training set.

M/EEG, due to its high temporal resolution, offers the possibility of cross-classification across time (d). For this, the classifier is trained on pattern vectors from one time point and tested on pattern vectors from other time points. Continued successful classifier performance is interpreted as evidence for temporal stability of the underlying neural representations, while transient neural representations would manifest in successful cross-classification only near the trained time point.

In sum, multivariate pattern analysis promises better detection power for weak signals in noisy brain data, allowing the investigation of questions in visual and auditory scene perception with stronger evidence basis, and helping to characterize the underlying neural computations both in the nature of the representations involved and their temporal dynamics.


Addressing challenge 2: top-down modelling to discover sensory representations

An alternative to the bottom-up modelling approach for visual and auditory scene perception in cortex is to revert the direction of modelling to top-down (a). Thus, a specific objective of the brain becomes the starting point for the model: a cognitive task is defined, e.g. scene classification. Next, a computer model is trained to perform the specified objective. Finally, the model representations are compared with measured neural representations.

As we do not know a priori with which representations to model visual and auditory scene processing, models that learn the necessary representations themselves are of particular interest. A promising class of models are deep convolutional neural networks (DNNs). These multi-layered neural networks perform linear (convolution, i.e. point-wise multiplication with a filter) and nonlinear operations (pooling of responses across neurons, and thresholding) at each layer (b). When trained on tasks such as scene or object classification, these models learn the representations necessary to fulfil the task (c). DNNs perform better than any other known model class and sometimes even rival human performance.

Several studies using the top-down modelling approach have shown that DNNs employ similar visual representations as the brain. DNNs trained on visual object categorization explain more variance in high-level ventral visual cortex in monkey and human than any other model. Further, the relation between DNNs and the brain is hierarchical: representations in low-level visual areas were similar to lower layers of the network, and representations in high-level visual areas were similar to higher layers of the network. A similar correspondence was found in processing time: higher layers of the DNN were similar to MEG data later in time with respect to image onset. While the top-down modelling approach using DNNs was pioneered in vision, it is not limited to vision. DNNs perform well on auditory tasks, such as automated speech recognition. Very recent research points towards a hierarchical relationship between processing stages of DNNs trained on auditory tasks and regions of the human auditory system. This promises new insight on the much-debated delineation of functional sub-regions of auditory cortex and adds to the demonstrated utility of neural networks in parcellating not only speech but also the gist of auditory scenes. Fortunately, excellent software toolboxes to aid in DNN training are readily available.

Together, preliminary results suggest that top-down modelling of visual and auditory scene perception can provide valuable insight into the underlying neural architecture, algorithms and representations.


Addressing challenge 3: integration of imaging methods and models for a spatio-temporally resolved and algorithmically informed view

For a spatio-temporally integrated and algorithmically informed view on scene perception, brain measurements with techniques with high spatial resolution (such as fMRI), high temporal resolution (such as M/EEG) and models providing algorithmic explicitness must be combined in a common framework. A large body of research has established relations between all possible pairs of the triplet of M/EEG, fMRI and computational models: M/EEG and fMRI, fMRI and computational models and M/EEG with computational models. However, establishing a relation between any two members of a triplet is not informative about the relation to the third. Integrating all three members of the triplet in a common framework offers more comprehensive insight into the spatio-temporal dynamics of visual and auditory scene perception.

A recent approach with this goal is representational similarity analysis (RSA) (for in-depth introduction and review). The basic idea is to abstract away from the particular source spaces in which data is accrued, e.g. voxels, M/EEG sensors or model parts, into a common similarity space (a–c). The similarity space is defined by the similarity of patterns related to experimental conditions in the respective source space (voxels, sensors, etc.). Representational similarities are in the same space and can thus easily be linked directly to each other through second-order similarity (i.e. similarity of similarities, d). Thus, this approach has the potential to create links in a common, quantitative framework between any comparisons across disparate source spaces, e.g. M/EEG and fMRI to computational models (e,f) or to each other (g). Importantly, excellent toolboxes that ease the application of RSA in different programming environments are readily available.

Thus, the application of RSA to visual and auditory scene perception has the potential to bring together insights from different and usually disparate sources with synergistic gain. Note that RSA is open in principle to integration of any kind of additional information, such as data from different species and behaviour. In particular, it is well suited for the investigation of subject-specific idiosyncrasies in brain function beyond the group average. By allowing the combination of behavioural measures with measures of neural data in a common framework, it assesses individual differences in a way unlikely to be affected by subject-specific differences unrelated to activity of the nervous system relevant for behaviour. In this way, subject-specific representations could augment analyses of individual differences by merging functional data with other neurophysiological or behavioural measures.


Highlighting two research efforts conducted in this spirit

In this section, we will highlight two recent research efforts in visual and auditory scene perception that make use of major parts of the tripartite, concerted method strategy, i.e. multivariate pattern classification, DNN modelling and integration of results in a quantitative framework.

Both studies investigate the question of spatial layout perception. Perceiving the layout of the visual scene is a crucial ability for all animals engaged in locomotion and navigation. Operationalizing spatial layout as the size of the space a scene subtends in the real world, the two studies investigated the temporal dynamics of visual and auditory scene perception, respectively.


The representation of the size of a visual scene in the human brain and deep neural networks


Multivariate pattern classification reveals the time course of single-scene and scene size processing

To probe the representations of scenes in brains and computer models, Cichy et al. used a stimulus set of 48 indoor images, differing along 4 orthogonal dimensions: scene size (large versus small), clutter level (high versus low clutter), luminance and contrast (a). In a first step, they used time-resolved multivariate pattern classification on MEG data (epoched from −100 to +900 ms w.r.t. stimulus onset) to identify the time course with which single images of scenes were discriminated by visual representations. This analysis revealed a robust signal with a peak at 97 ms (b). In a second step, they identified the part of the observed signal directly related to the representation of scene size. For this, they compared the results of the classification analysis for images of same and different scene size, subtracting the average of the former from the latter. They found that scene size was represented in the brain with a distinctive time course, peaking at approximately 249 ms (c).


Cross-classification reveals tolerance of visual scene size representations to other scene properties

To be ecologically useful, representations of scene size must be tolerant to variation in other properties of the scene, such as low-level image features arising from particular viewing conditions (e.g. luminance and contrast), and to other properties of scene such as the amount of clutter or category. To investigate the tolerance of scene representations, the authors used cross-classification across orthogonal experimental dimensions. For example, to investigate the tolerance of scene size representations to clutter level, they trained a classifier on MEG sensor patterns related to low-clutter scenes and tested the classifier on MEG sensor patterns related to high-clutter scenes. They found that the scene size signal was tolerant to changes in luminance, contrast, clutter and scene identity (d). Finally, to establish the temporal stability of representations underlying the representation of scene size, Cichy et al. used cross-classification across time. They found that scene size representations were stable over time from approximately 200 to 600 ms (e).

Together, these results showed the time course with which scene representations emerge in the human brain, exemplifying the potential of multivariate pattern analysis for understanding the neural mechanisms of visual scene processing.


Comparison to computational models suggests common mechanisms for the emergence of scene properties in brains and artificial networks

To investigate the nature of visual scene representations, the authors compared scene representations in human brains with computational models. The set of computational models consisted of two standard models of scene and object perception (HMAX and GIST) and two DNN models trained on object and scene categorization.

First, using RSA, the authors investigated how well each computational model accounted for emerging visual scene representations. They found that while all models had similar representations of scenes as the human brain, representations of the DNN models were most similar (f).

In a second step, the authors further investigated the emergence of scene size further in DNNs. The findings were threefold. First, both a DNN trained on object and on scene categorization predicted the scene size of an image (g). This indicates that DNNs capture abstract scene properties in their representations even when not being trained to do so, suggesting by analogy how scene size representations may emerge in neural circuits. Second, the representation of scene size increased with increasing layer number of the network, indicating the gradual build-up of representations that index scene size (g). Interestingly, the opposite was observed for low-level image properties, luminance and contrast (h). This suggests that DNNs have a brain-like hierarchical processing structure in which representations of relevant visual properties gradually emerge and representations of irrelevant visual properties of visual scenes are lost. Third, the DNN trained on scene categorization had stronger representations of scene size than the DNN trained on object categorization (g). This shows that the visual task on which DNNs are trained changes representational structure, concurrent with the presence of partly overlapping processing streams in the human brain for different visual contents such as objects and scenes.

Together, these results show how the nature of scene processing can be elucidated from a computational perspective, using complex computational models such as DNNs and comparison with brain data using RSA.


The representation of the size of an auditory scene


Multivariate pattern classification reveals the time course of single-scene identity and scene size processing

In a similar design applied to the auditory domain, Teng et al. used a set of nine stimuli, varying across orthogonal dimensions of space size and sound source (a). Participants listened passively to the stimuli, responding with a button press to occasional deviant vigilance stimuli. The MEG data were epoched from −200 to 1000 ms relative to stimulus onset and were analysed to determine the time course of single-condition classification. The classification peak of this time course occurred at 156 ms post-stimulus onset.

The classification analysis was repeated with stimulus conditions pooled by space size or sound source identity, yielding two distinct time courses of sound source and space size discrimination, peaking approximately 250 ms apart (b). This suggests that the representations encoding spatial extent are separable in time, potentially drawing on different temporal features of the stimuli. In a control experiment, the authors report that decoding peaks occurred in a similar time window even when stimuli were equated at 2 s duration, implicating a consistent neural time course irrespective of stimulus duration. A follow-up experiment (not shown) confirmed that behavioural reaction times and accuracies of pairwise same-different judgments correlated significantly with MEG classification peak latencies and decoding accuracies, suggesting that the neurodynamic signal reflects perceptual processing.


Cross-classification across scene properties and time reveals stability of auditory representations

To test the stability of these representations, the authors cross-classified space size across sound sources (training space size on two sound sources, then testing on the third), and vice versa. The resulting time courses peaked at nearly identical time points as the pooled classification analysis, indicating that auditory scene attribute representations are tolerant to variations such as spectral and level differences (b). A temporal generalization analysis classifying across time points (c) revealed relatively rapid initial dynamics, indicated by classifier performance close to the diagonal, and increasing stability of the neural representation thereafter, indicated by a ‘spread’ of classifier performance to time points distant from the diagonal.


Model fits suggest progressive space size representation

To evaluate the nature of the auditory representations, the authors compared the MEG signal to simple models hypothesizing pure categorical or ordinal space size coding (d). These took the form of representational dissimilarity matrices (RDMs) in which each cell denoted a categorical difference between space sizes (representational distance of 0 versus 1) or a stepwise progression (0, 1 or 2). The ordinal model was found to correlate more strongly with the MEG data than the categorical model (e), suggesting that the neural representations are more consistent with a sequential progression of space size coding than with a generic categorical distinction; i.e. that space is represented neurally along a size dimension.


Limits of the proposed methodological approach

The goal of this opinion piece is to encourage use of advanced analysis methods in the study of visual and auditory scene perception. The immediate limits of this perspective are thus the respective limits of the proposed methods.

For classification and cross-classification, the major limitation is that these methods do not explicitly model how the brain implements, i.e. realizes the probed representation. Instead, the nature of the specific neural realization has to be inferred. To add this missing link, pattern classification approaches can be complemented with encoding models.

Relatedly, the major drawback of RSA is the direct flipside of its major advantage: the relation of representations to specific realizations is not specified, i.e. many different realizations can have the same similarity structure. On the one hand, this enables comparison across disparate spaces; on the other, it leaves an unspecific link between representation and realization. To rephrase this in the framework of David Marr's levels of analysis of a cognitive system, the levels of analysis show some independence, evident in the fact that one algorithm or representation can be implemented (i.e. realized) in many different ways. However, not all realizations may be on par once processing speed and efficiency are assessed, or the performing system's error profile is evaluated. Thus, further investigation is needed to fully reveal the neuronal realization of representations in the human brain.

The major drawback of top-down models is that they are not explicit about the same aspects as bottom-up models. In particular, bottom-up models are explicit about the nature of the representations in the model, whereas top-down models are not. Thus, additional techniques must be applied to those models to visualize and understand features. For DNNs as the most widely used models for top-down modelling today, in particular, two limits are that massive supervised learning is not a realistic learning scheme for the brain and that the brain's perceptual functions include much more than categorical identification of stimuli. Approaches using unsupervised and one-shot learning might be able to narrow this gap.


Concrete roadmap for further research

We believe that the presented framework may enrich any type of research in visual and cognitive scene processing. Here we exemplify this potential in a concrete roadmap for further research to three open questions in scene processing.

First, what are the spatio-temporal dynamics of visual and auditory scene processing, respectively? Previous research has focused on revealing either the temporal or the spatial dimension. Integrated methods such as fMRI–M/EEG fusion might yield insight into how the information flows in the network of regions related to scene processing in the visual and auditory cortical networks and their interaction. Revealing the order of, and thus input–output relationships between, the nodes of the scene-processing cortical network will aid understanding of scene processing at the representational and algorithmic levels.

Second, what are the spatio-temporal dynamics with which information from the visual and auditory modalities are integrated to yield a unified percept of the scene? The research efforts sketched above revealed the time course with which scene size representations emerge in vision and audition separately, but did not relate those to each other. It is an exciting venue for further research using RSA and cross-classification methods on both fMRI and MEG data to reveal where and when in the brain modality independent scene properties emerge in the brain.

Third, what is the detailed nature of visual and auditory scene representations along the processing hierarchy in each modality? DNN modelling and top-down comparison with neural data are well suited to investigate this question. For example, it has recently been shown that task-orthogonal object properties—such as object size, position and pose—emerge along the hierarchy of a DNN trained on visual object classification, rather than being abstracted away. Strikingly, this was found to mirror the coding of the ventral visual stream in humans, and thus suggested re-thinking our understanding about where different types of visual object information is represented in the human brain. This directly motivates further research into the nature of representation of scene properties such as spatial layout, the contained objects, functional role and affordances in both the visual and the auditory domain. Further, while the current fit between human brains and DNNs is stunning, it might be further improved, e.g. by increasing architectural similarity. In particular, one possibility is to build a fovea–periphery organization as present in human retina into the DNN and to evaluate its consequences. A specific consequence of this might be the emergence of a correspondence in topography between DNNs and brains. In the human brain, it has been observed that face-selective regions have a foveal bias and scene-selective regions have a peripheral bias. Introducing a fovea–periphery organization into the DNN might lead to the emergence of a similar topography in the DNN.

Finally, in this article, our discussion and detailed examples have predominantly featured examples of sensory processing of scenes and their features. However, at a given moment, only fragments of scenes are accessible to consciousness, guided and filtered by attention, salience and task demands. The strength and flexibility of our approach—accessing and relating fine-grained representations in a variety of data modalities—can also be applied here, offering an additional tool to pursue elusive signals such as the auditory neural correlate of consciousness (NCCA).


Conclusion

In sum, we have argued for a tripartite effort to further understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying visual and auditory scene perception: multivariate analysis methods, an integrated quantitative framework and top-down computational modelling. Acknowledging that theory and elegant experiments cannot be supplanted by analysis methods, we are convinced that the latter opens new horizons and opportunities not to be missed by the contemporary investigator.


How is visual salience computed in the brain? Insights from behaviour, neurobiology and modelling

Richard Veale, Ziad M Hafed, Masatoshi Yoshida — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2017. PMC5206280, CC BY 4.0.

Inherent in visual scene analysis is a bottleneck associated with the need to sequentially sample locations with foveating eye movements. The concept of a ‘saliency map’ topographically encoding stimulus conspicuity over the visual scene has proven to be an efficient predictor of eye movements. Our work reviews insights into the neurobiological implementation of visual salience computation. We start by summarizing the role that different visual brain areas play in salience computation, whether at the level of feature analysis for bottom-up salience or at the level of goal-directed priority maps for output behaviour. We then delve into how a subcortical structure, the superior colliculus (SC), participates in salience computation. The SC represents a visual saliency map via a centre-surround inhibition mechanism in the superficial layers, which feeds into priority selection mechanisms in the deeper layers, thereby affecting saccadic and microsaccadic eye movements. Lateral interactions in the local SC circuit are particularly important for controlling active populations of neurons. This, in turn, might help explain long-range effects, such as those of peripheral cues on tiny microsaccades. Finally, we show how a combination of in vitro neurophysiology and large-scale computational modelling is able to clarify how salience computation is implemented in the local circuit of the SC.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘Auditory and visual scene analysis’.

Keywords: overt attention, saliency map, superior colliculus, lateral inhibition, microsaccades, spiking neuron network


Visual scene analysis in the brain

The brain responds to the visual world via a collection of parallel neural pathways beginning in the retina. Some of these pathways perform selective modulation of the visual signal, highlighting features and locations that contain relevant information. Because we can only look at one location at a time, such selectivity allows us to sequentially sample the visual world by moving our eyes, head and body. We refer to this redirection of sensory apparati as ‘overt attention’. This review lays out the current state of neurobiological evidence for overt attention. In other words, how does the brain select the next place to look? Evidence is converging to support the hypothesis that there exist multiple ‘maps’ in the brain that participate in computing the next place to look. Within each map, the conspicuity of all points in the visual scene is encoded in parallel. The next target of attention is then selected via a process involving competition within each map and merging of maps.

Two types of map have been proposed. One type is the ‘saliency map’, which computes visually conspicuous points based on low-level visual features such as brightness, colour, oriented edges and motion. The other map type is known as the goal-directed ‘priority map’. The priority map integrates information from the bottom-up saliency map with task- and goal-relevant information. Neither the saliency map nor the priority map exclusively encodes the target that has been selected to look at next. Rather, the maps code the graded salience or priority values for each location in the visual field. Even though the target of the next saccade may not yet be selected, each map contains information about the probability of a visual location being next foveated. It is important to clarify this terminology, because different authors use the word ‘attention’ to refer to different physiological, behavioural or cognitive phenomena. Here, we take care to differentiate between ‘graded attention’ representations (pre-selection) versus ‘attentional target’ representations (post-selection). We focus on how overt attention (i.e. the point in visual space that is being fixated) is influenced by both pre- and post-selection maps.

Using experiments that dissociate the contributions of low-level saliency maps from goal-directed priority maps, a picture has begun to emerge for how the brain is able to use a combination of bottom-up and top-down mechanisms to efficiently select the next attentional target. This review addresses our understanding of the neural circuits that underlie the bottom-up saliency map, and specifically how these circuits contribute to saccadic eye movements, which represent the fastest way to redirect overt attention. Besides clarifying computational principles and underlying neurophysiological mechanisms, our review complements clinical perspectives in the study of visual (and auditory) salience. For example, it is known that individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) perform differently in both visual and auditory scene analysis tasks than non-ASD individuals. Thus, understanding the mechanisms responsible for overt attention shifts can aid in differential diagnosis and possibly even therapy. Although this review focuses on visual stimuli, sounds also commonly draw overt attention shifts. Similar to how ‘colour’ is used to compute salience in the visual modality, Southwell et al. have found that one salient property of auditory stimuli is ‘predictable repetition over time’. For a broader background, this issue also includes comprehensive review comparing models of auditory and visual salience.

Our review proceeds as follows. First, we present a short overview of the bottom-up saliency map model, so that it can be clearly dissociated from goal-directed priority, and from visual feature analysis. Second, we overview attention-related visual pathways of the brain, focusing on physiological and behavioural evidence for saliency map-like or priority map-like responses in these pathways. We conclude that although priority-map-like and saliency-map-like responses can be observed in various areas, one brain region in particular—the superior colliculus (SC)—mechanistically implements the saliency map computational model by virtue of its local circuits and unique pattern of inputs and outputs. Third, in the light of this, we zoom in to focus on the SC. The SC is a midbrain structure that has emerged as a strong candidate for being the final gatekeeper between saliency/priority maps and overt behaviour. In order to support this hypothesis, we review SC anatomy and physiology in detail, complemented with recent in-depth computational models fit to empirical data.


What is a saliency map?

A salience computational model describes how low-level exogenous visual features such as colour, orientation, luminance and motion are combined into a single global map representing the relative ‘salience’ of each point on the map. The saliency map is a two-dimensional map, with the amplitude at a given point representing how perceptually conspicuous the corresponding region is in visual space, regardless of what caused it to be conspicuous. In other words, the saliency map is feature-agnostic—a highly salient point could equally have been caused by a yellow dot on a blue background as by a non-moving region against a moving background. The saliency map concept was originally proposed by Koch & Ullman and was later implemented by Itti et al.. We refer to this implementation as the Itti salience model. overviews the major pieces of the saliency map computational model. In short: (i) feature maps representing basic visual features such as colour, orientation, luminance and motion (computed from image sequences) compete within themselves to determine which locations on the map are most ‘different’ from their surroundings at many spatial scales; (ii) feature maps are normalized and then combined into a feature-agnostic ‘saliency map’. The saliency map is then used to determine the most likely target for attention. Variations of this basic saliency map model have been extensively applied to predicting human eye movements during free-viewing of natural and complex scenes. Hereafter, we use terminology primarily following the Itti salience model, such as ‘feature map’, ‘saliency map’ and ‘priority map’.

Despite success in predicting eye movements, it is not clear what the saliency map represents from a neural standpoint. In a recent review, Zelinsky & Bisley dissected the theoretical properties needed to differentiate between salience and priority based on the behavioural task. Importantly, they also distinguished between whether a brain area is part of the local computation of salience or priority and whether it receives a computed result as input (‘inheritance’). There have also been other previous reviews about visual attention, which have primarily focused on the computational problems solved by a salience-driven system. Based on these reviews, a prevalent state of the field is that biologically plausible models remain to be developed. However, drawing parallels between computational models and neural activity is a delicate endeavour. Predicting behaviour by the Itti salience model only implies computational similarity between the model and its biological implementation. Furthermore, even if we give the saliency map model the benefit of the doubt, then the same input–output mapping could potentially be accomplished via multiple algorithms. For example, in a digital computer, numbers can be represented in binary or hexadecimal format, and sorting a list of numbers could be accomplished by any number of algorithms, all of which produce the same output. In this review, we are explicitly interested in finding evidence of saliency map model computation in the brain. We look for evidence of computational equivalence (to show that the Itti salience model is the correct computational model) and then algorithmic equivalence (to show that, furthermore, representation of intermediate steps is basically the same set of two-dimensional amplitude maps predicted by the model). We then attempt to understand how the algorithmic equivalence may be realized by the specific implementation of local computations in the spiking neural substrate of the brain.

In §3, we review the corpus of excellent research regarding the neural correlates of salience computation. Over the years, authors have had different interpretations of what it means to be a neural correlate of salience computation, making it difficult to construct a consistent story at any level of description. With this in mind, there is converging evidence that certain brain regions exhibit neural activity that is both retinotopically organized and proportional to the activity predicted by different steps in the saliency map model. In §4, we provide stronger evidence that the brain implements the saliency map model, using recent research from the well-understood subcortical route. We also overview recent results showing how small saccadic eye movements made during fixation (microsaccades) can give insights into local interactions within the SC, and thus constrain the salience model implementation in the brain. Finally, we use biological models fit to physiological data suggesting how salience is implemented in local circuits.


Visual pathways for salience

Several parallel pathways control visually guided overt attention shifts (saccades). These pathways all begin in the retina and terminate at the extraocular muscles. shows the major pathways and brain regions addressed in this review. At the sensory side, visual information usually enters the brain via the primary visual cortex (V1), through relays in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the dorsal thalamus. At the motor side, eye movements are usually evoked through bursting activity in the deeper layers of the SC, which propagates to eye movement control centres in the brainstem.

Anatomically, V1 sends axons to higher visual areas, such as V4 and the lateral intraparietal area (LIP), as well as to the superficial layers of the SC (sSC), located in the midbrain. There are also parallel projections via other cortical areas to the frontal eye fields (FEF) and then to the deeper layers of the SC (dSC). Such SC projections are both direct and through a disinhibitory pathway via the basal ganglia known to be involved in voluntary gaze shifts. There is also a parallel subcortical route directly from the retina to the sSC, which has been the subject of less attention, as well as several other parallel routes to cortex via pulvinar. Neurons in the sSC receive input not only from V1, but also from extrastriate areas V2, V4, MT and TEO.

To understand how salience is represented in the brain, we must define salience from a neural perspective. For a brain area to represent salience, neurons in the area should exhibit two properties: (i) be selective to salience rather than to visual features per se; (ii) have receptive fields (RFs) organized into a two-dimensional topographical map of visual space. Based on this definition, previous papers suggest that there may be no single saliency map in the brain, which represents purely bottom-up visual information with invariance to low-level visual features (e.g. luminance, colour, orientation and motion). Rather, maps are distributed in various areas, with map properties being similar across neighbouring areas; this is reasonable given the bidirectional nature of connectivity between areas. Additionally, experimental data from converging sources (detailed in §§3a–c) have argued for a role of the areas in in one or more of the following functions: (i) feature analysis, which is part of raw visual feature computation rather than salience computation; (ii) feature map representation, in which bottom-up salience computation based on raw visual features is computed; (iii) saliency map representation, using feature-agnostic bottom-up salience computation; and (iv) priority map formation in which behavioural relevance is integrated.

From a neurobiological perspective, we also argue that there are additional constraints on how salience is implemented. Specifically, visual saliency maps may be further classified as exhibiting different emphasis on either vision or action (a). Thus, logically, there are four possible maps, classified into two-by-two components. Each column in a indicates whether the map is specialized for certain visual features or not, and each row indicates whether the map contains information about behavioural goals or not. Thus, the labels ‘vision’ and ‘action’ in highlight the specialization within a given map, from a computational modelling sense. In this scheme, feature maps, saliency maps and priority maps can all be classified into one of the four matrix positions (a). The major view of how visually guided overt attention works has been as follows: an implementation of the Itti salience model somewhere in the brain processes visual feature maps into a feature-agnostic saliency map, and then this bottom-up salience information feeds into a priority map where it is integrated with top-down information. However, there is one remaining, logically possible map, having both feature specificity and goal information simultaneously. We call this map a ‘feature-specific priority map’. In the following sections, we classify each relevant brain region as computationally equivalent (i.e. having similar output) to one of the four categories of a using data from available human and monkey studies.


Cortical pathways


Lateral geniculate nucleus, visual cortex

Neurons in the retina, LGN and V1 are tuned to visual features such as luminance contrast, colour and orientation. Furthermore, intrinsic interactions within V1 and LGN cause neurons to spatially suppress adjacent neurons of the same feature tuning. This local suppression means that neural activity in V1 and LGN represents local feature differences, rather than raw visual features. A V1 neuron tuned to respond to red colours will respond to a red dot in its RF less vigorously if the dot is surrounded by other red dots than if it is surrounded by green dots. Thus, V1 computes salience of an odd-ball stimulus, albeit in a feature-specific manner.

Although viable proposals exist suggesting that V1 may compute a feature-agnostic saliency map, these proposals are weakened by the lack of neural data to support them. Recently, one intriguing study used a visual search paradigm with various levels of conjunctive features to demonstrate salience-based behavioural effects. Because V1 neurons are never tuned to conjunctions of visual features, the authors argued that V1 could mediate behavioural effects by implementing a feature-agnostic saliency map. However, behavioural results do not necessitate that the saliency map be implemented in V1. Furthermore, recent results have directly contradicted the hypothesis by providing evidence that blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) signals in V1 do not correlate with salience, but rather with luminance contrast. This is significant, because contrast correlates strongly with salience unless care is taken to separate them. Chen et al. responded by measuring BOLD activity while subjects performed a visual discrimination task involving an unrelated natural image presented briefly. The natural images were carefully selected to have single isolated regions of either high or low salience. Chen et al. found that V1 BOLD signals were higher for high salience images than low salience images, whereas this was not the case in LGN, V2, V4, LOC or IPS. In contrast, White et al. used electrophysiological recordings in macaques to show that SC neurons downstream of V1 certainly do encode salience, whereas neurons in V1 do not (an abstract at Vision Science Society meeting 2014 and). These seemingly contradictory results should make one pause, but White et al.’s results are supported by the lesion studies of Yoshida and co-workers, which are presented next.

Further evidence that V1 contributes to salience computation by implementing feature maps is provided by the work of Yoshida et al.. These authors used a computational saliency map model to predict eye movement patterns of macaques with V1 lesions during free-viewing. Using regression techniques to weigh the contributions of each feature map to the final saliency map, they demonstrated that V1 removal abolished the contribution of orientation features, whereas other feature types (such as luminance, colour and movement) were mostly unaffected. In other words, the monkeys still made eye movements as predicted by the saliency map model even after V1 lesions, but the feature types unambiguously computed in V1 no longer contributed to the looking behaviour of the animals. This work provides us strong support for the hypothesis that pathways beyond V1 are able to compute salience. We will argue later that the most likely candidate in such pathways is the sSC based on its particular pattern of intrinsic and extrinsic connectivity. Overall, the combination of electrophysiological findings supplemented by lesion studies of Yoshida et al. strongly supports the idea of V1 being classified into the feature map category of a.


V4

Visual area V4 is an extrastriate cortical area. V4 neurons are tuned to more abstract properties than V1/V2 (e.g. colours or specific shapes) and have RFs of up to a few degrees wide. V4 receives direct input from the early visual cortices V1/V2, and it is strongly modulated by frontal cortical regions (specifically the FEF). This modulation is related to a stimulus being the target of a task. In fMRI experiments, V4 exhibits graded responses to orientation pop-out, which is suggestive of salience computation. Mazer & Gallant examined the role of V4 in selective attention during a free-viewing visual search task. They analysed whether V4 activity predicted the direction of the next eye movement, or whether it was highly correlated with contrast or brightness. They found that activity was related to where the eye would move, but it was locked to stimulus onset. Thus, V4 has a perceptually mediated (bottom-up) guiding role in selecting the next attended target. However, they also found strong top-down modulation. Ogawa & Komatsu found the same pattern of early singleton pop-out. However, the early singleton pop-out response was always followed by modulation that highlighted the behaviourally relevant stimulus. In summary, V4 integrates bottom-up information from the cortical route with goal-related priority information, and communicates this information to downstream brain regions that select the attention target. Because V4's responses are modulated by specific features of a search target, we classify V4 into the feature-specific priority map component of a.


Lateral intraparietal area

The LIP area (IPS in humans) is a parietal region in the dorsal processing stream with subregions whose BOLD signal has been reported to correlate with computational salience. Bogler and co-workers specifically investigated whether the BOLD signal measured from various brain regions correlated linearly with salience, or whether the signal correlated with the most salient point only. The former would suggest a graded saliency map representation, whereas the latter would suggest a winner-take-all representation. They found that the anterior IPS and FEF represented only the final target. In contrast, the visual cortex and the posterior IPS correlated linearly with the salience level of the corresponding visual region. These studies follow those of Gottlieb et al., who investigated whether LIP neurons represented the target of the next saccade in a visual search task. The responses to a stimulus brought into neurons' RFs were much stronger when the target was relevant to the task. However, this effect was also observed when stimuli suddenly appeared, confounding bottom-up and top-down salience. Buschman & Miller recorded from the LIP and FEF simultaneously. They found that LIP neurons responded earlier to the bottom-up aspect of stimuli, whereas frontal neurons responded earlier to the top-down aspects. However, in their recordings, both the LIP and FEF contain both bottom-up and top-down signals at different times. Ibos et al. likewise recorded from the LIP and FEF simultaneously, finding that the LIP contained primarily bottom-up salience related signals. However, the LIP is not the source of the bottom-up salience signals, but rather inherits them from earlier cortex. In summary, like V4, the LIP biases bottom-up signals from the cortical route using top-down information from more frontal regions, although feature-specific modulation is observed less in the LIP. Based on this, we consider the LIP a feature-specific priority map (a).


Frontal eye field

The FEF is a region of the primate frontal cortex with robust eye-movement-related activity. Fernandes et al. have recently recorded from FEF neurons while monkeys performed a visual search task in natural scenes, and they trained models to estimate spike rate, using either saccadic activity or salience model computation. There was little correlation between the saliency map and FEF activity in situations where the salient locations were not the eventual target of movement. In contrast, the FEF strongly responded to task-relevant, but non-salient stimuli, indicating that FEF activity implements a goal-related priority map rather than a bottom-up saliency map. Ogawa and Komatsu's recordings from the FEF in more artificial visual search tasks showed the same trend: FEF neurons' responses favoured the behavioural significance of the stimulus in their RF. Results from Ibos et al. likewise support this interpretation. Specifically, according to these authors, the FEF may be involved in endogenous attention (i.e. the representation of behaviourally relevant and goal-directed signals), although FEF neurons did also show some salience-like signals later than the LIP in the time course. This suggests that the FEF may receive bottom-up signals as input from elsewhere, for example via LIP. Finally, Thompson & Bichot found that during a visual search task, FEF activity evolves during a fixation to represent non-feature-selective bottom-up information. However, the strongest firing neurons represent the region that would be the target of a saccade, even if the saccade is not executed. This is true even when there are stimuli that are more visually salient in the array, providing further support for FEF as a goal-related priority map (a).


Subcortical pathways

As described above, Yoshida et al. have shown that attention guidance over complex natural scenes is preserved in the absence of V1. This directly challenges theories that crucially depend on V1 to compute low-level visual features guiding attention. Here, we review evidence that subcortical brain areas are involved in salience computation.


Superficial layers of the superior colliculus

The SC is a phylogenetically old midbrain structure involved in visual control of orienting movements. In amphibians, reptiles, birds and lampreys it is known as the optic tectum, and it maintains much of the same function in mammals. Its superficial layers (SZ, SGS and fibre-rich layer SO) have strong visual responses, whereas the deeper layers (SGI, SAI, SGP and SAP) have activity related to orienting eye movements.

Anatomically, the sSC receives input primarily from the retina and visual cortex and sends outputs to the deeper layers in rodents and primates, as well as relays input to other visually related structures including the thalamus. Physiological evidence that the superficial layers contribute to bottom-up salience has until recently been circumstantial: visual responses in SGS are stronger when the target is the focus of attention than not. Furthermore, SGS neurons do not have strong tuning for any particular visual feature such as motion direction, colour or orientation, although superficial layer neurons receive direct input from retina from the same population of retinal cells that send information to cortex. Some SGS neurons respond invariantly to motion direction (pan-directional cells), but they respond more to moving than static stimuli. This property is closely matched with the notion of feature-agnostic saliency map (a). Some directional selectivity has been seen in cats, rats and mice, but our focus is on macaque monkeys, whose response characteristics are closer to humans. Recently, more direct evidence has emerged supporting salience signals in SGS. White et al. recorded from SGS in primates during both free viewing and carefully controlled saccade tasks, and they found strong evidence that SGS activity is correlated with bottom-up salience of the visual input.

SGS is unique, because SGS neurons do not show feature tuning even though they receive feature-tuned input from V1 and other feature-tuned areas. This contrasts with other visual areas (such as V4) that receive similar feature-tuned input but do show feature tuning. Thus, unique feature-agnostic responses of SGS provide us further support for categorizing SGS as a saliency map analogue. On the other hand, it raises the question of how these feature-agnostic responses come about, and specifically what kind of information is transferred from V1 to sSC. Neurophysiological experiments combined with ablation or cooling of V1 have shown that the signal from V1 to SGS does not contribute to the RF properties of SGS neurons. The same group also suggested that the V1 input may have a gating function in contributing to the control of the downflow of excitation from SGS to SGI. These findings suggest that a feature-agnostic saliency map in sSC is less likely to be a product of V1 computation.

The lack of goal or eye-movement-related responses in SGS is also unique compared with other cortical areas, such as the FEF. Thanks to these unique patterns of connectivity and physiology, and its output to SGI, we look into more detail at the intrinsic connections of the SGS in §4, particularly to understand how a potential implementation of salience computation arises.


Deeper layers of the superior colliculus

Anatomically, SC deeper layers (dSC) receive converging associative inputs from cortex, basal ganglia and sSC. Physiologically, SGI neurons are strongly related to (and can evoke) eye movements (overt attention). The SGI has also in recent years been the subject of more research related to covert attention. Fecteau and co-workers have suggested that SGI activity is modulated by the locus of covert attention. Pharmacological inactivation of the intermediate and deep SC layers has been shown to negatively influence the ability of monkeys to perform attention-related tasks, but without having an effect on the enhanced response of neurons in the cortex (in this case, MT/MST) to attended locations. Moreover, recording and inactivation experiments have demonstrated that these layers encode a real-time representation of behaviourally relevant goal location, independent of visual stimulation. Finally, recent exciting results show that SGI neurons encode task- or goal-related priority even in the absence of bottom-up salience. However, these responses are enhanced when the task-related target is also highly salient, suggesting that SGI receives and integrates information about both bottom-up and top-down conspicuity. Because the SGI then sends outputs directly to the brainstem oculomotor nuclei, this implies that SGI represents a priority map and is situated as the last stage of salience/priority pathways (a). At the circuit level, in contrast to the competitive nature of SGS, SGI acts as a stable integrator of its input, from which a winning target is selected via a combination of intrinsic and extrinsic computations whose nature is still under investigation.


Pulvinar

The primate pulvinar is a visual thalamic nucleus. Anatomically, the inferior section of the pulvinar (PI) receives input from sSC and has a retinotopic map. Physiologically, it is proposed to contain a representation of visual salience. Pulvinar lesions in monkeys produce abnormal scanning of a complex visual array, providing evidence that the pulvinar is involved in salience computation during free viewing. Berman et al. identified and characterized PI neurons receiving inputs from the sSC. The neurons' RFs had inhibitory surrounds, and direction selectivity was low. This suggests that these neurons have similar characteristics with upstream sSC neurons and may inherit salience information from the sSC. On the other hand, PI neuron activity was not enhanced when the RF visual stimulus was the target of saccades. We classify PI into the category of feature-agnostic saliency map in a.


Differences in salience computation between cortical and subcortical pathways

In both cortical and subcortical areas, neurons process and represent successive stages of salience computation, starting with feature analysis and ending with bottom-up salience and top-down priority maps. We have described that some areas such as LIP and V4 can be classified into what we call feature-specific priority maps. In contrast, subcortical routes contain feature-agnostic representations in sSC and priority map-like representations in dSC.

We summarize our views on the neural correlates of salience computation in b. In terms of input stages, there is really no area in the brain for pure feature analysis, because even at the level of retinal ganglion cells, neuronal responses are influenced by surrounding visual input. In cortical pathways, information is processed from feature maps to feature-specific priority maps and ultimately to a priority map (black arrows in b). On the other hand, a subcortical route processes information in a feature-agnostic manner (through the grey lines in b). Although speculative, our hypothesis provides intriguing insights into how salience computation was evolutionarily built. The ‘bug detector’ neurons in the frog tectum could be considered a phylogenetical ancestor of subcortical salience computation. Another speculation is that the cortical pathway may make it possible to use salience information for higher cognitive functions, such as covert attention, social gaze and working memory. This distinction may be important functionally. The feature-agnostic saliency map in the subcortical route (with ‘bug detector’ neurons) may be optimized for salience computation, rather than detailed analysis of features. On the other hand, the feature-specific saliency map in the cortical route may be optimized for detailed analysis of features rather than for salience computation. The subcortical route can be useful for fast reaction, such as during free-viewing, whereas the cortical route can be useful for recurrent computation of bottom-up and top-down information, such as during conjunction visual search tasks.


Superior colliculus as a salience computer

We selected the neural pathways in §3 based on behavioural and physiological evidence demonstrating that each region might contain feature, saliency or priority maps. However, it is possible that these maps, in the computational sense, could be computed elsewhere in the brain and then inherited by other brain regions. For example, bottom-up signals in the FEF could be computed in the visual cortex and then inherited by the FEF. In order to understand what causes saliency-map-like activity, it will be necessary to understand the local implementation. This requires an understanding of the local computations of each region and the interactions between them. However, research into salience computation in the cortex has avoided delving into the particular implementation details of the local circuit. This is unavoidable—understanding local circuit dynamics in, say, the parietal and frontal cortex, while simultaneously accounting for their multitudinous inputs and outputs, is a daunting task. Nonetheless, exceptions do exist. For example, Li et al. have detailed how spatial suppression mechanisms in V1 can lead to salience-like computations. Additionally, Soltani & Koch constructed a spiking neural circuit model of salience computation in which cortical areas V1, V2 and V4 perform only lateral excitation/inhibition, and the final saliency map is represented in an identically implemented spiking neural sheet representing FEF/LIP. This type of full-scale model is important because it provides support for local computations to experimentally look for in each brain area. Although the Soltani model had shortcomings, such as small neural scale and physiologically unrealistic simplifications like synaptic weight decreasing with distance, it is the best existing neural model of the cortically implemented saliency map.

On the subcortical side, where local circuits are better understood, there has been more progress. The SC has a unique set of inputs and outputs that make it suited to salience computation and overt attentional control. Furthermore, as stated above, the SC has been shown to have saliency- and priority-map-like responses. For these reasons, the SC is the brain region currently most amenable to in-depth exploration at the circuit level.


Delving deeper: what is the superior colliculus doing in attentional control?

Both sSC and dSC layers are organized retinotopically, and the layers are in spatial register with one another. A visual stimulus that evokes a neural response in the sSC can have the eyes guided to centre on that visual stimulus by a neuronal burst directly ventral to it, in the dSC.

Behavioural and physiological evidence suggests rich intra-SC interactions that are critical for constraining computational models of saliency and priority map implementations. For example, results from tiny microsaccadic eye movements in an otherwise fixation-controlled cueing paradigm have shown that the local circuit in the SC may operate in a delicate balance, even during periods of forced fixation to a central stimulus. In this regard, microsaccades are intriguing precisely because they reveal so much about the dynamics of the SC. During fixation, rostral SC activity has a strong influence on the selection of the next saccade target. Thus, rostral SC activity must have an effect on any saliency or priority map present. Moreover, recent evidence from a variety of experiments is showing that microsaccades are part of the entire saccadic repertoire of the visual system, because they specifically and precisely realign the line of sight just like large saccades do. Thus, even within foveal and parafoveal regions, the same issues of various objects competing for the line of sight also arise for microsaccades as they do for large saccades, and thus are equally as integral for understanding how the salience model could be implemented in the SC.

Results on microsaccades during peripheral cueing are additionally intriguing given the expansive spatial dissociation between the small microsaccade amplitudes and the peripheral stimuli. Specifically, visual burst modulation (even in sSC) takes place if a stimulus appears in the far periphery near the time of a microsaccade. Given that eye-movement-related bursts for microsaccades occur in the rostral SC region, where small eccentricities are encoded, this means that these bursts might interact laterally with more eccentric neurons in the SC map. Consistent with this, Ghitani et al. have identified an excitatory connection from dSC to sSC that spans different eccentricities in sSC. This suggests that a saccade burst in one part of the map can be related to visual burst modulations in other parts of the map, implying that dSC may integrate part of the selection mechanism that outputs the location on the priority map to look at next.

Besides illuminating potential intra- and interlayer SC interactions, results from microsaccades also highlight additional constraints on saliency map computation. Namely, salience and priority are not stationary, static qualities of a scene or its internal representation. They are instead continuously modulated, whether by visual stimuli, or by generation of eye movements. Eye movements not only alter retinal images, thus remapping the retinotopically coded saliency and priority maps (b), but eye movements may also modulate intra-SC local activity patterns, thus altering either the saliency or the priority map. An example of this is a scenario in which a visual stimulus suddenly appears while SC neurons are bursting to produce a microsaccade. In this situation, spatial read-out of the SC map will provide not a single saccade burst location, but instead multiple ‘hills’ of activation in the SC. Thus, how the SC represents graded salience across multiple locations (i.e. as in a pre-selection graded saliency map) or a selected target (i.e. as in a post-selection priority map about to communicate the selected target downstream to eye movement centres) can dynamically change, and our understanding of the salience computation must account for this.

Alteration of the saliency and priority map representations in different retinotopic parts of the SC might also be expected in the light of recent discovery of strong functional and structural asymmetries in the primate SC. Specifically, neurons in the upper visual field representation possess smaller RFs than neurons in the lower visual field representation (a), and this is true for both visual (sSC) and motor (dSC) RFs (b). Moreover, visual responses in the upper visual field are stronger than visual responses in the lower visual field, and they have shorter latencies (b). These results suggest that there is a functional discontinuity in the retinotopic map of the SC. Importantly, the different RF sizes in different portions of the visual field are indicative of differing patterns of lateral interactions in different parts of the SC map. Similarly, voltage imaging of rat brain slices has suggested a rostral–caudal asymmetry in sSC, in which excitation preferentially spreads caudally within sSC. Intriguingly, this effect is strongest when the activity flows up to sSC from dSC. These results have strong implications on the role of local SC circuit properties for attention, salience and priority control. For example, when multiple stimuli simultaneously appear, then one might predict differences in the trajectories of the evoked saccade (e.g. saccadic averaging) depending on whether the stimuli were presented together either in the lower or upper visual field. Moreover, different population read-out schemes may exploit larger or smaller RF sizes in the SC's representations of the lower and upper visual fields, respectively, in order to serve attention. For example, illusory contour integration is perceptually better in the lower visual field. If SC RFs act as a pointer to salient regions, then larger lower visual field RFs may aid in the integration that is necessary for disparate image regions associated with illusory contours. This being said, links between the SC asymmetries and attention need to be further investigated, especially given that spatial scales in other brain regions (such as V1) may not be asymmetric across the horizontal meridian like in the SC (and may even exhibit a mild asymmetry in the opposite direction).

Thus, converging evidence points to the SC as ripe for further investigation. We next highlight recent modelling work pointing to the feasibility of the SC as a structure capable of both performing feature-agnostic competition and integration with top-down information to select a target for overt attention. We argue that locally, the SC is algorithmically close to computational implementations of saliency maps. Although the majority of the work on the intrinsic SC circuit is based on rodent research, there is large preservation of the same circuitry in primates. Slight differences in the numbers of horizontal cells, and the locations of retinal and cortical inputs, could have unpredictable effects on SC activity dynamics, but experiments with in vitro primate SC slices and modelling comparisons will be necessary to come to any concrete conclusions.


The local circuit of the superior colliculus

Phongphanphanee et al. recently presented data from in vitro slice experiments of mouse SC showing that the intrinsic circuit of the superficial layers implements a centre-surround (‘Mexican-hat’) computation. In other words, lateral connections in the SGS cause competition between spatially adjacent stimuli (a, top). The extent of such lateral connections affects the spatial extent of the competition, and therefore has an impact on RF size of individual neurons. This, in turn, influences the size of the population of neurons that are simultaneously activated by a given stimulus (i.e. the ‘active population’). A recent study from rat SC also suggests interaction of competing activities within sSC. At the level of the SGI, lateral interactions implement an integration mechanism, in which activity from nearby neurons is integrated proportional to their distance from one another (a, top). This means that the response of SGI neurons to various bottom-up and top-down locations is integrated in both space and time, evoking stronger activity and thus faster search times in cases where multiple bottom-up and top-down sources agree on the next target for attention. As in the SGS, the range of lateral interaction in the SGI has a bearing on the size of the active population for a given spatial location of a target. We thus hypothesize that the Mexican-hat computation in the SGS performs salience detection, and then the SGI integrates this with top-down goal information to select the next target for attention. Could the local circuit in the SC support these computations?

The sSC has been the subject of a fair amount of anatomical and physiological investigation. Historically, many cell types were identified based on morphology, but recent research has shown that there are four types of cells. Most are excitatory: narrow-field vertical (NFV), wide-field vertical (WFV) and stellate cells (whether these are excitatory is a matter of debate). In addition, one unequivocally inhibitory cell type has been identified: the horizontal cell. Horizontal cells have wide laterally spreading dendrites. In mice, only the NFV cells send projections to the dSC; other cell types send external projections mostly to the thalamus or to a sister nucleus known as the parabigeminal nucleus (PBg). The sSC receives excitatory inputs via axons from the retina and cortex.

There is less agreement on the classification of cells in the dSC. As one moves deeper, there are increasing numbers of pyramidal cells, which project to the brainstem for evoking eye movements, but the most interesting region is the SGI, which contains a complex circuit of inhibitory cells and excitatory cells that exhibit the bursting properties associated with eye movement initiation. See for details.

What causes the particular patterns of activity in isolated slices of the SGS versus the SGI? To better understand how these anatomical pieces combine to produce observed behaviour, Veale et al. have recently applied advanced statistical methods to estimate the parameters of the SC local circuit that are most likely, given slice data from Phongphanphanee et al. Specifically, they applied a differential evolution/Markov chain Monte Carlo method to estimate the parameters of a spiking neural circuit model of the SC. Following the data from Phongphanphanee et al., Veale and co-workers fit the SGS and SGI separately to reveal the most likely values of parameters such as lateral spread of inhibitory cells and excitatory cells, synaptic weights and synaptic parameters such as synaptic depression or facilitation. Examples of best parameter estimates, as well as visualizations of these simulations, are shown in b,c. These results work backwards from in vitro behaviour to support the hypothesis presented above: wide-reaching inhibitory cells and smaller excitatory cells in the SGS fit the slice data. The models use realistic densities of neurons and synapses based on anatomical findings, and in contrast to Soltani & Koch, modulate synaptic connection probability (rather than synaptic weight) as a function of distance. Using these models, Veale et al. examined the computational properties of the SC simulations (Veale, R, Isa, T, Yoshida, M., 2015, Annual Meeting of the Society for Neuroscience). These authors specifically investigated how the circuit simulations respond to visual input (d). Although the spiking models were fit to physiological data of electrical stimulation from single electrodes, the firing of the output neurons in the superficial layers of the model shows a pattern in which areas of strong input are highlighted, and weak regions are suppressed. Based on these complementary physiological data and mathematical simulations, we conclude that the sSC can intrinsically compute a stable competitive filter of visual input, like the step of feature-agnostic saliency map of the Itti salience model. The dSC could integrate this salience input with top-down information in order to transform it into overt attention shifts. However, to implement a winner-take-all mechanism in dSC, integration of topographically nearby inputs is not sufficient. Phongphanphanee et al. argued that switching between linear integration and nonlinear burst generation is subject to control by the basal ganglia. Further studies are needed to clarify how winner-take-all computation is implemented by circuits within dSC or downstream areas.

One question that remains is whether the SGS is sufficient to compute the saliency map or whether the more superficial SZ layer or the fibre-rich deeper layer SO might also play an important role. It is already known that SO contains a large population of a different cell type, the wide-field vertical (WFV) cell, which is not implemented in Veale et al.'s model. Because WFV cells are excitatory neurons with large spreading dendrites, it is possible that they may play a role in salience computation by integrating information over a larger region than the neurons in SGS with narrower dendrites. Incorporating WFV cells into Veale et al.'s model may contribute to reconstructing how sSC signals are transferred into the dSC in vivo.

Another intriguing possibility comes from Vokoun et al., who imaged parasagittal slices of rat SC. Stimulating two locations in the SGI causes a strong flow of neural activation back to the SGS, which spreads laterally and interacts based on the distance between the stimulated points. The interaction results in either two separate peaks of activation when the stimulations are distant, or a single-averaged peak in the middle when the stimulations are adjacent. This phenomenon could work to pipe the goal-directed and multisensory priority information present in the dSC back up to the competing saliency map representation in the sSC. From the sSC, the combined top-down and bottom-up information could then be re-integrated with higher-level areas via the thalamus or directly evoke overt attention shifts via the sSC–dSC pathway. However, White et al. did not report priority responses in sSC cells. Thus, the dSC–sSC pathway needs to be examined in more detail to understand whether it functions differently between primate versus rodent.

Finally, it is important to connect salience computation in the SC back to overt attention. In other words, how is the next target for fixation selected by the graded saliency and priority maps? We can use information from the saccadic averaging literature to constrain the possible shapes of the neural circuits that perform this final target selection. The strongest constraint is that any circuit we propose to perform target selection must produce saccades that obey the linear vector averaging of multiple saccade targets in visual space. The proposed selection circuit must perform this correction despite two nonlinear transformations: from linear visual space to the log-polar neural representation, and then back to linear vector space for the eye movement. It is also possible that such a correction from nonlinear to linear summation is likely computed downstream of the SC (e.g. in cerebellum). One intriguing possibility is that recurrent circuitry in the SC could perform these nonlinear-to-linear corrections. Further studies including both experimental and theoretical methods will be needed to clarify this question.


Conclusion

In this review, we overviewed how salience computation is implemented in attention-related visual pathways. Based on findings in neurophysiology and functional imaging, we classified the responses of each brain area as being computationally equivalent to one of the stages of salience computation (a). We emphasized a possibility that there are two partly segregated pathways for salience computation, namely the cortical and subcortical pathways. Finally, we zoomed in to focus on the subcortical pathway to examine in greater detail the algorithmic equivalence of the brain implementation of the salience model. The SC represents a visual saliency map via centre-surround inhibition and winner-take-all mechanisms built into the local circuit, thereby affecting saccadic and microsaccadic eye movements. Lateral interactions in the local SC circuit are particularly important for controlling active populations of neurons. This, in turn, may help explain long-range effects, such as those of peripheral cues on tiny microsaccades. Finally, we showed how combination of in vitro neurophysiology and a large-scale computational modelling is able to clarify how salience computation is implemented in local circuits of the SC.

Several open questions remain to be investigated. How are the Mexican-hat function in the sSC and the integration and winner-take-all function in the dSC evolutionarily and developmentally built? What are the computational benefits of such structures? More specifically, we would like to know whether such structures in the sSC and dSC are optimized for covert attention and eye movements, respectively. What is the fundamental difference between cortical and subcortical salience computation? Finally, the functional asymmetry in SC suggests that future studies will reveal critical differences in structural and functional architecture that characterize subcortical and cortical salience computation.


Authors' contributions

R.V., Z.M.H. and M.Y. wrote the manuscript.


Why are there so many explanations for primate brain evolution?

R I M Dunbar, Susanne Shultz — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2017. PMC5498304, CC BY 4.0.

The question as to why primates have evolved unusually large brains has received much attention, with many alternative proposals all supported by evidence. We review the main hypotheses, the assumptions they make and the evidence for and against them. Taking as our starting point the fact that every hypothesis has sound empirical evidence to support it, we argue that the hypotheses are best interpreted in terms of a framework of evolutionary causes (selection factors), consequences (evolutionary windows of opportunity) and constraints (usually physiological limitations requiring resolution if large brains are to evolve). Explanations for brain evolution in birds and mammals generally, and primates in particular, have to be seen against the backdrop of the challenges involved with the evolution of coordinated, cohesive, bonded social groups that require novel social behaviours for their resolution, together with the specialized cognition and neural substrates that underpin this. A crucial, but frequently overlooked, issue is that fact that the evolution of large brains required energetic, physiological and time budget constraints to be overcome. In some cases, this was reflected in the evolution of ‘smart foraging’ and technical intelligence, but in many cases required the evolution of behavioural competences (such as coalition formation) that required novel cognitive skills. These may all have been supported by a domain-general form of cognition that can be used in many different contexts.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘Physiological determinants of social behaviour in animals’.

Keywords: social complexity, foraging innovations, energetics, coalitions, multilevel sociality, social brain hypothesis


Introduction

Primate evolution has been dominated, as much as anything, by unusually large brains. Over the past four decades, many explanations for the evolution of large brains have been proposed. Broadly, these explanations divide into four major themes, each with many sub-hypotheses of their own: genetic explanations (primates have large brains because a particular gene mutation allows them to grow large brains), developmental explanations (primates have large brains because their extended periods of parental investment allow them to grow large brains), ecological explanations (primates evolved large brains in order to cope with demanding environmental conditions), and social explanations (there is something intrinsically complex about primate sociality that requires a large brain). In many respects, the main problem associated with understanding why large brains have evolved has been the fact that there is an embarrassment of riches: there is empirical evidence to support every hypothesis. However, the fact that evidence can be adduced in favour of conceptually very different, mutually incompatible, explanations should alert us to the fact that something is amiss. Either there are confounding statistical issues such that we struggle to tease apart the causal relationships between a suite of highly correlated traits or there are conceptual issues stemming from the construction of alternative explanations.

Here we argue that the efforts to identify the correct explanations for brain size evolution have foundered on four major issues. The first, and undoubtedly most pervasive, has been a failure to distinguish between different levels of explanation (sensu): authors often implicitly suppose that evidence for one hypothesis undermines all the other explanations even though the hypotheses under test may in fact be complementary and equally necessary. A second problem has been that too many studies still only provide evidence for a single hypothesis, and fail to test adequately between alternatives. A third issue has been a failure to specify exactly how brain size impacts on cognition (e.g. exactly what aspects of primate behaviour are so cognitively demanding) and how this relates to the underlying neurobiology. The fourth issue has been a tendency to favour hypotheses that only apply to a subset of species, even within the primates. Explanations that apply only to special cases may be true, but they cannot be general explanations.

To highlight how these issues have obstructed our understanding of primate brain evolution, we evaluate each of the major explanations and specify exactly what assumptions and potential limitations underlie each in turn. In doing so, we develop a framework that articulates the various explanations within a single explanatory model. We shall argue that an important fulcrum in this is the energetic costs of evolving and maintaining both large brains and large groups: these are invariably ignored.

The test we must apply to any prospective explanation is that it can explain six key empirical findings: (i) that primates have larger brains relative to their body size than all other animals; (ii) that some primates have larger brains than other primates; (iii) that there is a remarkably robust quantitative relationship between brain (and especially neocortex) size and group size in primates (but not other mammals or birds); (iv) that primates have a peculiar form of bonded sociality that seems to be very different to that of other mammals, reflected in the fact that primate societies are highly structured in network terms (whereas those of most other mammals and birds are not); (v) that pairbonded monogamy in birds and mammals is associated with larger than average brain size for their orders; and (vi) that some (but not all) species of primates exhibit novel technical competences.

Although many analyses do so, we should not ignore the relationship between group size and brain size in primates, because living in groups is extremely costly to animals. This is so for three reasons. First, increasing group size unavoidably increases competition and induces costs in terms of time required for foraging, travel and, in primates, social bonding, that place significant stress on the animals' ability to survive in a given habitat. Second, an organism is an integrated biological system and any change in one part of the system will inevitably have ramifications for other parts. Increasing brain mass, for example, imposes additional energy and nutrient requirements, which in turn requires greater investment in foraging. Such energetic pressures can result in animals investing in riskier and more time consuming foraging, potentially exposing themselves to higher predation risk. These pressures further compress time budgets and their capacity to invest in other essential activities, including social bonding. Time is a major issue for animals, and especially for primates, and its significance should not be underestimated. Third, group-living imposes significant physiological costs on females, in particular, because of the impact that social stress has on menstrual system endocrinology, and hence infertility. In short, group size cannot simply be dismissed as a casual by-product of having a large brain—it is a central part of the story owing to feedback loops in the relationships between these variables.

Note that, for present purposes, we shall frame our discussion mainly in terms of brain size, rather than specifying particular brain regions. Even though primates' large brains are mainly the consequence of a dramatic increase in neocortex volume, most of the behavioural relationships we discuss correlate to some degree with almost any index of brain size, and we do not wish to be side-tracked into unnecessary debates as to whether some brain regions are more important than others. We note below that multiple measures of brain architecture support similar conclusions. The reasons why absolute brain size may the best measure to use as a proxy for cognitive capacity in primates have been discussed by other authors.

One final point is worth stressing: virtually all studies on this topic are based on correlational evidence. Evolutionary hypotheses have always suffered from the disadvantage that we cannot easily test causality in what are implicitly causal hypotheses. From time to time, experiments are conducted, but the substantive analyses based on these are always, of necessity, correlational (brain size correlates with task performance). However, there are alternative approaches that can now be used, and we will argue that that these need to be given more attention.


Why and how large brains evolve

To provide a framework, we summarize the various hypotheses that have been proposed, and their functional implications, in. We structure this as a decision tree in which the options are narrowed down progressively from left to right.

In the top left corner, we list a number of factors that have often been proposed as bona fide hypotheses for brain evolution but which are, in reality, constraints on brain size rather than functional explanations. It is essential not to confuse mechanistic and functional explanations. Evolutionary constraints typically operate via limited developmental opportunities (what possibilities are available given a current set of traits). In terms of brain evolution, developmental constraints have focused on life-history traits and neurogenic explanations, but more recently genetic explanations (and especially those genes associated with accelerated evolution within the human lineage) have joined this set. Evolutionary constraints can also involve the physiological costs to grow and maintain traits. Brains are extremely expensive, and these constraints represent some of the costs that animals must be able absorb in order to evolve large brains if they have a compelling reason for doing so. Conventionally, these include metabolic rate, and energetic or dietary requirements. Developing solutions to overcome these constraints are necessary, but not sufficient, explanations for the evolution of large brains.

All the remaining explanations in are, in principle, functional explanations (i.e. they make claims about the selection forces that might have driven brain evolution). They divide naturally along two dimensions: first, by whether the animals solve their fitness-limiting problems individually (by trial-and-error learning or insight) or socially (the presence of several individuals is explicitly necessary for the solution to be effective), and then, secondarily, by whether the fitness-limiting factor is direct (the acquisition of food or mates) or indirect (e.g. ensuring group coordination so as to manage an exogenous threat to survival or fertility).


Instrumental hypotheses

These hypotheses focus mainly on the demands of food-finding and implicitly (but almost never explicitly) assume that foraging is the single most important constraint on an animal's fitness. In effect, this is the default position for ecologists. In early analyses, frugivory was assumed to be cognitively more demanding than folivory, and it may well be: fruits are less predictable in time and space than leaves. However, phylogenetic comparative analyses find no relationship between the degree of dietary frugivory and brain size when controlling for social group size across mammals—though the latter fact may be the crucial giveaway in that it may indicate that a change of diet is needed when large groups are involved because of the effect that group size has on energetics.

More importantly, perhaps, for smart foraging to have any traction as an explanation, it is necessary to show that primates do something different from non-primates—otherwise why would they need bigger brains than other mammals? For this reason, more recent studies have focused on foraging innovations, including the discovery and exploitation of novel foods or novel means of accessing foods. A number of analyses have shown that foraging innovations correlate with brain size in both birds and primates, and this relationship has in turn been related to species' abilities to survive in challenging habitats (birds, primates and hominins). The weakness of this claim is that most taxa do not in fact exhibit much smart foraging or technical innovativeness, despite variation in brain size across species.

The crucial fact is that, in primates, the relationship seems to be more of a phase transition: most species exhibit no innovations at all and a few exhibit a lot. Given this, it would seem to be stretching a point to claim that what is in effect a dichotomy in innovativeness is responsible for a quantitative change in brain size across the entire order. An obvious alternative explanation might be that smart foraging is a by-product of acquiring a brain of a particular minimum size (i.e. breaking through a glass ceiling on brain evolution).

What evidence is there to suggest that ecological or technical decision-making has actual fitness consequences? Only one study has assessed this directly: Altmann showed that female baboons who were better able to match an optimal diet (in terms of energy and protein intake) as yearlings survived longer, had longer reproductive careers and produced more offspring (whether indexed as total number of births or the number that survived to 12 months). Although the sample size is small (n = 6 females), the results are remarkably linear and convincing. Large brains certainly provide the capacity to engage in efficient trial-and-error problem-solving or insightful one-trial learning.

A more important issue concerns the assumption that food is, or by extension energy budgets are, the primary factor influencing an animal's fitness, either because all other extrinsic effects are trivial by comparison or because foraging is the only factor that an animal can actually control through its behaviour. In fact, for mammals generally, and primates in particular, predation is also a major consideration and has a much greater effect on species' biogeographic distributions—and this is widely so across mammals and birds generally.

Individually and collectively, instrumental hypotheses seem to fail as a general explanation because they do not explain why primates should need bigger brains than anyone else, why primate brains vary so much in size between species, why primates should have bonded social groups, why group size should correlate with brain size or why pairbonded species should need such big brains. On balance, then, foraging skills may be better explained as the solution to a constraint on the growth and maintenance of large brains when these are required for some other reason.


Social hypotheses

The social explanations place an explicit emphasis on sociality as the key issue associated with large brains. There are at least five different versions: the original Machiavellian (or social) intelligence hypothesis (MIH), the cultural intelligence hypothesis (CIH), the Vygotskian intelligence hypothesis (VIH), the Scheherazade hypothesis (SH) and the social brain hypothesis (SBH) sensu stricto. These five hypotheses differ in what they see as the central problem that big brains allow animals to solve and the mechanism(s) required to achieve this.


Machiavellian intelligence hypothesis

The MIH was the earliest of these social explanations. As originally conceived by Humphrey and later elaborated by Byrne & Whiten, MIH argues that primates live in inherently competitive social environments in which individuals compete with each other to steal food and/or mates. Tactical deception became the defining criterion for this hypothesis, and its frequency does correlate with relative neocortex volume. However, this explanation does not explain why primates live in social groups: if being exploited by group members is what happens when you live in a group, why would anyone choose to reside in bonded social groups. Living in casual herds of indeterminate size should be sufficient to allow individuals to exploit each other in the way envisaged by the MIH. Species, like artiodactyls, that regularly form aggregations on rich pastures should exhibit Machiavellian behaviour and have large brains. But, in fact, they do not. Perhaps the real issue is that Machiavellian behaviour, being intrinsically competitive, is inherently socially destructive and thus likely to lead to the fragmentation of groups unless some very significant counter-selection pressure exists to force animals to stay together despite their Machiavellian behaviour.

In sum, MIH might explain how primate sociality is different from that of all other mammals, but offers no explanation as to why this should be so. Indeed, one might argue that Machiavellian behaviour is more likely to be a consequence of living in large groups (that provide many individuals to exploit) rather than its cause. MIH seems to fail because it is not of itself intrinsically social, and does not explain why group size (and hence brain size) should vary across primates (or why groups are bonded and continue to stay together).


Cultural intelligence hypothesis

CIH is a more explicitly social version of the smart foraging hypothesis. The central claim is that large brains enable the social transmission of behaviour (or, more generally, information), principally by imitation or mimicry. Inevitably, CIH faces the same problems encountered by instrumental foraging explanations: social groups (or networks) are necessary for the propagation of information, but are not sufficient as an explanation for the evolution of group-living. Since group-living is intensely costly for animals, and especially so for primates (see below), we must ask why animals are prepared to pay these costs as well as the energetic costs of large brains simply in order to exchange information.

The crucial issue is whether animals that are better at absorbing social information have higher fitness. Altmann's study of optimal foraging in yearling female baboons is, once again, the only relevant evidence. The fact that individual foraging skills as yearlings (the age at which weaning occurs in baboons) predict lifetime fitness would seem to suggest that, if anything, foraging skills are learned before being weaned and are less likely to be influenced by cultural experiences during either the main period of socialization (weaning to puberty) or in adulthood when cultural transmission should be at its most important.

Aside from this, CIH often appears to refer to rather a narrow conception of complex learned behaviours (including technical behaviours like tool use). Moreover, the fact that both technical competence and cultural transmission are step-like rather than continuous in their distribution within primates seems to suggest that these explanations may be relevant for a small handful of species (great apes, humans?), but not for all. Muthukrishna & Henrich certainly provide compelling evidence for the importance of culture and cultural transmission as an explanation for the fact that human communities and achievements are many orders of magnitude greater than those of other primates. However, the evidence they adduce for the claim that population size affects innovation rates all derives from modern societies (i.e. post-Neolithic and contemporary societies). By contrast, the evidence that brains evolved for innovativeness before the Neolithic is not impressive: tool manufacture has very long periods of stasis in the archaeological record and does not correlate well with the evolution of human cranial capacity. That said, cultural icons and their transmission do play a singularly important role in social bonding at both the dyadic and the communal levels in humans, which would perhaps make this a version of the SBH (see below) where culture becomes part of the bonding process.

CIH has been extended to include cooperative breeding on the grounds that cooperative breeding imposes coordination and investment challenges, as well as the potential to extend development in a way that might facilitate social learning. The anatomical evidence to support this claim is, however, mixed. Even though obligately monogamous species (e.g. indrids, cebids and hylobatids) do have larger brains than we might expect for their group size, the males make little if any direct contribution to rearing in these species; by contrast, genuinely cooperative breeders like callitrichids (and maybe humans), where the male plays an active role in rearing, actually have smaller than expected brain sizes. By the same token, monogamous ungulates have larger brains than polygamous/promiscuous ungulates, yet in no species does the male provide any paternal care. This perhaps suggests that the cognitive demand may have more to do with pairbonding (i.e. behavioural coordination) than cooperative rearing as such. If the issue really is pair coordination, then the proposal is simply a small-scale version of the SBH (see below), where precisely this claim has previously been made for mammals and birds, in general.

There are two further considerations in respect of CIH that we should note. First, although the occurrence of cultural transmission does correlate with social group size in primates, no evidence has yet been offered to suggest that the efficiency of innovation or transmission actually increases with the number of models available. Indeed, if anything, the converse may be true: the natural structuring of primate social groups actually slows down the rate at which innovations spread through a group. Second, the fact that animals ‘infect’ each other with novel foraging strategies, technical know-how or cultural rules does not, of itself, tell us anything about why (bonded) social groups exist. This is not to say that the flow of information through networks is not important and does not have functional (i.e. fitness) consequences; an equally plausible claim is that the use of socially available information is an exaptation, or secondary benefit, of group living.

In sum, as an explanation, CIH has three issues: it seems to apply only to a very limited number of species; it cannot explain the variation in nonhuman primate brain size (especially given that the kinds of phenomena likely to be transmitted culturally, such as innovations, seem to have a stepwise rather than continuous distribution in primates) or why primates should have bonded social groups. That it might be a by-product benefit (or evolutionary window of opportunity) to one of the other hypotheses is, however, a distinct possibility.


Vygotskian intelligence hypothesis

VIH was proposed by Moll & Tomasello. They argued that all non-human primate societies are essentially competitive; hence, the MIH (as originally proposed by Humphrey) provides a sufficient explanation for the evolution of large brains in nonhuman primates. By contrast, they claim, human societies are intrinsically cooperative and for this a new kind of intelligence (Vygotskian intelligence) was needed. Vygotsky developed a theory of culture during the 1930s that emphasized the social aspects of intelligence, in particular collaboration, communication and teaching. Moll & Tomasello argued that this form of intelligence is unique to humans and marks a phase shift both in how social life is organized and in the kinds of cognitive demands placed on the brain, thereby explaining the fact that humans have brains that are significantly larger than those of all other primates.

Appealing as this suggestion is, it falls foul of three problems. First, Moll & Tomasello misunderstand the nature of primate sociality. Contrary to what they assume, all (anthropoid) primate societies are in fact based on cooperation: primate groups are cooperative solutions to the central problems of survival, in particular predation risk. Second, as originally stated, VIH argues a special case for a single taxon: special pleading should always be an explanation of last resort. Third, as with so many other hypotheses, it fails to explain why group size varies across primates, or why it correlates so robustly with brain size. One could, of course, argue that the Vygotskian model applies to all primates. But since it appears to be a categorical phenomenon (you have Vygotskian intelligence or you do not), it would then be difficult to explain the quantitative differences in brain size across primates. Nonetheless, VIH may well be a plausible explanation for the mechanism(s) needed to ramp conventional primate social intelligence up onto the higher plane needed to manage the substantially larger scale of human societies.


Scheherazade hypothesis

SH argues that human's very large brains arose as a consequence of sexual selection in the context of managing mate fidelity. However, we can exclude the possibility that sexual selection for mate quality has driven brain evolution in primates as a whole: brain size does not correlate with at least two well-established indices of sexual selection, namely relative testis size and the degree of female sexual promiscuity. Nonetheless, it might possibly offer an explanation for the evolution of the large brains characteristic of monogamous mammals and birds if we can argue that the issue is selection for mate bonding (the processes that underpin behavioural coordination) rather than mate selection (for genetic quality). This would explain why, in birds, lifelong pairbonders have significantly larger brains than annual pairbonders who find a new mate each year. The bottom line is that if SH's scope is simply as an explanation for the very large brains of modern humans, its interest may be limited; but, if it offers a more general mechanism for pairbonding, then it may be a version of the SBH (see below). In this respect, however, it potentially adds an important way in which the SBH can be generalized to a taxonomically wider range of species beyond the primates.


Social brain hypothesis

SBH has been used (or misused) to refer to many different, often rather vague, hypotheses. We ignore most of these and focus on SBH sensu stricto, defined as originally specified in terms of the need to create functional, cohesive, bonded social groups as a means of solving an ecological problem. SBH is an explicitly two-step process: an ecological problem is solved socially (i.e. as a cooperative process) and a big brain is needed to allow the requisite level of sociality to do this. The group created by big brains is not an end in itself (a mistake made by many attempts to compare between alternative hypotheses: e.g.), but rather the means to an ecological end. It is important not to mistake this view for group selection: it does not involve the differential survival or extinction of groups. Rather, it is a group-level or group-augmentation explanation (sensu), such that individuals living in larger social units have higher fitness than those living in smaller ones.

It is worth rehearsing briefly the weight of evidence for the SBH, and how remarkably robust the relationship actually is. In primates, social group size correlates with a wide range of brain indices, including absolute and relative cranial volume, brain volume, neocortex volume, non-striate neocortex volume and frontal lobe volume (with and without phylogenetic correction in all these cases and with roughly similar goodness of fit), in several different datasets, in many cases while simultaneously controlling for a variety of potential ecological confounds. The correlation is significantly improved if group size is indexed as female cohort size, suggesting that it may have been female grouping patterns that have driven brain evolution. It is improved still further by noting that the data actually form a series of grades. (By grades, we refer to the fact that the regression equations for two subsets of data have the same slope but significantly different intercepts: see.) Many studies that compare social group size against other cognitive or behavioural measures as predictors of brain size treat the SBH relationship as a single unitary equation relating group size to brain size. Using a single generic regression, equation yields a significantly poorer fit, as grades inevitably result in regression slopes being pulled down. It is essential to match species to the correct grade when undertaking such tests if egregious errors are to be avoided.

In addition, and more impressively, there is now considerable neuroimaging evidence for both humans and macaques that individual differences in social network size (variously indexed as sociability, core social network size, number of Facebook friends and living group size) correlate with the absolute volume of core regions in the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain. Thus, the social brain relationship applies not just between species but also, within species, between individuals (as might be expected of any trait subject to natural selection). These results also narrow down the focus of the correlation and identify those brain regions associated with social skills (in particular, in the frontal lobes) as being critical to the relationship with group size.

For reasons that are not entirely clear, SBH is frequently perceived as being just about group size. In fact, right from the outset SBH explicitly claimed that group size is an emergent property of the animals' abilities to maintain and coordinate social relationships. This is evident from the fact that neocortex volume correlates with a number of behavioural indices of social complexity in primates, including the size of grooming cliques, the use of coalitions, the use of sophisticated social strategies and the frequency of tactical deception. Importantly, there is direct evidence that individual differences in social skills have real implications for fitness. In baboons, female longevity and fecundity correlate with the number of social partners that females have, and females with more grooming partners are better able to cope with stressful events (as indexed by cortisol titres). There is now extensive evidence that social network size and quality are among the most important factors influencing health, wellbeing and even longevity in humans (for a recent summary).

Although SBH was originally developed as an explanation for the evolution of primate brain size, a number of studies have explored its implications for other taxa. However, Pérez-Barbería et al. and Shultz & Dunbar demonstrated that primates differ radically from carnivores and ungulates in their pattern of brain size evolution. Only anthropoid primates exhibit a quantitative relationship between group size and brain size; in all other mammals and birds, SBH is instantiated as a categorical difference between pairbonded species with big brains and polygamous species with small brains. Moreover, Shultz & Dunbar showed that the historical rate of encephalization over geological time within different mammalian sub-orders correlates with the proportion of living genera that have bonded social systems (defined as either pairbonded or groups in which individuals have a limited number of preferred social partners, resulting in highly structured networks). Some taxa, such as the felids (almost all of whose living species are solitary), show little evidence of encephalization across their entire geological history, whereas taxa like the canids and anthropoid primates that have a high frequency of bonded groups show an accelerating change in encephalization. Given that it has repeatedly been shown that the quantitative relationship between brain size and group size does not apply outside the anthropoid primates, it is puzzling that social group size has so often been considered an appropriate index to correlate with brain size across widely divergent vertebrate taxa (for recent examples).

Sociality may also have been instrumental in selecting for large brains in some fish families (e.g. the cichlids:) and among the social insects. Again, group size is not the issue in either case, but rather social skills. Bee and wasp species in which the queens are social (several queens share a nest) have larger mushroom bodies (the part of the brain that handles social behaviour) than species that nest solitarily, and within these social species queens have larger mushroom bodies than workers. Gonzalez-Voyer et al.'s study of cichlids is unique in that it used a selection experimental paradigm to show that, at least among females, selection for social skills resulted in changes in brain size.

As a final aside, we note that, although it has been claimed that CIH represents a novel approach, because it highlights the role of social learning, in actual fact social learning and the practice of social skills was identified at a very early stage as being a crucial component of SBH. The skills required to maintain social coordination and cohesion are complex and have to be learned. There is abundant evidence from both developmental psychology and neuroimaging that, in humans, this actually takes a very long time (possibly as long as two decades). The fact that, in primates, neocortex volume is best predicted by the length of the socialization period (weaning to first reproduction), and not by the period of parental investment (gestation plus lactation) that conventionally explains total brain size, reinforces this point. It is not enough to have a big computer; the computer needs software, and the software is acquired by learning, imitation and practice. Herein may lie the substantive importance of cultural transmission and CIH.


Towards an integrated model

To avoid the apparent bind caused by the need to differentiate between alternative explanations, some authors have suggested that the brain evolved to support several or all of the functions reviewed in §2, and hence that the distinction between ecological and social explanations is a false dichotomy. At a cognitive level, this is almost certainly true: the same cognitive processes very likely do support all these different functions, since processes like causal reasoning, analogical reasoning, one trial learning, the comparison of alternative outcomes and the ability to inhibit prepotent responses underlie all forms of primate decision making, whether social or instrumental. More importantly, these are unique anthropoid competences dependent on Brodman area 10 in the frontal pole, a brain region that exists only in anthropoid primates. Indeed, these executive function competences correlate with neocortex volume across primates. It may not, however, necessarily be so where functional explanations are concerned. Here, an important distinction will usually need to be drawn between the function that led to the original evolution of a particular trait, and the function(s) that have subsequently been responsible for coopting the trait for other biological purposes.

One of the problems in this respect is that, because social skills are more nebulous to define and their benefits typically accrue only on the scale of a lifetime, foraging tasks have been much easier to work with in both the laboratory and the field. This makes it difficult to design experiments that genuinely distinguish between technical (instrumental) and social hypotheses. Although limited to apes, the one serious attempt to test between competences on technical and social competences directly reveals a remarkably linear relationship between prefrontal cortex volume and performance on a genuinely social task in three ape species (orangutans, chimpanzees and humans), whereas competences on non-social instrumental tasks exhibit, at best, a stepwise relationship with brain size. These differences in social skills also correlate monotonically with group size, whereas those for instrumental skills do not. More data of this kind are clearly needed on other primate species, but such experiments are not easy to design.

A further problem in testing between alternative hypotheses is that almost all comparative analyses are, inevitably, correlational, making it impossible to test causal hypotheses. This problem has been somewhat ameliorated recently by the development of new phylogenetic statistical methods that allow causal hypotheses to be tested by examining the sequential order in which correlated variables appear in the phylogenetic tree. Broadly speaking, this works fine so long as cause and effect are separated by time intervals long enough to be picked up by the phylogenetic timescale. In many cases, however, the coevolutionary process is so tightly locked that there is insufficient temporal precision to detect a difference.

Even so, when doing so, it is important that both the hypotheses and their behavioural indices are covalent (i.e. of equal logical standing). This is especially true if we use multiple regression to compare the influence of two alternative behavioural indices. Recent examples where this desideratum has not been observed include: Bailey & Geary, who used multiple regression to test between environmental instability (an index of energy challenge: an environmental driver) and social competition (with fossil abundance used as a proxy by population density: a consequence) in hominin brain evolution; Charvet & Finlay, who tested between body weight (an index of energy flow: a constraint) and social group size (a function); MacLean et al., who tested between behavioural inhibition (a cognitive variable, and hence a mechanism) and social group size (a function) in mammals as a whole; and Benson-Amram et al., who tested between problem-solving ability (a cognitive measure) and social group size (a functional index) in hyaenids (notwithstanding the fact that, in the latter two cases, SBH does not apply as a quantitative relationship to mammals as a whole). All conclude that some aspect of environmental conditions is the main (or only) driver of brain evolution. In one sense, that goes without saying, since even the SBH is an ecological hypothesis (groups exist to solve an ecological problem: the issue is do the animals solve the ecological problem socially or by individual skills). Confusing one kind of explanation with another is a type of logical error known as a category mistake.

An alternative approach is needed. A particularly suitable one is path analysis (or structural equation modelling), since it is explicitly designed to handle conceptual nesting of this kind. Path analysis uses the partial standardized slopes from multiple regression equations to test between alternative causal relationships that link a set of variables. One attempt to do this is illustrated in a. This suggests that predation risk is the main driver for group size, which in turn selects for the cognition needed to support social groups, which in turn selects for the neocortex size needed to support this kind of cognition. Since large neocortices can only be supported by large brains, this has energetic consequences that need to be met, with enhanced ecological problem-solving abilities as a consequence. Most of the life-history and ecological variables form a set of energy-related constraints or costs that have to be resolved to achieve any increase in brain volume.

Recently, Navarette et al. used phylogenetically informed causal graphs to explore the functional relationships between social group size, brain size (they did not consider neocortex volume), other life-history variables and a number of relevant foraging variables (including technical feeding innovations, social learning and diet breadth; b). Here, innovations, social learning and diet breadth turn out to form one functional module, while social group size, brain size, body size and life-history form another. Although social learning does not correlate independently with group size in all models, in one model it did, perhaps suggesting, as implied by CIH, that the number of models available may be an important factor influencing the extent to which social learning can manifest itself or, as implied by the suggestion that nutrient throughput is a constraint (§2a), that smart foraging is a requirement for the evolution of large brains when the costs of living in large groups put pressure on nutrient throughput.

Although taking different approaches and using different variables, these two path analyses come to essentially the same conclusion: brain evolution is driven largely by social factors, with instrumental skills being a beneficial spin-off (probably because they exploit the same cognitive mechanisms) which is nonetheless essential because they solve the inevitable energetic bind that large brains necessarily entail. Increasing body mass to support a bigger brain may bring with it well known savings of scale in terms of basal metabolic rate that allow surplus energy to be diverted to fuelling brain growth and maintenance, but this does not obviate the fact that bigger bodies consume absolutely more energy.

In sum, the set of variables that have been correlated with brain size are part of a single, integrated biological system whose components are all essential, but which play importantly different roles in the explanatory story. The feedback loops in this model explain why all variables correlate as well as they do.


What makes primate sociality so different?

We identified primate sociality as a key element in this story: so what is it about primate sociality that is so cognitively demanding as to require a large brain? We address this question in more detail elsewhere, but for present purposes we highlight two key features of primate sociality that we see as being crucially different from most other mammals and birds, and which are likely to be cognitively very demanding.

One is the fact that primate social groups exist to provide a passive defence against predators; in primates, in particular, group size is adjusted to the level of experienced predation risk. Although such groups do not incur the conventional costs of public goods (animals do not pay a contribution to benefit, and hence cannot freeride), they do require individuals to coordinate their activity schedules if they want to be part of the group. Failure to do so will result in the group very quickly disintegrating as individual animals drift apart. This is a much more serious problem than many appreciate. In ungulates, herds rapidly disintegrate because the activity schedules of different individuals do not coincide. Sex differences in energy demand, and hence required feeding time, owing to differential reproductive costs or differences in body mass are a particular problem: when some individuals need to continue feeding or move to new feeding sites but others want to rest, someone has to give way if the group is to stay together. The ability to inhibit prepotent responses (a correlate of neocortex volume, and Brodman area 10 in particular) is likely to be crucial in this context. These costs are not trivial, because very few species have significant quantities of free (i.e. uncommitted) time.

We have highlighted the fact that energy demand is limiting for brain evolution. However, it is also limiting for another important reason, namely the fact that both foraging and social bonding are time consuming: though not widely appreciated, large-bodied mammals (and diurnal primates, in particular) may be more limited by time than by energy. As a result, time is a major determinant of anthropoid biogeography. Owing to the need to devote time to leaf fermentation, folivorous Colobus monkeys, for example, are unable to live in large groups because they do not have sufficient time to devote to social grooming at the level required to bond larger groups; modelling shows that if they switched to a more frugivorous diet, as their sister-genus Piliocolobus has done, they would free off sufficient time to live in groups as large as those found in Piliocolobus.

The second issue is a general problem facing all social animals: living in groups creates intense social stresses that arise in part through ecological competition and in part simply through the consequences of crowding in limited space. These create strong dispersive forces that inexorably precipitate group fission if they are not defused. Some of these are owing to the effects of energy bottlenecks (low ranking animals are excluded from the best food sources); others arise as a consequence of the effects that even low levels of harassment have on female menstrual endocrinology and consequential loss of fertility. These fertility costs are not widely appreciated, but they have very significant consequences for females' fitnesses. If they are not mitigated, females risk being functionally infertile.

Normally, these stresses are defused by animals leaving the group (the solution widely adopted in fission–fusion forms of sociality, even among primates). However, most primates do not have fission–fusion sociality. Instead, anthropoid primates solve these problems through grooming-based coalitions that protect their members against harassment by other individuals in the group. These coalitions provide both active defence when threatened by others (e.g. gelada) and a form of passive deterrence (monkeys are less likely to attack individuals who have powerful allies, even when those allies are not in view). Being able to keep absent individuals in mind at the same time as physically present individuals is cognitively very demanding. This is equivalent to being able to compare the outcome of two different behavioural strategies, and depends on both being able to inhibit prepotent action (holding back from attacking an individual one might be able to displace easily on a one-to-one basis) as well as modelling a virtual reality.

The prevalence of this relatively unusual form of bonded relationship has the important consequence of creating the distinctive layered structure of primate social groups. The result is a multi-level form of social organization similar to that found in humans. In effect, these species are able to maintain two qualitatively distinct kinds of relationship simultaneously: intimate relationships with principal grooming partners (allies) and weaker ones with other group members with whom they do not often interact directly. This resembles the two-tier structure of human social relationships, where parallel distinctions are drawn between weak and strong ‘ties’ and, orthogonally, between family and friends. At least some Old World monkeys are able to factor two separate social dimensions into their calculations about others' status (e.g. baboons).

The need to be able to manage relationships of two different types (those based on direct interaction, and those inferred from third-party interactions) is cognitively demanding, and in humans forms the basis of the ability known as mentalizing (or theory of mind) and the ability to model the social world in a virtual mental environment. Not only do individuals' mentalizing abilities correlate with the size of their social networks in humans, but they also correlate with the volume of core regions in the brain, especially in the prefrontal cortex and the temporal lobes. While formal theory of mind is probably an exclusively human (but possibly also great ape) competence, the capacity to handle alternative causal sequences (i.e. propositionally structured descriptions of the world) is a uniquely anthropoid ability.

That these social cognitive abilities may form a scaled continuum across anthropoids is implied by the fact that comparative neuroimaging studies indicate that the human and macaque neocortex is organized in the same way for social functions. Indeed, tractography studies have recently shown that humans and macaques have the same white matter tracts connecting the ventral prefrontal cortex with the temporal lobes that, in humans, are associated with the theory of mind (or mentalizing) network. This brings us back full circle. This kind of cognitive complexity is not an all-or-none phenomenon like formal theory of mind, but a quantitatively varying one that is directly related to group size. As the demand for this increases with group size, it necessitates a proportionally bigger brain to support it, and this adds significantly to the energetic burden that the animal must find additional foraging time to offset.


Conclusion

identifies which of the six criteria listed in §1 are satisfied by each of the hypotheses. Only SBH satisfies all the criteria. Because SBH sensu stricto is about the quality of relationships (and their functionality as coalitions) and not simply about group size, this hypothesis naturally also explains the evolution of pairbonding in non-primates, thus providing a unitary explanation for brain evolution across all mammals and birds. At the same time, it is clear that the other components (or hypotheses) play significant structural roles.

This proposal has several advantages. First, it integrates a wide range of data of very different kinds into a single explanatory framework, and provides a reason why there should be evidence to support all the hypotheses that have been proposed. Second, it provides an explicit explanation for the relationship between social group size and brain size, and why primate brain sizes should vary quantitatively across species. Third, it provides an account of the kinds of behaviour and cognition needed to maintain bonded social groups, reasons why these should be cognitively more demanding than more conventional instrumental skills and how these relate to the underlying neurobiology. Fourth, it offers reasons why social learning (and hence cultural transmission) should be important. Fifth, and more importantly perhaps, it provides an explanation that spans the full range of birds and mammals, arguing only that pressures to evolve bonded relationships reflect the particular circumstances and evolutionary histories of individual taxa. Individual species may well be subject to other selection pressures that add or subtract from this overall effect, but there is no need to plead special cases.

Finally, perhaps, we can answer the question with which we started: why are there so many different explanations for primate brain evolution? Put simply, too many analyses focus on correlational evidence while advocating a single explanation to the exclusion of all others; as a result, they rarely make serious attempts to integrate the various explanations (for all of which there is convincing evidence) into a single unitary explanatory framework. We hope that we have gone some way towards achieving that objective.


Brain Rhythms of Pain

Markus Ploner, Christian Sorg, Joachim Gross — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2017. PMC5374269, CC BY 4.0.

Pain is an integrative phenomenon that results from dynamic interactions between sensory and contextual (i.e., cognitive, emotional, and motivational) processes. In the brain the experience of pain is associated with neuronal oscillations and synchrony at different frequencies. However, an overarching framework for the significance of oscillations for pain remains lacking. Recent concepts relate oscillations at different frequencies to the routing of information flow in the brain and the signaling of predictions and prediction errors. The application of these concepts to pain promises insights into how flexible routing of information flow coordinates diverse processes that merge into the experience of pain. Such insights might have implications for the understanding and treatment of chronic pain.

Keywords: pain, brain, oscillations, information flow, predictive coding

Pain is a vital phenomenon that depends on the dynamic integration of sensory and contextual processes. In chronic pain the adaptive integration of sensory and contextual processes is severely disturbed.

Neuronal oscillations and synchrony at different frequencies provide evidence on information flow across brain areas. The flexible relationship between oscillations at different frequencies and pain indicates flexible routing of information flow in the cerebral processing of pain.

The systematic assessment of oscillations and synchrony in the processing of pain provides insights into how sensory and contextual processes are flexibly integrated into a coherent percept and into abnormalities of these processes in chronic pain. Predictive coding frameworks might help us understand these integration processes.


How Can the Study of Brain Rhythms Advance Our Understanding of Pain?

Pain results from dynamic interactions between sensory and contextual (i.e., cognitive, emotional, and motivational) processes. Pain is thus essentially an integrative phenomenon. In recent years it has been shown that oscillations and synchrony serve integrative functions by flexibly routing information flow in the brain,. Thus, understanding the role of oscillations in the processing of pain promises insights into how functionally diverse processes dynamically merge into the experience of pain in health and disease.

Here we review recent evidence on the role of neuronal oscillations and synchrony in the processing of pain. We begin with a brief discussion of the peculiarities of pain and its processing in the brain. We then summarize recent insights into the significance of neuronal oscillations and synchrony for the routing of information flow in the brain. On this basis we review evidence on the role of oscillations in the processing of pain. We specifically discuss how oscillations and synchrony serve the flexible routing of information flow in the integration of sensory and contextual factors into a coherent percept. Moreover, we review and discuss the role of these processes in pathological abnormalities of the pain experience in chronic pain. Finally, we consider perspectives and future directions for the study of the role of neuronal oscillations in the cerebral processing of pain.


Pain

Pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience that signals threat and promotes behavior to protect the individual. Commonly, the underlying process is that a noxious stimulus induces physiological processes, referred to as nociception, that translate into pain. This translation process is influenced by a broad variety of contextual factors. We routinely make use of this influence; for example, when comforting an injured child or when harnessing placebo effects for pain therapy. Pain thus results from the integration of nociceptive and contextual information mediated by feedforward and feedback processes in the human brain. This integration process is not static but has to be dynamically adjusted to the continuously changing demands of everyday life. For example, the same noxious input can yield no pain when a competing goal has to be achieved (e.g., during a long-distance run) but under other contextual conditions can result in strong pain (e.g., when a severe disease is feared). Thus, the dynamic integration of sensory and contextual processes plays a preeminent role in pain that probably exceeds its role in other modalities.

In chronic pain states, pain often persists without objective threat to the body. Chronic pain is a disease in its own right that affects about a fifth of the adult population in the Western world, imposes an enormous economic burden on society, and causes severe suffering to individuals. In chronic pain the relationship between nociception and pain is often weak or lost indicating abnormal integration of nociceptive and contextual information. In particular, there is a close and mutual relationship between contextual factors and chronic pain. For example, certain psychological factors such as passive coping strategies predispose to the development of chronic pain and, conversely, chronic pain yields severe cognitive, affective, and functional deficits. Thus, the adaptive integration of nociceptive and contextual processes is severely disturbed in chronic pain.


Pain and the Brain

Pain is associated with the activation of an extended network of brain areas including the somatosensory, insular, cingulate, and prefrontal cortices, the thalamus, subcortical areas, and the brainstem. These areas do not constitute a dedicated pain system but belong to different functional systems of the brain that are transiently orchestrated in the processing of pain. None of these areas exclusively processes or singularly determines the experience of pain (see, for an ongoing discussion of this topic). It is thus likely that the integration of neuronal activity across brain areas eventually determines pain. Structural connections represent the anatomical basis for this integration process. However, to continuously adjust pain to the momentary behavioral demands, the integration process has to be highly flexible. This flexibility requires dynamic changes of neuronal integration at timescales that can be provided not by changes of structural connections but rather by dynamic changes of functional connections. Such dynamic changes of functional connections in the processing of pain have recently been conceptualized as the dynamic pain connectome. This concept does not conceive the cerebral processing of pain as a static phenomenon but emphasizes that the dynamics of functional connections flexibly determine the experience of pain.

Pain is associated not only with a spatially extended network of dynamically recruited brain areas but also with complex temporal–spectral patterns of brain activity. In particular, pain-related neuronal oscillations at frequencies ranging from infraslow fluctuations below 0.1 Hz via theta (4–7 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz), and beta (14–29 Hz) to gamma (30–100 Hz) oscillations, have been observed. These oscillations have been recorded during different contextual conditions and at different timescales. However, an overarching framework for the significance of these oscillations for pain remains lacking.


Infraslow Fluctuations and Pain

In resting-state fMRI data, infraslow fluctuations of blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signals below 0.1 Hz have been observed. The synchronization of these infraslow fluctuations across brain areas defines intrinsic brain networks. Accumulating evidence indicates that particularly the activities of the default mode, salience, and sensorimotor networks are changed in chronic pain,. The findings show changes of connectivity not only within but also across these networks in chronic pain. Moreover, changes of the frequency pattern, and the variability of infraslow fluctuations have been observed. Thus, the analysis of infraslow fluctuations is a promising approach to advance our understanding of the brain mechanisms of chronic pain. However, changes of infraslow fluctuations of BOLD signals are found not only in pain but in many neuropsychiatric disorders so that the disease and symptom specificity of the observed changes remains an important question.

Two physiological aspects of intrinsic brain networks might be of particular interest in the processing of pain. First, intrinsic brain networks relate to slowly propagating waves of neuronal activity at a timescale of about 1 s for the whole cortex,. These waves provide subthreshold depolarization to individual neurons indicating modulation of neuronal excitability. Changes of infraslow BOLD fluctuations in chronic pain might therefore indicate impairment of slowly propagating waves. As slowly propagating waves are intimately linked to slow waves during sleep and memory consolidation, changes of infraslow BOLD fluctuations might relate to abnormal learning and memory consolidation processes in chronic pain. Second, infraslow fluctuations are linked to fluctuations of faster oscillations at alpha and gamma frequencies, indicating cross-frequency coupling with infraslow fluctuations shaping faster oscillations. In chronic pain, abnormal infraslow fluctuations, particularly in the salience and default mode networks, might interfere with faster oscillations and the flexible routing of information flow in the brain.

In summary, infraslow fluctuations provide a mechanistic framework that connects slow wave propagation and learning processes to oscillations at higher frequencies and flexible cerebral information flow. Abnormalities of infraslow fluctuations and their synchronization might signal abnormal slow wave propagation and related learning processes and contribute to abnormal routing of information flow in chronic pain.

The close relationship between chronic pain and psychological factors and the substantial comorbidity of chronic pain and mental disorders indicates that brain dysfunction plays a central role in the development and maintenance of chronic pain. Recent neurobiological investigations corroborate the crucial role of the brain in chronic pain by showing substantial structural and metabolic changes of the brain in chronic pain,. Moreover, neurophysiological and functional imaging studies found abnormalities of the frequency spectrum of brain activity ranging from infraslow fluctuations to gamma oscillations in patients with chronic pain,. Most recent evidence indicates that some of these changes are causally involved in the development and maintenance of chronic pain,.


Neuronal Oscillations and Synchrony

Brain rhythms or brain oscillations refer to rhythmic fluctuations of neural mass signals recorded by local field potentials (LFPs), electroencephalography (EEG), or magnetoencephalography (MEG). Brain oscillations are most prominent at frequencies between 1 and 100 Hz. They originate from the dynamic interplay of excitation and inhibition of neuronal populations leading to periodic synchronization of action potentials. In addition, infraslow fluctuations of brain activity are observed at frequencies below 0.1 Hz by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). At any frequency the synchronization of brain activity can occur both within and between brain areas,. Brain oscillations have been observed in association with a broad variety of perceptual, cognitive, and behavioral functions. The interpretation of their functional significance therefore varies substantially between tasks and backgrounds. It is only recently that these different interpretations have been complemented by a unified physiological framework indicating that brain oscillations are mechanistically involved in the dynamic routing of information flow,.

This framework is based on a convergence of anatomical and functional findings in animals and humans. First, in the visual system anatomical connections have been differentiated into feedforward (bottom-up) and feedback (top-down) connections,. This anatomical differentiation is apparent in distinct distributions of both types of connections across the various layers of the cortex. Feedforward projections typically start in supragranular layers and terminate in layer IV. Feedback projections predominantly start in infragranular layers and terminate in layers other than layer IV. Second, the non-homogeneous distribution of feedforward and feedback connections is complemented by a non-homogeneous distribution of brain oscillations across cortical layers. Several studies demonstrate that oscillations at alpha and beta frequencies (8–29 Hz) are stronger in infragranular layers than in supragranular layers. By contrast, oscillations in the gamma frequency band (∼30–100 Hz) are stronger in supra- than in infragranular layers of the cortex,. In light of the aforementioned laminar distribution of anatomical connections, this suggests a link between feedforward signaling and gamma oscillations and feedback signaling and alpha/beta oscillations. A recent study provided direct evidence for these associations. The study characterized the information flow in human visual areas based on MEG data. Specifically, measures of directed connectivity (such as Granger causality) indicated stronger connectivity in the gamma band from lower towards higher hierarchical areas (feedforward signal) whereas directed connectivity in the opposite direction (from higher to lower areas) is stronger in alpha/beta frequencies.

Taken together these findings indicate that neuronal oscillations and synchrony in distinct frequency bands serve the dynamic routing of information flow in the brain. Previously seemingly independent strands of research converged on the notion that alpha/beta oscillations mediate feedback signals whereas gamma oscillations mediate feedforward signals. In predictive coding frameworks of brain function, this might correspond to the signaling of predictions and prediction errors, respectively. The involvement of neuronal oscillations in the flexible routing of information flow has been largely demonstrated and developed in the visual system. In the following section, we apply this concept to findings on neuronal oscillations and synchrony in the processing of pain.


Predictive Coding

Predictive coding is a framework of brain function that states that the brain is not a passive recipient of information but generates and optimizes predictions about the environment,. These predictions are continuously compared against sensory evidence and discrepancies produce prediction errors that serve to optimize future predictions. In this way the brain efficiently allocates resources to events that are behaviorally relevant and useful for updating predictions (i.e., learning processes). These processes are implemented in a hierarchical processing model in which predictions and prediction errors are passed in feedback and feedforward directions, respectively. At every level of the hierarchy, prediction errors are minimized by optimizing predictions. In this optimization process, the influences of predictions and sensory evidence are weighted according to their precision.

In the cortex predictive coding processes are likely to be implemented by various neuronal populations. In particular, predictions have been related to infragranular neurons and feedback connections while prediction errors have been related to supragranular neurons and feedforward connections. In light of the predominance of alpha/beta and gamma oscillations in infra- and supragranular layers, respectively, the relation of predictions and prediction errors to neuronal oscillations at alpha/beta and gamma frequencies, respectively, is obvious,. Recent studies have provided the first experimental evidence for such relationships,.


Neuronal Oscillations and the Experience of Pain

Most studies on the cerebral processing of pain have investigated responses to phasic pain stimuli in the range of milliseconds to seconds. These results are likely to apply to acute pain events that signal threat and promote protective behavior. Fewer studies have investigated the brain mechanisms of longer-lasting pain of months and years as a key feature of pathological chronic pain conditions. Furthermore, experimental studies on longer-lasting pain in the range of minutes (tonic pain) have investigated pain at timescales between those of phasic and chronic pain and are intended to represent an experimental approach towards chronic pain.


Phasic Pain

EEG and MEG studies showed that brief noxious stimuli induce a complex spectral–temporal–spatial pattern of neuronal responses with at least three different components. First, pain stimuli evoke increased neural activity at frequencies below 10 Hz. These increases occur between 150 and 400 ms after stimulus application. They originate from the sensorimotor cortex and the frontoparietal operculum including the insula and secondary somatosensory cortex as well as from the mid-/anterior cingulate cortex. They correspond to the well-investigated pain-related evoked potentials,. Second, phasic pain stimuli transiently suppress oscillations at alpha and beta frequencies,. These suppressions are observed at latencies between about 300 and 1000 ms in the sensorimotor cortex and occipital areas,. Third, phasic pain stimuli induce oscillations at gamma frequencies over the sensorimotor cortex at latencies of between 150 and 350 ms,.

The functional significance of the different components of pain-related brain activity is not yet fully understood. So far the evidence indicates that the components are differentially sensitive to different modulations of pain. Bottom-up modulations of pain by varying stimulus intensity (i.e., nociceptive information) influences all three components,. Similarly, top-down modulations by varying attention affect all components,. However, during spontaneous fluctuations of pain, pain modulations by music and music therapy, and repetitive painful stimulation gamma oscillations are more closely related to pain intensity than the other components. By contrast, when pain is modulated by varying the expectation about the upcoming stimulus in the form of a placebo manipulation, evoked potentials and alpha suppressions are more closely related to pain than gamma oscillations. Hence, bottom-up modulations affect all components of pain-related brain activity whereas different top-down modulations selectively modulate certain components. The available evidence does not yet allow more precise assignment of the different components to the manifold modulations of pain.

The findings, however, indicate that brain activity at different frequencies provides different and complementary information about pain. Moreover, they indicate that there is no one-to-one correspondence between any frequency component of brain activity and pain, which extends the lack of specificity of brain activity for pain to the frequency domain. Instead, the relationship between pain and brain activity is variable and context dependent. In the context of an involvement of oscillations in the flexible routing of information flow, the findings suggest that different contextual modulations of pain differentially change the information flow between the involved brain areas (Key Figure). For example, when pain is mostly driven by nociceptive processing, gamma oscillations in the somatosensory cortex may serve the feedforward signaling of sensory information to other brain areas involved in pain processing and behavioral responses to pain. By contrast, when other processes such as affect or, evaluation dominate, the information flow is changed with gamma oscillations and feedforward signaling from the somatosensory cortex playing a rather minor role.

The assessment of brain responses to phasic painful stimuli shows the impact of contextual modulations on stimulus processing but not the mechanisms of the modulations. A straightforward approach to the disentangling of contextual processes from stimulus processing is the assessment of prestimulus activity, which cannot be contaminated by any stimulus-related processes. The few studies on this topic with respect to pain, suggest that ongoing oscillations play an important role in shaping pain perception. Specifically, the amplitude of prestimulus alpha oscillations over the sensorimotor cortex is negatively correlated with pain perception,. Correspondingly, attention to pain and the expectation of analgesia are associated with changes of alpha oscillations in the sensorimotor and prefrontal cortex, respectively. In addition, the amplitudes of prestimulus gamma oscillations are correlated with pain perception, although the direction of the effect differed. Intriguingly, alpha and gamma oscillations together have a stronger predictive value than each component alone, which supports the view that they provide different and complementary information about feedforward and feedback signaling in pain processing.

Studies using intracranial recordings in a few patients with epilepsy investigated the significance not only of prestimulus oscillations but also of prestimulus connectivity between brain areas for pain. The results indicate that attention to pain changes the connectivity between pain-relevant brain areas at alpha and beta frequencies,. Intriguingly, the analysis of directed functional (or effective) connectivity indicates that the information flow is flexibly changed by attention. Specifically, during attention to a painful stimulus the medial prefrontal cortex exerted causal influences on the primary sensorimotor cortex whereas during distraction the causal influences were reversed. These findings provide evidence for the context-dependent routing of information flow in the processing of pain. Moreover, the findings are well compatible with a role for synchrony at alpha and/or beta frequencies in the top-down signaling of contextual factors and/or, in a predictive coding framework, predictions of pain. However, these promising findings originate from three patients and need replication and elaboration in further studies.


Tonic Pain

The above-reviewed evidence relates to the processing of brief experimental pain stimuli. It is, however, unclear how these findings relate to the brain mechanisms of longer-lasting pain of months and years, which is the key feature of chronic pain. Experimental studies using longer-lasting tonic experimental pain stimuli in the range of minutes represent a step further in that direction. These studies have shown that tonic pain is associated with suppression of oscillations at alpha frequencies,. However, as most mental processes suppress alpha oscillations, the specificity of this effect is unclear. Some studies have claimed it to be pain specific based on covariation of alpha oscillations and pain intensity,. Another recent study showed that the suppression of alpha and beta oscillations during tonic pain is more closely related to stimulus intensity as a proxy for nociception than to the perceived pain intensity indicating that these suppressions reflect stimulus processing rather than perception. In addition, several studies have recorded gamma oscillations during tonic pain,. Intriguingly, during tonic pain gamma oscillations encoded pain rather than nociception. Moreover, in contrast to phasic pain, they were not recorded over sensorimotor areas but over the medial prefrontal cortex.

Thus, during a few minutes of painful stimulation the encoding of pain shifts from gamma oscillations over brain areas encoding sensory processes to gamma oscillations over brain areas encoding emotional–motivational phenomena. These findings indicate that pain-related information flow might change not only with the behavioral context but also with the duration of pain. In the current framework of flexible routing of information flow, these findings suggest that during longer-lasting pain, signals from brain areas encoding emotional–motivational processes rather than from sensory brain areas dominate the processing and perception of pain. In a predictive coding framework, this might indicate that longer-lasting pain does not generate prediction errors at the level of sensory processing but rather at the level of emotional–motivational processing.


Chronic Pain

The analysis of oscillations and synchrony is conceptually promising and methodologically well suited for the investigation of ongoing processes such as chronic pain. However, remarkably few studies have addressed this topic and the results are not fully consistent (see for a recent review). The most-noticed abnormality is an increase of theta oscillations in chronic pain patients. This phenomenon has been embedded in the framework of thalamocortical dysrhythmia,. This theory posits that abnormal thalamic theta oscillations play a crucial role in various neuropsychiatric disorders. In neuropathic pain deafferentation might cause these thalamic theta oscillations, which in turn entrain thalamocortical loops. At the cortical level, the abnormal theta oscillations are supposed to reduce lateral inhibition, which might result in abnormal gamma oscillations. Eventually, these abnormal gamma oscillations have been proposed to result in positive neurological and psychiatric symptoms including ongoing pain. The appeal of this framework is its internal coherence and there is some clinical and experimental evidence in favor of the concept,. However, other studies did not observe abnormal theta oscillations in chronic pain,. Moreover, as slowing of the peak alpha frequency in chronic pain, has also been observed, abnormal amplitudes of theta oscillations might basically represent the unspecific slowing of EEG activity observed in many acute and chronic neuropsychiatric disorders.

A less-noticed finding is an increase of oscillations at alpha and beta frequencies,. This is in line with studies in animal models of chronic pain that showed broadband increases of oscillations from theta to beta frequencies in the primary somatosensory and medial prefrontal cortex,. In particular, increases of beta oscillations were observed in frontal brain areas,. Considering that beta oscillations are likely to serve feedback signaling, and/or the signaling of predictions, this would be compatible with abnormal predictions playing a crucial role in chronic pain.

In summary, the data show mostly changes of theta and beta oscillations in chronic pain, the latter particularly in frontal brain areas. Considering disturbed integration of nociceptive and contextual processes in chronic pain, an abnormal balance of feedforward and feedback signaling and thereby an abnormal balance of oscillations at different frequencies might play an important role in chronic pain. However, the role of neuronal oscillations and synchrony in chronic pain is a largely unexplored field and the emerging concepts await further empirical testing.


Concluding Remarks and Future Perspectives

Recent evidence has shown that oscillations and synchrony play a crucial role in the flexible routing of information flow in the brain. In particular, oscillations at gamma and alpha/beta frequencies have been shown to serve feedforward and feedback processing, respectively. The flexible routing of information flow might be particularly relevant in the processing of pain where the dynamic integration of sensory and contextual processes plays a crucial role. The results available so far are compatible with these concepts. It has been shown that there is no one-to-one correspondence between oscillations at any frequency or location and the subjective experience of pain, which extends evidence on the lack of specificity of pain-related brain activity to the frequency domain. Instead, different modulations of pain are associated with distinct changes of neuronal oscillations indicating flexible, context-dependent routing of information flow. The available evidence does not so far allow more systematic mapping of the relationship between oscillations, cerebral information flow, and the experience of pain and its modulations. This lack of evidence is at least partly due to a lack of a systematic understanding of pain modulations. Conversely, the systematic assessment of brain oscillations might represent a promising approach to establish a taxonomy or ontology of different types of pain modulation based on patterns of oscillations and cerebral information flow.

Chronic pain appears to be associated with abnormal oscillations at theta and beta frequencies. Although the specificity of these findings has remained unclear, at least part of them would be compatible with abnormal contextual feedback processes playing a central role in the pathology of chronic pain. More standardized approaches, larger patient samples, data-sharing initiatives, and more sophisticated and timely analysis strategies such as graph theory-based network analyses are needed to further our understanding of the role of neuronal oscillations and flexible cerebral information flow in chronic pain. A better understanding of these processes might eventually help in the diagnosis and treatment of chronic pain. In particular, the assessment of oscillations and cerebral information flow might help to establish brain-based diagnostic markers of pain,. Moreover, the frequency-selective modulation of neuronal oscillations by brain stimulation techniques, can determine causal influences between oscillations and behavior and might represent an option for the treatment of pain.

Furthermore, considering the preeminent role of the integration of contextual and sensory information in the processing of pain, an application of predictive coding frameworks to the processing of pain is obvious. In such a framework, contextual and nociceptive information might be conceptualized as predictions and sensory evidence, respectively. Pain thereby results from the comparison and adjustment of predictions, sensory evidence, and prediction errors rather than directly from nociceptive information. Accordingly, it has recently been proposed that predictive coding represents a suitable and testable model of pain processing,. Paradigmatically, a predictive coding model for pain and placebo analgesia has been presented. In this model placebo-induced treatment expectations were conceptualized as feedback-mediated predictions, which modulate pain by changing the balance of feedback and feedforward processes at different levels of a neural processing hierarchy. It will be intriguing to extend this model to other modulations of pain. Moreover, considering the relationship of predictions and prediction errors with alpha/beta and gamma oscillations, respectively, the assessment of oscillations could provide novel insights into predictive coding processes related to pain. This is even more appealing as abnormally precise predictions and/or abnormal updating of predictions might play an important role in the pathology of chronic pain.

Thus, based on recent progress in our understanding of neuronal oscillations, their systematic assessment might provide a unique window onto the dynamics of cerebral information flow and related predictive coding processes underlying the experience of pain in health and disease.

Recent studies discuss the significance of interactions of oscillations at different frequencies (i.e., cross-frequency coupling). What is the role of cross-frequency coupling in pain? In particular, how do infraslow fluctuations observed by fMRI relate to oscillations at higher frequencies in the processing of pain?

Pain modulations can be harnessed for pain therapy. However, a systematic understanding of pain modulations is so far lacking. Can the assessment of oscillations and patterns of cerebral information flow help to establish a brain-based taxonomy of pain modulations?

It is tempting to relate the interaction between sensory input, contextual information, and pain to predictive coding frameworks of brain function. How can this relationship be specified and experimentally tested? What are the consequences for the understanding of pain and chronic pain?

The analysis of oscillations is conceptually and methodologically well suited for the investigation of the brain mechanisms of chronic pain. However, evidence on the role of oscillations and synchrony in chronic pain is remarkably limited. Can timely network analyses of EEG, MEG, and fMRI data specify abnormalities of oscillations and synchrony underlying chronic pain?

Subcortical areas including the ventral striatum, amygdala, and hippocampus play an important role in chronic pain. Although neuronal oscillations from these areas are well known they have not so far been investigated during pain. How can subcortical oscillations be recorded and how do they integrate in patterns of cerebral information flow?

Recent studies discuss the use of patterns of brain activity as markers of pain. Can patterns of neuronal oscillations and synchrony serve as diagnostic and/or prognostic markers of pain? Can we target neuronal oscillations and synchrony for pain therapy using pharmacological, behavioral, neuromodulatory, or neurofeedback approaches?


Formalising recall by genotype as an efficient approach to detailed phenotyping and causal inference

Laura J. Corbin, Vanessa Y. Tan, David A. Hughes, Kaitlin H. Wade, Dirk S. Paul, Katherine E. Tansey, Frances Butcher, Frank Dudbridge et al. — Nature Communications, 2018. PMC5818506, CC BY 4.0.

Detailed phenotyping is required to deepen our understanding of the biological mechanisms behind genetic associations. In addition, the impact of potentially modifiable risk factors on disease requires analytical frameworks that allow causal inference. Here, we discuss the characteristics of Recall-by-Genotype (RbG) as a study design aimed at addressing both these needs. We describe two broad scenarios for the application of RbG: studies using single variants and those using multiple variants. We consider the efficacy and practicality of the RbG approach, provide a catalogue of UK-based resources for such studies and present an online RbG study planner.


Introduction

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified thousands of common genetic variants related to complex traits and diseases. To deepen the understanding of the biological mechanisms underlying specific genetic association results or the impact of potentially modifiable risk factors, new research ideally requires detailed phenotyping and analytical frameworks allowing causal inference. Exhaustive phenotyping in the same discovery collections can be impractical or prohibitively expensive and leads to situations in which measurement precision and quality or proximity to underlying biology is compromised by the use of cheaper pragmatic approaches. There has been substantial growth in the availability of bioinformatic resources able to help break down association results, but less often seen is the explicit use of genetic data to design new studies that could contribute to the understanding of specific association signals, or the impact of potentially modifiable risk factors. Recall-by-Genotype (RbG) studies recall participants, patients or their samples for extensive investigation based on informative genetic variation. These are not standard human genetic association studies, but rather studies that explicitly use existing genetic data as a basis for the design of efficient investigations of mechanism and causality.

In this article, we describe the motivation for and characteristics of RbG studies and why they can be useful for both the examination of specific association results and the efficient extension of applied genetic epidemiology. We discuss the practicalities of incorporating genotypic data into population-based study designs and provide a catalogue of UK-based study resources and an online tool to aid the design of new RbG experiments. Overall, we conclude that RbG studies can help dissect existing genetic associations and make efficient use of the genetic prediction of risk factor exposure through the execution of novel and genotype-informed studies. However, the efficacy of the RbG design depends on a number of study-specific factors and therefore careful consideration should be given as to whether RbG is the optimal design for any given research question. There is further work to be done by the community in developing protocols and procedures to support RbG studies, in particular to address the potential ethical challenges associated with recruitment by genotype.


Rationale for genotype-based sampling strategies

By sampling in an informed manner, targeted studies can be undertaken that allow the examination of dense phenotypic information in sample sizes that are both financially and practically feasible and have the potential to optimise analytical power. Studies that recruit subgroups of participants from the extremes of phenotype distributions (such as lean and obese individuals) have been used in epidemiological investigations for many years; however, these studies suffer well-known limitations of observational epidemiology. In contrast to these, RbG studies use naturally occurring genetic variants robustly associated with specific traits and diseases to stratify individuals into groups for comparison and are novel and beneficial for two reasons. Firstly, by exploiting the key properties of genetic variants that arise from the random allocation of alleles at conception (Mendelian randomization (MR))–, RbG studies enhance the ability to draw causal inferences in population-based studies and minimise problems faced by observational studies (Fig.). Indeed, the often-used comparison of MR to randomised controlled trials (RCTs) is structurally closer for RbG than more conventional applications of this analytical approach–. Secondly, focusing phenotypic assessments on carefully selected population subgroups can improve insight into mechanism and the aetiology of health outcomes in a cost-efficient manner through targeted deployment of more precise and informative phenotyping across already known biological gradients.

These key features ensure results from RbG studies can be useful in a variety of settings, including in the realm of drug development. For example, data from both GlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca show that genetic target linkage to disease increases the rate at which drugs are approved. Currently, one of the main sources of genetic support are results from GWAS (for example, those in GWASdb) and these seem to be particularly useful in earlier stages of the drug development process. However, the influence of genetic support appears to be less strong in progression from Phase III trials to approval, suggesting that there is still progress to be made in refining molecular targets. Furthermore, RbG studies may be able to realise the concept of dose−response curves derived from ‘experiments of nature’ described by Plenge et al., where naturally occurring mutations can be utilised to estimate the efficacy and toxicity of a drug.


Exemplars of RbG design in population health studies

Forms of RbG have appeared in designs looking to optimise RCT and investigate pharmacogenetic relationships–, but have not been fully described for population-based resources. RbG study designs are likely to develop further, but here we present design considerations for RbG in simple form. We split the RbG approach into two categories for the purpose of description; RbG using a single variant (RbGsv) and RbG using multiple variants (RbGmv). The former can be viewed as a focus on the use of specific (potentially rare and large-effect) loci to understand biological pathways of interest; in contrast, the latter uses polygenic contributions to exposures of interest in study designs more efficiently than conventional MR analyses. These approaches have the same inferential properties based on the properties of genetic data; however, they describe differing analytical scenarios and illustrate the potential variety in this application of human genetics.

RbGsv studies are the most intuitive type of RbG, where strata defined by a single genetic variant are used as the basis for the recall of samples or participants for further phenotypic examination. This type of RbG study may focus on functional variants known to induce a direct biological change; however, genetic variants may also be chosen if they have uncharacterised or predicted effects (i.e., loss-of-function variants, cis-regulatory variants or intronic variants that alter DNA-protein binding at potential drug targets). These variants provide natural experiments able to yield information about the specific role of biological pathways as well as gradients within them and potentially inform on both the safety and the efficacy of medicines. For RbGsv studies, participants or patients or their samples are recruited and phenotypes measured based on genotypic groups in a manner not dissimilar to the arms of a clinical trial. Recall in this way yields groups in which detailed phenotyping can be undertaken to assess the specific impact of a genetic change or the aetiology of an outcome. An early example of this approach was an investigation of the effects of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ Pro12Ala polymorphism on adipose tissue non-essential fatty acid metabolism. Further examples of RbGsv are included in Box. Additional studies currently underway have had protocols reported in advance of their completion,.

A form of RbGsv, which has received attention in the literature recently, relates to the concept of ‘human genetic knockouts’, that is, individuals carrying rare homozygous predicted loss-of-function (pLoF) mutations. These are useful in supporting understanding of biological pathways because they come close to simulating the ablation of protein function. By sequencing relatively large numbers of individuals from populations in which homozygous genotypes might be enriched (e.g., founder populations and those with high consanguinity rates), researchers have successfully identified hundreds of pLoF mutations. In their study of over 10,000 individuals living in Pakistan, Saleheen et al. identified four participants homozygous for a pLoF variant in the apolipoprotein C3 (APOC3) gene, associated with lipid metabolism. By re-contacting one homozygous proband, researchers were able to identify and recruit six pLoF carriers and seven non-carriers from the same family for detailed physiologic examination. Participants underwent an oral fat load followed by serial blood testing for 6 h, which showed pLoF homozygotes had lower post-prandial triglyceride excursions. Features from this work that are more broadly applicable within the RbGsv framework include the exploitation of founder populations due to the potential enrichment for highly penetrant large effect variants and the potential to expand recruitment to family members of those identified for recall–.

RbGmv designs differ in the formation of their strata. Rather than employing specific loci of known or hypothetical effect, RbGmv uses multiple genetic variants to design studies focused on the impact of an exposure of interest (e.g., variable body composition, glycaemic profile or complex disease predisposition). The gains afforded in this type of RbG are not through the balanced recruitment of rare mutations of large effect, but the generation of comparison groups small enough for extremely detailed investigation, but where the risk factor exposure gradient is as marked and powerful as in the analyses of the entire population sample.

Consistent with conventional MR analyses, the choice of genetic variants for RbGmv studies relies on the ability of genotypic variation to act as a reliable proxy measure for the exposure of interest. Distinct from genetic prediction, this use of multiple genetic variants as markers for modifiable risk (as in more conventional MR designs) requires strong evidence of reliable association. Single genetic variants associated with complex traits or modifiable risk factors often explain only a small proportion of variance in that trait and a strategy employed to try and recover some of the consequent lack of power of single variant analyses is to generate aggregate genetic risk scores (GRSs)–. The use of multiple genetic variants in this way can increase the precision of the causal estimate compared with those derived using separate genetic variants. In contrast to conventional MR, once a GRS is constructed within the study sample targeted for RbG (usually as the sum of allele dosages at risk variants weighted by their beta coefficients obtained from an independent GWAS for the exposure of interest), individuals are ranked based on this score, which is then used to stratify participants for recall (Fig.). Actual selection of individuals from extremes of the GRS will be dependent on the number and frequency of the variants forming the score, their effect and the number of participants (or samples) available. In addition, it should be considered that while the average genetic composition of a GRS used to recruit participants will be the same, unlike RbGsv, the precise allocation of genotype will vary from participant to participant. Despite this, the differences across the genetic stratum will carry the same inferential properties as RbGsv and allow for causal inference concerning the risk factor being instrumented. An example of an RbGmv study designed to investigate the causal relationship between body mass index (BMI) and cardiovascular health in young adults can be found in preprint form (please note this article has not yet been subject to peer-review). In this study, magnetic resonance imaging-derived measures of cardiovascular health were collected on 418 young adults recruited based on a GRS predicting variation in BMI. Both MR and RbGmv analyses indicated a causal role of increased BMI on higher blood pressure and left ventricular mass indexed to height2.7.


Statistical power and efficiency in RbG

Undertaken correctly, power calculations illustrate the conditions in which one would consider using an RbG experiment as an approach as opposed to more conventional sampling methods. Again, it is useful to consider RbG in the RbGsv and RbGmv forms. Power for RbGsv studies can be calculated based on the proposed sample size and the balance of major homozygotes to minor homozygotes/heterozygotes therein (the actual sampling ratio can be adjusted to optimise power as in a conventional case−control design), the phenotypic properties of the outcome measure(s) of interest and the anticipated difference in outcome by recall group. The precise sampling strategy for RbGsv will depend on properties of the target variant and predictions about its mode of inheritance. Here, we consider the implications of recruiting an equal number of major and minor homozygotes (or carriers of the minor allele (heterozygotes) if frequency is very low) in an effort to maximise available biological contrast. However, if it is known, consideration of the appropriate genetic model can aid design (particularly where effects are dominant) and an alternative strategy is to recruit equal (or optimal) numbers of all three genotype groups.

A key property of RbGsv design is that study power is independent of the minor allele frequency (MAF) of the target variant; therefore, where random recall designs suffer low power at low MAF, RbGsv does not (Fig.). Consequently, there is most power to be gained at the lower end of the MAF range, where random sampling in relative small samples would fail to yield sufficient numbers of rare variant participants. Despite this, appreciable gains can still be made at moderate MAF if sample size is restricted and/or effect sizes are predicted to be moderate; for example, given a standardized per allele effect of 0.3, a MAF of 0.2 and a sample size of 100, the difference in power between random recall and RbGsv can be over 40%.

Importantly, the efficiency of the RbGsv design comes at some cost as recruiting sufficient participants or samples with low or very low frequency genotypes requires much larger bioresources (with genetic information) from which to recruit (Fig.). For instance, in a study recruiting individuals based on a genetic variant with a MAF of 1% and requiring a total sample size of 50 in each group, the genotyped bioresource would need to contain at least 500,000 individuals in order to identify 50 minor allele homozygotes (assuming Hardy−Weinberg equilibrium). Given that not all participants will be eligible or willing to participate in the RbG study, the required bioresource sample size is likely to be even larger.

Power for RbGmv studies can be considered as a two-part process reflecting not only the properties of the outcome measure, but of the exposure gradient being measured in proxy by the GRS in question. This can be modelled using properties of the genetic variants and their aggregate effects to predict (i) the distribution of the GRS, (ii) the number of participants in the tails of the GRS for any given sample size and (iii) the magnitude of the association between set thresholds of the GRS and the exposure of interest. Given a satisfactory exposure gradient for the GRS in question, the second part of the process follows that of RbGsv studies (i.e., the size of a recall sample to detect biologically informative differences in the outcome phenotype). Again, the efficiency of this approach will be governed by the distribution and properties of the GRS in question (determining the number of participants at any part of it and the relationship to exposure), but also the practicalities of study-based recruitment (as for RbGsv).

For RbGmv studies, power depends on the variance in the exposure explained by the GRS ($\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$R_{XG}^2$$\end{document}$), the anticipated relationship between the exposure and the outcome that will be measured ($\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$R_{YX}^2$$\end{document}$) (although not likely to be known precisely) and the threshold (percentile) that is used to recruit, as well as sample size (Fig.). The greatest gain in power occurs when the sample groups are recruited from the most extreme part of a GRS distribution, but one must be mindful of the need for large genotyped bioresources from which to recruit in this case (Fig.). As an example, with $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$R_{XG}^2$$\end{document}$ in the range 0.03 (as is currently seen for complex traits such as BMI) and assuming $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$R_{YX}^2 = 0.3$$\end{document}$, appreciable power gains (>25%) can be made over random recall using thresholds of between 5 and 20% in samples of 300 or more. Therefore, while the conservative aim for RbGmv is to achieve equivalent exposure gradient in a smaller sample suitable for extensive investigation, it is evident that for an equivalent outcome power is enhanced (and of course considerable measurement cost savings made).

For both RbGsv and RbGmv approaches, there may be situations where power can further be enhanced (and biological effect clarified) when comparing genotype-driven recall groups also group- or pair-matched for characteristics such as age, sex and BMI. Analogous to an RCT, the overall approach in RbG is reliant on the properties of genotype-assigned recall groups, though in certain conditions it may be possible to enhance analyses with appropriate matching strategies. Access to larger sample sizes may reduce the need for matching, but even here matching may be advantageous when there are genotype-driven differences in the potential for ascertainment (e.g., early-onset fatal disease or in selecting non-diabetic individuals for a study of a diabetes risk variant) and this approach has been exercised in existing studies,. Other situations that may prompt refinement of the basic RbG design include instances of gene × environment and gene × gene interaction. Though the evidence for consistent examples of these in the literature has been limited to date, in the presence of a gene × environment interaction, for example, the assumption that genotype is orthogonal to all potential confounders may be invalidated due to associations between socioeconomic status and geographic ancestry. Importantly, there remains a danger that efforts to balance or match samples can exacerbate the potential for particular types of study bias and the pros and cons of these decisions need to be weighed carefully in study design.

To facilitate the design of RbG experiments based on the scenarios outlined above as ‘RbGsv’ and ‘RbGmv’, we have prepared an online tool for guiding researchers through these steps (see Web resources). The methods used to calculate power for RbG studies are described in more detail in Supplementary Note.


Ethical considerations of RbG

RbG is a potentially powerful research design, but it creates ethical challenges. The RbG approach is inextricably linked to the issue of disclosing potentially sensitive individual results, and places an emphasis on transparency and communication with participants. This of course relates to the nature of both the RbG design and the genetic variation being used to construct the RbG stratum of interest. This is particularly pertinent where potentially penetrant and functional variants are employed in RbGsv designs, but has implications for all forms of RbG. Despite this, there is little published academic work regarding the specific ethical issues in RbG studies.

A small body of literature suggests a need for ‘bottom-up research’ to be monitored by an independent governance body and that the issues presented with RbG studies are not new but common to those faced by other approaches, such as the use of medical records. Qualitative data that does exist around this topic compared the experiences of patients (those with the disease of interest) to those of ‘healthy volunteers’ (recalled from a biobank) following their recruitment on the basis of genotype. This research found that, while patients expressed ‘no concerns’ about the eligibility criteria, ‘healthy volunteers’ did not always comprehend the study design or why they had been chosen. This led in some cases to participants assuming a degree of meaningfulness to the genetic data that was unwarranted but, nevertheless, caused them to feel anxious. Seemingly in contrast to this, a qualitative research study in which semi-structured interviews were conducted with 53 young adult participants of the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children, a cohort of ostensibly ‘healthy volunteers’ reported that few expressed any immediate concerns about being recruited by genotype. Given that this work has yet to be peer reviewed and is not a systematic analysis (rather excerpts from a small number of interviews), the results of this study must be interpreted with caution. However, the conclusions from this work were that the main reasons for the lack of concern were the trust that participants had developed over their long-term relationship (more than 20 years) with the study, plus a naturally limited knowledge of genetics and modest interest in reported research outcomes. This complements previous research that identified the relationship between researchers and participants as a factor that may influence how much information is provided, with regular study participants perhaps expecting more under the ethical principles of respect and reciprocity. Although there is clearly scope to expand the body of evidence relating specifically to ethical considerations in RbG, an emerging theme is the responsibility placed onto researchers for the handling of potentially sensitive and disclosive studies.

The very nature of RbG designs highlight a central tension between avoiding the possibility of participant harm through revealing unwanted or misunderstood information and being open and clear when explaining how and why participants are being recruited into studies,. In healthy volunteers, it is unlikely that the genetic information used for recruitment to most RbG studies will be either immediately clinically valid or useful, as the precise function of the genetic characteristics will presumably be unknown. However, this does not diminish the need to clearly communicate the study protocol to participants and why they, specifically, have been recruited. To this end, the issue of direct or unwanted indirect disclosure of genotype is of great importance in this type of study. It is of course possible to envisage a situation whereby a threshold of clinical relevance obtained through an RbG study is not reached, but the genetic information could still be of interest to the participant. The employment of sensible mechanisms for assessment of data quality and routes for appropriate feedback (as considered in detail for sequencing studies elsewhere) will clearly be the accepted mode for RbG studies with large effects. However, the issue of addressing a specific genotype-driven effect does serve to illustrate a key advantage of RbG studies over less hypothesis-driven genomic research. It is potentially easier to anticipate the nature of findings for a given recall stratum and therefore the potential relevance of those findings to participants,.

Related to the nature of the cohort is the extremely important issue of consent and the provision for re-contact of participants within the informed consent process of the original study,. While there are a number of ‘purpose-built’ RbG resources such as The Oxford Biobank, the Exeter 10,000 (EXTEND), the East London Genes & Health (ELGH) and the Extended Cohort for E-health, Environment and DNA (EXCEED) projects whose consent processes deal explicitly with the issue of RbG, in many cases researchers will be looking to recruit from cohort studies established for more general epidemiological research. Therefore, in the event that a network approach to RbG studies is initiated (as described below), careful consideration will need to be given to the extent to which consent and disclosure policies can and should be aligned across studies versus the tailoring of approaches to account for the varied nature of the cohorts involved.


Resources

Despite potential advantages of genotype-based sampling strategies, they have so far been underutilised, partly because of limited infrastructure to support them. However, at a time where the potential value of population-based human genetics is being realised in a clinical context, recent developments have changed the scientific landscape. A growing number of bioresources have been established or re-purposed to enable RbG studies and are ready for coordinated deployment to maximise RbG designs. In the UK alone, there exists a collection of RbG-ready studies that form a network of genotypic resources and phenotypic expertise suitable for the execution of new studies (see Table: UK patient and population-based studies available for RbG studies and the extended version in Supplementary Table). A second factor has been the continued fall in genotyping and sequencing costs, which has accelerated discovery and enabled genetic characterisation of large cohorts consented for RbG studies. Finally, in recent years a number of RbG studies with important findings have been reported that highlight the value of the approach and illustrate key variations on it.


Future directions, limitations and recommendations

We have presented RbG as a potentially valuable study design in its simplest form within population-based studies. Recall itself is not a novel paradigm to epidemiological studies, where phenotype-driven selection has been a mainstay for the purposes of maximising analytical power. The novelty with RbG comes from the selection process being based on genetic strata, which have the ability to recapitulate biological pathway changes or exposure differences and do so using reliably measured, reproducible and randomly allocated markers. In the correct conditions, this approach has the potential to be both cost-effective and biologically informative.

The ability to measure genetic variation reliably (including that with low MAF) is an important asset to this approach and has been facilitated by both the swathe of GWAS analyses and imputation development that has occurred over the last 5–10 years. However, to take this further, the existence and maturation of effective networks of RbG-ready collections will undoubtedly be required. Not only will these networks allow for the look-up and access of rare variant carriers in reasonable numbers, but local bases of phenotypic expertise will help to develop and exercise the real value of RbG studies in deep phenotyping and enhanced statistical power. For the RbG approach to prove of greatest benefit in the future, this will have to be coupled with large-scale population and patient-based records of genotypic variation data with appropriate consent.

Along with this, there is a series of developments that may enhance the utility of RbG as an approach. Resources are already available that present the possibility of searching the human genome for genetic variants that are particularly suited for use in RbG experiments. Most pertinent to RbGsv designs, assessment of variant suitability would likely involve browsing genetic regions of interest for evidence of actual or predicted functional variation using best available data (e.g., the ExAC database) and the marriage of this information to outcome association results and RbG study design parameters. In this way, researchers would be able to conduct a pre-emptive assessment of the likely value and performance of an RbG study. In addition to this, other developments include the formalisation of data-driven recall protocols (where the reduction of extremely complex data for non-hypothesis-driven association signal discovery is followed by deep exploration of results by genotype) and the testing of population-level opt-out strategies (i.e., that avoid disclosure of genotype status—or likely status—with invitation alone) to ensure ethical balance for RbG studies.

There are specific adaptations and potential limitations that are relevant to this approach. Concerning power, current approaches able to assess simplified RbG conditions provide conservative estimates of the performance of RbG studies and need to be developed to further incorporate the application of group and pair-based matching. These techniques are used in RCTs and have the potential to increase statistical efficiency, especially in small sample sizes and where chance or study-specific biases may be present. In addition to refining power calculations and study planning, it is important to consider the potential of employing variants of specific functional effect or sets of genetic variants that act together, interact or are responsible for specific pathway effects. With increasing information about the weight of specific and functional genetic changes and a growing collection of whole genome sequence data available, the opportunity to explore predicted effects in specific clinical scenarios is also increasing and can be extended with RbG studies.

In line with more conventional MR analyses based on non-selected population samples, the quality and nature of the genetic variants used for stratum formation will directly affect the ability to draw inference. Population stratification, genuine (or horizontal) pleiotropy and consequent unanticipated instrument properties have been observed elsewhere, and may affect RbG through the invalidation or complication of genetic instruments. Horizontal pleiotropy, specifically is a complication that should be viewed in the context of the type of RbG being undertaken however and is an issue that is pertinent to MR more generally. In the case of RbGsv, while pleiotropy may complicate the inference drawn from differences between recalled groups, one of the merits of using RbG for single variants will be to explore the potentially diverse and complicating nature of genetic associations validated for health outcomes. For RbGmv, the situation is different and while it is theoretically possible for directional (unbalanced) pleiotropy to potentially bias estimates drawn from groups defined by many genetic variants, with increasing numbers of these genetic proxies for complex exposures or risk factors of interest, the likelihood of this problem decreases. This does not remove pleiotropy as a potential complication (indeed it may be unlikely to ever have a single genetic predictor not involved in complex regulation), but it presents RbG as an approach to explore and account for pleiotropy.

Lastly, unbalanced loss to follow-up by genotype (due to death or behaviour) and the practicalities of study-specific recruitment are potentially limiting factors that need to be considered when undertaking RbG. These limitations can have an impact on the outcomes of this type of design and will benefit from the study of recruitment dynamics in large-scale prospective studies. Overall, as is the case for other forms of MR, these limitations highlight the role of RbG as only part of a required triangulation and replication of evidence when asserting causality or mechanism.

Considering RbG as a vehicle for undertaking detailed and causal dissection of genetic effects and the efficient exploration of potentially causal risk factors, there are recommendations that come from early experiences with studies of this design. These recommendations are presented in Box. Overall, RbG study designs have the potential to offer independent and informative biological gradients over which specifically designed studies can interrogate the detailed architecture of confirmed associations. In tandem with the driving forces of larger hypothesis-free association studies, the presence of directed follow-up and causal investigation may provide the opportunity to convert some of these outputs into targets for clinical use and future development.


BOX 1: Examples of RbG studies

Melatonin signalling and type 2 diabetes

Several GWASs have identified >100 genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D), including a common variant in the melatonin receptor 1b gene (MTNR1B). However, the mechanism of how glucose metabolism and development of T2D are affected by melatonin remains elusive. Tuomi et al. demonstrated that rs10830963, an eQTL for MTNR1B in human islets, affects insulin release. To test the hypothesis that activation of MTNR1B would result in a reduction of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, Tuomi et al. employed an RbGsv study design. Twenty-three non-diabetic individuals with two copies of the risk allele (GG) and 22 individuals with two copies of the non-risk allele (CC) were recruited for the study during which they received 4 mg of melatonin for 3 months. The participants underwent an oral glucose tolerance test before and after 3 months of melatonin treatment and levels of plasma glucose, insulin, glucagon and melatonin were measured. The study found that insulin secretion was inhibited by melatonin treatment, with higher glucose levels in risk allele carriers. Results from this RbGsv study suggest that melatonin might be protective against nocturnal hypoglycemia.

IL2RA polymorphisms and T-cell function

In type 1 diabetes (T1D), the malfunction of CD4+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) results in T-cell-mediated autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells. The function of Tregs may be influenced by gene polymorphisms in the IL-2/IL-2 receptor alpha (IL2RA) pathway. Several interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor alpha-chain (IL-2RA) gene haplotypes (rs12722495, rs11594656 and rs2104286) have been shown to be associated with T1D,. To investigate whether the IL-2RA haplotypes are associated with different expression of IL2RA on the surface of peripheral blood T cells, Dendrou et al. employed an RbGsv design, recruiting 50 homozygous or heterozygous individuals for each of the 3 protective haplotypes and 50 homozygous individuals for the susceptible haplotype. Blood samples were collected and the surface expression of IL2RA on peripheral blood T cells measured. Individuals with the protective rs12722495 haplotype in IL-2RA had increased expression of IL2RA on the surface of memory CD4+ T cells and increased IL-2 secretion compared to individuals with the susceptible haplotypes or those with the protective rs11594656 or rs2104286 haplotype. In a second study, Garg et al. employed an RbGsv design recruiting healthy individuals according to their genotype at IL2RA-rs12722495 to investigate how polymorphisms in IL2RA alter Treg function. Blood samples were taken from 34 healthy individuals and T-cell function tested. The study found that the T1D-susceptibility IL2RA haplotype correlated with diminished Treg function via reduced IL-2 signalling. Findings from the RbGsv studies by Dendrou et al. and Garg et al. informed the design of a successful dose-finding, open label, adaptive clinical trial design of Aldesleukin, a recombinant interleukin 2 (IL-2), in participants with T1D to investigate whether Aldesleukin could be potentially used to prevent autoimmune disorders such as T1D by targeting Tregs. The trial found that a single ultra-low dose of Aldeskeukin resulted in early altered trafficking and desensitisation of Tregs, suggesting that Aldeskeukin could be useful to prevent T1D.


Box 2: Recommendations for RbG implementation

RbG designs are not appropriate for all studies. Depending on the nature of the genetic variation in question, the sample type or participant recruitment opportunities and the outcomes of interest, there will be optimal conditions for either RbGsv or RbGmv study designs. These should be carefully considered before undertaking a new RbG investigation. We have described both the types of experiment that may be facilitated by this approach and provide an online application to aid the planning of future work.Genetic variant(s) should be well characterised. The genetic variation forming the recall strata are the fundamental building blocks of this study design and the most likely reason that such a study would fail. As for all MR analyses, the limitations to the genetic instrumentation of pathways or risk factors of interest will dictate any inference drawn from analyses undertaken. The integrity of the genetic signal motivating the study (in either RbGsv or RbGmv) should be thoroughly assessed.The full financial and non-financial costs of undertaking an RbG study should be considered. A deep phenotyping exercise based around an RbG design may yield a definitive single hypothesis answer, but the utility of the sampling frame will be limited by that specific study design. This does not render the by-product resources useless (given the randomised nature of their strata), but this property needs thought.Transparency, communication (including appropriate disclosure) and thoughtful process in working with participants in RbG studies are paramount. This is a relatively novel approach for using genetic data and, while the paradigm is simple, the implications are often not. Researchers should consider not just the implications of genotypes employed in this type of study, but also the implications of inviting participants before it is done.Network RbG studies may be an answer. The issues of allele frequency, optimising phenotypic expertise, standardizing consent and strategy and reducing the complexity of original study initiation remain and may be best addressed by combining resources. Studies do exist that are suitable for RbG and the federated use of these as a network of RbG resources has the potential to overcome specific RbG limitations.


Web resources

To facilitate the design of RbG experiments based on the scenarios outlined in this paper, we have prepared an online tool for guiding researchers through these steps that is available on the MRC IEU Software Page at: http://www.bristol.ac.uk/integrative-epidemiology/faciliitiesresources/software/ (under ‘RbG Study Planner’). The methods used to calculate power for RbG studies are described in more detail in Supplementary Note.


Prediction complements explanation in understanding the developing brain

Monica D. Rosenberg, B. J. Casey, Avram J. Holmes — Nature Communications, 2018. PMC5821815, CC BY 4.0.

A central aim of human neuroscience is understanding the neurobiology of cognition and behavior. Although we have made significant progress towards this goal, reliance on group-level studies of the developed adult brain has limited our ability to explain population variability and developmental changes in neural circuitry and behavior. In this review, we suggest that predictive modeling, a method for predicting individual differences in behavior from brain features, can complement descriptive approaches and provide new ways to account for this variability. Highlighting the outsized scientific and clinical benefits of prediction in developmental populations including adolescence, we show that predictive brain-based models are already providing new insights on adolescent-specific risk-related behaviors. Together with large-scale developmental neuroimaging datasets and complementary analytic approaches, predictive modeling affords us the opportunity and obligation to identify novel treatment targets and individually tailor the course of interventions for developmental psychopathologies that impact so many young people today.


Introduction

Understanding how the brain gives rise to cognition and behavior is a fundamental goal of human neuroscience. Scientists, philosophers, and statisticians have long debated the nature of understanding, but tend to agree that there are two routes to achieving it: explanation and prediction–. Despite the historical dominance of explanation as a route to understanding, scientists and philosophers of science have emphasized the importance of both these approaches–. As noted by the philosopher Heather Douglas, “explanation and prediction are best understood in light of each other and thus … should not be viewed as competing goals but rather as two goals wherein the achievement of one should facilitate the achievement of the other”.

Foundational cross-species research has made significant progress on the path towards neuroscientific explanation. Researchers have described neural bases of cognition, characterizing how patterns of brain organization from neural circuits to functional networks relate to behavior and psychopathology–. Although this work has traditionally taken a cross-sectional, group-level approach to studying the developed adult brain, there is growing consensus that comprehensive models in neuroscience must account for the facts that neural phenotypes and behavior vary widely across the population and change over time within individuals–.

The road to prediction is less traveled. Recently, however, the use of machine-learning methods to predict behavior from brain measures has become increasingly common, due in part to the emergence of large data sets and new analytic and computational tools. Representing a critical avenue to understanding, these approaches provide new ways to account for developmental changes in behavior, dynamic brain systems, and associated individual differences while offering statistical rigor, and clinical and translational benefits for personalized medicine and education,.

Although much predictive modeling research has focused on adults, forecasting outcomes in childhood and adolescence presents unique opportunities for scientific discovery and clinical application. First and foremost, biological and statistical models that account for developmental change are necessary for truly understanding how neural circuits emerge to give rise to cognition and behavior. Predicting behavior from brain features during development represents initial progress towards this goal, and predicting future outcomes from past developmental changes represents an important next step. Predictive models of current and future behavior may be especially beneficial in adolescence, a developmental period of rapid social, emotional, psychological, and physical change characterized by mental and physical health vulnerability, but also opportunities for growth and intervention.

In this forward-looking review, we highlight how predictive modeling in developmental neuroscience can account for developmental trajectories in behavior, dynamic brain systems, and individual differences in both. After discussing these concepts in the context of adolescence, we introduce predictive modeling and its applications in developmental populations. Using adolescence as a case study, we address two complementary questions. First, how can prediction inform models of risk taking, a phenotype that is strikingly elevated in adolescence? Second, how can considering adolescence inform predictive modeling techniques and motivate future research? We conclude by emphasizing the importance of approaches that predict current and future behavior from developmental trajectories of brain structure and function. In doing so, we discuss how these methods complement and extend ongoing research on the neurodevelopmental processes that underlie the emergence and disruption of cognition and behavior.


Changes in behavior and brain systems across adolescence

Human abilities and behavior change dramatically across the lifespan, emerging over development from the dynamic interplay between genes and experience. Developmental changes reflect neurobiological constraints shaped by evolution to meet the unique challenges of each stage of life, including adolescence. That evolutionary pressures have presumably tailored adolescent behavior to facilitate the transition to independence, however, is frequently overlooked. Instead, adolescents, whose behavior is sometimes judged as immature relative to their physical development, are often considered impaired mini-adults–. In the following section, we emphasize the importance of considering developmental changes, dynamic brain systems that unfold over time, and interindividual variability when seeking to establish descriptive and predictive models of behavior.


Developmental trajectories in behavior

When we think of the prototypical adolescent (or recall our own teenage years), a number of quintessential traits may come to mind. We might consider (or remember) risky behaviors like dangerous driving, illegal substance use, irresponsible sexual behavior; preoccupations with peer groups and social hierarchies; an uptick in feelings of anxiety; and heated conflicts with parents, teachers, or other well-meaning figures of authority.

Epidemiological studies confirm that our stereotypes largely reflect typical adolescent behavior. Adolescents are more likely to be injured or killed in motor vehicle accidents, contract sexually transmitted infections, engage in criminal activity, and experiment with drugs than children or adults,. These behaviors are thought to stem from adolescents’ increased sensation-seeking, and reward-sensitivity, as well as decreased self-control and emotional regulation abilities, especially in social contexts–. The prevalence of anxiety disorders also peaks in adolescence, underscoring this developmental period as a time of both vulnerability and opportunity for intervention.

Given that risky behavior during development has potentially dire consequences, why does it persist across generations and species? Fear learning provides a useful example of potential evolutionary benefits of seemingly costly behavior during adolescence,. Across altricial species, whose young rely on parents for survival, fear learning is suppressed in early infancy, presumably to ensure caregiver attachment even in cases of neglect or abuse,. In adolescence, fear of previously aversive environmental contexts is diminished whereas fear of previously aversive cues (i.e., conditioned stimuli) is amplified, a pattern that may facilitate exploration and independence but also safety from immediate threat,. Importantly, these survival-relevant behaviors do not develop in a vacuum. Rather, common genetic variations and early life stressors– affect how fear learning changes over time, influencing risk for negative outcomes such as anxiety disorders. Just as developmental changes in fear learning confer both costs and benefits, changes in risk taking during adolescence are advantageous at the group level but in some contexts may be detrimental for the individual. The same is likely true for other processes following their own nonlinear trajectories across development, including decision making, reward learning, and sensitivity to motivational, appetitive, and aversive cues,.

Although stereotypes can paint teenagers in an unflattering light, recognizing that adolescent behaviors are single points along broader, evolutionarily advantageous developmental trajectories provides a more accurate, nuanced (and perhaps sympathetic) picture. Analytic perspectives that consider behavioral shifts during the transitions into and out of adolescence, as well as their differential expression across environmental and social contexts, are necessary for understanding how the brain gives rise to behavior over time.


Dynamic brain systems

The nonlinear behavioral trajectories observed across adolescence emerge from a cascade of hierarchical changes in brain circuitry that were themselves shaped over the course of our evolutionary lineage. First to mature are connections within subcortical-limbic circuits, followed by connections between cerebral cortex and subcortical-limbic circuits, and, finally, connections across cortex,.

Evidence for this developmental cascade comes from observations of earlier changes in synaptic morphology and neurotransmitter systems in subcortical relative to cortical regions and an earlier plateau in synaptic formation and subsequent pruning in unimodal sensory, motor, and subcortical regions relative to multimodal association areas,. These processes likely contribute to gray matter volume and cortical thickness changes observed during adolescence and early adulthood– that end in the association cortices–. Selective degradation of excitatory synapses also affects the excitatory-inhibitory balance across cortex, an equilibrium related to shifts in cognitive abilities and behavior,. The relative decrease in prefrontal behavioral regulation is reflected in changes in dopamine receptor density, related to learning and reward prediction, that peak in the striatum during adolescence but not until early adulthood in the prefrontal cortex–.

Structural and functional brain connections follow similar patterns of development, providing additional evidence for a hierarchically emerging system first dominated by mature subcortical circuits and then balanced through interactions with late-maturing prefrontal systems,. As early as 1920, Flechsig’s histological studies revealed protracted myelin development in association cortex,. Reflecting this property of brain maturation, diffusion tensor imaging studies, which measure water diffusion modulated in part by axon myelination, suggest that the development of posterior cortical-subcortical tracts precedes that of fronto-subcortical tracts supporting top-down control of behavior–. Functional brain connectivity studies support these results, observing a general pattern of weakening short-range functional connections followed by strengthening long-range cortical connections across adolescence–.

Altogether, this work provides evidence for the progressive development of connectivity within and between subcortical and cortical brain regions, and offers a plausible neurobiological account of nonlinear trajectories in risk-related processes such as self-control, reward sensitivity, and emotion regulation. Emotional reactivity, for example, may arise from the early dominance of subcortical over cortical circuitry, later waning as cortical-subcortical circuits related to top-down control, and then cortical circuits involved in processes such as cognitive reappraisal, mature during adolescence and adulthood. More broadly, these findings highlight how approaching the study of adolescence from a dynamic, multimodal, circuit-based perspective (rather than a view that focuses on snapshots of individual brain regions in isolation) can inform our understanding of self-regulation and risk-taking behavior during development,.


Individual differences

Although neurobiology and behavior tend to unfold in predictable ways across development, significant individual differences lie atop this scaffolding. This variability applies not only to an adolescent’s current behavioral and neural characteristics, but also to their past and future phenotypes. That is, while one stereotype of adolescents is that they engage in risky behaviors such as binge drinking, there are plenty of young people who do not fit this mold. Even among adolescents who drink excessively, some may go on to develop substance use disorders, while others may never progress to disordered drinking.

Despite recognizing these individual differences, in research, clinical, legal, and educational practice, we often treat variance around average behavioral and neural phenotypes and trajectories as noise, or collapse it into discrete categories (e.g., patients vs. controls, adults vs. minors, etc.). Although these groups can be useful in practice, they do not necessarily represent biologically plausible or informative qualitative distinctions. Instead, approaches that characterize the normative trajectories of dimensional behavioral and neural phenotypes, and investigate how genetics and experience affect the timing and shape of these curves, are necessary for understanding how these processes unfold in development,. In addition to informing models in basic science, individual differences approaches can provide clinically applicable insight into the factors that confer risk for and resilience to psychopathology and guide personalized treatments.


Predictive modeling and its importance in developmental neuroscience

Studying developmental trajectories, dynamic brain systems, and individual differences is becoming increasingly feasible with the rise of high-throughput data collection efforts. Longitudinal and cross-sectional samples of neuroimaging data from children and adolescents, such as the IMAGEN study, Lifespan Human Connectome Project Development, Brain Imaging Data Exchange, Healthy Brain Network Biobank, and Adolescence Brain Cognitive Development Study, have accelerated advances in basic and applied neuroscience (Fig.). Collaborative initiatives have also helped democratize data access, improve statistical power, and facilitate transparent, reproducible research. The unique challenges posed by large-scale imaging samples, such as how to perform adequate quality control, account for scanner and site effects, and disentangle meaningful explanatory power from statistical significance, are also motivating the development of new data collection, preprocessing, and analytic approaches.

Large neuroimaging data sets are not only advancing understanding of how brain features relate to behavior at the group level, but are also renewing focus on the individual. Although cognitive and developmental neuroscientists have long been interested in interindividual differences in abilities and behavior, traditional experiments have focused on tens, rather than hundreds or thousands, of participants. These small samples, with tightly controlled demographics and circumscribed behavioral phenotypes, are not always conducive to studying population variability. Larger samples that capture a broad range of phenotypes provide opportunities not only to describe brain–behavior relationships, but to predict behavior from brain features at the level of single individuals,. In this vein, researchers are searching for neuromarkers, or brain features that predict behavior, clinical symptoms, risk for or resilience against illness, or treatment response,. The pursuit of generalizable neuromarkers goes hand-in-hand with predictive modeling, a technique that leverages brain–behavior relationships to predict outcomes in novel individuals (Box and Fig.).

The statistician George Box famously claimed that “all models are wrong but some are useful”. Models that predict outcomes from previously unseen observations can be especially useful for both scientific discovery and clinical decision-making,. From a basic science perspective, predicting brain–behavior relationships at the level of single subjects represents progress towards understanding how individual differences in brain features relate to individual differences in cognition and behavior. In addition, because predictive models are by definition validated on independent data, they can help foster robust, reproducible discoveries.

The benefits of individualized predictions of current and future behavior are especially pronounced in developmental populations including adolescents. Because behavior and psychopathology are best viewed as the result of developmental processes that unfold across the lifespan, characterizing individual arcs in brain–behavior relationships over time can move us even closer to understanding targets for change. Addressing the unique challenges presented by prediction in adolescence, including the complex dynamics linking neurobiological, behavioral, and environmental change, can also help us better model periods such as prenatal development, infancy, aging, and illness course.

Predictive models may not only contribute to progress in basic developmental neuroscience, but may also have implications for education, mental health, and legal policy. For example, early predictions of behavioral impairments could facilitate earlier treatments and improved health or educational outcomes. Prediction can also inform pressing policy questions, such as characterizing the maturity of a particular individual in specific contexts to inform whether they should be treated as an adult in the justice system,. Thus, although machine-learning models of behavior in development may be “wrong” in the sense that they (necessarily) simplify complex neurobiological systems, they are useful in that they can inform theories of how cognition and behavior emerge from dynamic brain systems and speak to general educational, medical, and social policies.


Predictive modeling and risk preference

One of the most common reprimands of wayward youths is: “Act your age!” The phrase — immortalized in the English-language idiom “act your age, not your shoe size” — is so ubiquitous that it even makes an appearance in song lyrics from the musical artist Prince. Its sentiment, however, is not straightforward. What does it mean for an adolescent or young adult to act his or her age? What counts as typical adolescent behavior? One possibility is that “act your age” means, “make the most responsible decision you have the capacity to make”. What this entreaty fails to recognize, however, is that there is a discrepancy between how responsibly adolescents and young adults can act in nonsocial, unemotional situations relative to social or emotionally charged contexts,.

Recent work from Rudolph and colleagues used predictive modeling to identify the neural basis of this phenomenon, asking whether functional brain organization looks less mature in emotional contexts, and whether this effect relates to individual differences in risky behavior. To this end, the authors calculated functional connectivity patterns from fMRI data collected while 212 individuals aged 10–25 performed a go/no-go task in neutral and emotional contexts. During emotional contexts, participants anticipated an aversive noise or a reward; during neutral contexts there was no anticipation of noise or reward. Using partial least squares regression and 10-fold cross-validation, the authors first built a model to predict chronological age from functional connectivity patterns observed in the neutral context, and then applied the same model to connectivity observed during the emotion manipulation. They found that a prediction made from an individual’s neutral context pattern (their “neutral brain age”) was closer to their chronological age than a prediction made from their emotional context pattern (their “emotional brain age”). Further, both predictions tended to be younger than chronological age in teens. Interestingly, there was a trend such that adolescents were more likely to look younger in emotional relative to neutral contexts, but young adults who showed this pattern had greater risk preference and lower risk perception (Fig.). These findings illustrate the power of predictive modeling in delineating dynamic developmental changes and individual differences in risk taking behaviors.

In addition to helping explain why adolescents may not “act their age” under emotional arousal, the Rudolph et al. findings raise two notable points about predictive brain-based models in general.

First, when the model of chronological age was wrong, it was wrong in interesting ways: A young adult incorrectly predicted younger in an emotional context was more likely to show a “risky phenotype” than an individual incorrectly predicted older. Thus, in some cases, model errors may be as informative as model successes in unraveling the brain bases of individual differences in behavior.

Second, this model—along with many in cognitive and developmental neuroscience—predicts outcomes from functional connectivity data. Given that functional connectivity patterns can be affected by cognitive state, such models may not generalize across contexts as well as models based on state-independent features such as structural connectivity. (There is evidence, however, that functional connectome-based models generalize across task-engaged and resting states to predict abilities such as attention.) Thus, researchers hoping to build an age-prediction model with optimal predictive power and generalizability may consider including structural features that may capture more “trait”-related than state-related variance as predictors (see the section entitled “Include multimodal predictors”).

Finally, it is important to note that although here maturity was assessed with a single number—akin to the difference between an individual’s functional connectivity pattern and the age-typical pattern—maturity does not lie on one continuum from “less” (in emotional states) to “more” (in unemotional states). Rather, temporal differences in the fine-tuning of interacting neural systems with age and experience impact behavioral phenotypes differently across development and vary across individuals and contexts. For example, Rudolph and colleagues show that, on average, adolescents’ functional connectivity profiles look younger in emotional contexts, and that young adults who maintain this profile show riskier choices. This work suggests that future studies can characterize each individual’s unique multivariate maturational profile, that is, the age-typicality of both their trait- and state-dependent neural phenotypes.


The road ahead

Just as building predictive models can inform how we understand risk taking in adolescence, studying adolescence can inform how we approach behavioral prediction. Here, motivated by predictive and descriptive models of development, we suggest eight directions for future research and highlight their importance for understanding the neurobiological basis of adolescent behavior. In particular, we encourage researchers to bridge data sets and levels of analyses to develop generalizable, trajectory-based models that predict current and future outcomes.


Leverage multiple data sets to build and validate predictive models

Predictive models will be most theoretically and practically useful when they generalize beyond a single data set. Although historically replication and external validation samples were rare in fMRI due to cost and time constraints, open-access data sets and a growing culture of data sharing are removing barriers to access. Consider, for example, a group of investigators interested in predicting impulsivity from resting-state functional connectivity data. These researchers could download data from the Human Connectome Project, model the relationship between impulsivity and functional connectivity, and then apply their model to completely independent data from the Brain Genomics Superstruct Project to evaluate its generalizability.

Training and testing predictive models with open data sets has obvious benefits. For our hypothetical investigators, downloading data may cost a fraction as much as running their own, smaller fMRI study. Open data sets also tend to offer relatively large sample sizes, capturing a wide range of behavior and allowing researchers to fit complex models and refine model parameters with nested cross-validation techniques. In addition, open samples can provide opportunities to validate models across unique behavioral measures. Although this approach can be challenging given that different-but-related measures may index similar-but-not-identical mental processes, it is a useful way to investigate whether a model is capturing individual differences in a specific performance metric or a general cognitive function. For example, imagine that researchers build a model to predict impulsivity questionnaire scores. If they apply this model to a new sample in which impulsivity is measured with task performance, predictive power will be limited by the ground-truth relationship between questionnaire scores and task performance. Successful generalization would provide additional evidence that the model is related to individual differences in impulsivity per se rather than individual differences in questionnaire scores alone. Thus, validating models in open data sets can help establish their specificity and generalizability.

This should not be taken imply that targeted studies are obsolete. Instead, experiments designed to probe specific behavioral phenotypes with carefully designed psychological tasks are crucial complements to open data analyses. Because targeted studies have greater flexibility in the participants they recruit, the behavioral measures they collect, and the tasks they administer, they can help elucidate brain–behavior relationships across populations and cognitive states. The impulsivity research group, for example, could use data from a targeted study to ask whether the same functional network that predicts impulsivity in adults emerges in development to support children’s impulse control. (In fact, they may not even need to collect their own data to do so: Relevant targeted samples may be available on data-sharing platforms such as OpenfMRI.) Recent work examining the heritability of the functional connectome used a similar approach, building a model of siblingship in a locally acquired data set, and validating it in the Human Connectome Project sample.

The sustained attention connectome-based predictive model is another recent example of a model validated across multiple imaging data sets,–. This model was defined to predict individual differences in the ability to maintain focus from patterns of task-evoked and resting-state functional connectivity. During fMRI, adult participants performed a challenging sustained attention task, which presumably perturbed attention-relevant neural circuitry and amplified behaviorally relevant individual differences in functional connectivity. Models defined on task-based data generalized to predict left-out participants’ task performance not only from data acquired as they were engaged in the task, but also from data collected as they simply rested. External validation with data from the ADHD-200 Consortium revealed that the same functional networks that index attention task performance in adulthood predict ADHD symptoms in childhood. Together these results suggest that a common functional architecture supports sustained attention across developmental stage (adults vs. children and adolescents), clinical population (ADHD vs. control), and cognitive state (task vs. rest).

Another targeted study provided insights into potential mechanisms of the model’s predictive networks. That is, the same sustained attention connectome-based predictive model distinguished individuals who had taken a single dose of methylphenidate (Ritalin) from controls, raising the possibility that networks reflect the expression of neurotransmitters whose extracellular concentration is modulated by methylphenidate.

Although the anatomy of the sustained attention model is complex, broad trends align with previous findings and suggest new targets for intervention. Functional connections between sensorimotor and cerebellar regions predict more successful sustained attention, whereas intra-cerebellar, intra-temporal, and temporal-parietal connections predict less successful attention. The participation of the cerebellum, implicated in ADHD, provides convergent evidence of its importance for attention. Frontal and parietal regions traditionally related to attention and attention impairments do appear in the predictive networks, but they represent >35% of all connections in the model, accentuating the importance of data-driven approaches to feature selection.

In light of the sustained attention model’s out-of-sample generalizability—a recent proof-of-principle example—we are optimistic that, moving forward, a combination of high-throughput data sets, targeted experiments, and “green science” data sharing initiatives will facilitate robust, generalizable models of cognitive abilities and behavior across development.


Develop trajectory-based models with longitudinal data

Neurobiology is inherently dynamic, and understanding any dynamic process in terms of both description and prediction requires appreciating changes over time. Atmospheric models, for example, rely on dynamical equations to predict the weather, and stock forecasting models use measures of how a stock’s performance has changed in the past to predict how it will perform in the future. We often use longitudinal data to make folk psychological predictions, such as when we consider how quickly a young tennis player climbed the rankings to estimate her shot at winning Wimbledon, or use what we know about a friend’s recent stress levels to predict how he will react in an emotional situation.

Models that predict behavior from brain features can also benefit from longitudinal measures. Consider again the case of attention deficits. Pioneering work applied growth–curve models to cross-sectional and longitudinal data to establish delays in cortical thickness and brain surface area maturation, as well as a down-shifted trajectory of cerebellar growth in children and adolescents with ADHD (Fig.; but see refs. – for methodological considerations related to effects of head motion). Recent work also suggests that the age-typicality of a child’s or adolescent’s functional connectivity patterns is related to their psychiatric symptoms, including attention deficits,. In other words, children and adolescents with attention deficits show delayed maturational patterns of cortical thickness and functional connectivity on average, and single snapshots of functional connectivity predict single snapshots of attentional abilities in novel individuals. It follows that a teenager’s unique trajectory of functional connectivity and cortical thickness development may provide more nuanced information about his or her attentional abilities, predicting not only deficit severity, but also perhaps symptom persistence or abatement. Developmental neuroscientists pursuing trajectory-based predictive models can take advantage of large longitudinal samples such as IMAGEN or the open-access ABCD collection effort, and of biostatistical techniques developed to predict clinical outcomes from longitudinal biomarkers–.

In addition to potentially increasing predictive power, individualized trajectory-based models can inform theories of how neural phenotypes give rise to typical and atypical development. For example, although we know that delayed cortical maturation trajectories characterize ADHD patients at the group level, it is not yet known whether a delayed trajectory confers risk for attention deficits at the level of individual subjects. Extending similar group-level findings to the level of individual subjects can enhance the clinical utility of research findings and inform novel interventions.


Predict future outcomes

Models that predict current behavioral tendencies are technically postdictive in that they make retrospective, rather than prospective, predictions. Although these models can inform relationships between neural and behavioral phenotypes, models that predict future outcomes may be most useful in clinical and translational contexts, allowing for earlier intervention, treatment, or cessation of treatment.

Recent work demonstrates that models that make future forecasts are possible in the context of development. For example, Whelan and colleagues modeled neural and psychological profiles of alcohol misuse before its onset in adolescence. Using measures of brain structure and function, personality, cognitive abilities, environmental factors, life experiences, and genetic variants, the authors built a model that distinguished adolescents who go on to binge drink from those who do not. New findings suggest that brain features can predict clinically relevant outcomes even earlier in development: cortical surface area and functional connectivity observed at 6–12 months, for example, predict autism diagnosis at age two,.

In addition to models that predict the onset of clinical symptoms or risky behavior, models that predict improvements in clinical outcomes can help identify resilience factors for psychopathology. Recently, Plitt and colleagues used functional connectivity patterns to predict improvements in adolescents’ and young adults’ autism symptoms. They found that functional connectivity in the salience, default mode, and frontoparietal networks, implicated in attention and goal-directed cognition, predicted symptom changes over time, even when accounting for age, IQ, baseline symptoms, and follow-up latency. Hoeft and colleagues also showed that prefrontal activity and right superior longitudinal fasciculus fractional anisotropy, but not reading or language test scores, predicted which children with dyslexia would show reading skill improvement over the course of 2.5 years. Functional and structural measures, therefore, can predict not only the onset of clinical symptoms, but also the abatement. In addition, brain features can predict future outcomes over and above behavioral measures alone—an important check when evaluating the utility of predictive models.

In the future, trajectory-based approaches may better characterize not just where a child or adolescent has been or is currently, but where he or she is going. For example, models that use a child’s developmental growth curve (e.g., precocious, delayed, deviant, regressive, or resilient) to predict the persistence or worsening of clinical symptoms could have implications for treatment. Such models may also have implications for the cessation of treatment. A child with attentional impairments but a resilient developmental trajectory for ADHD could, for example, be titrated off of medication sooner than otherwise possible (Fig.).


Include multimodal predictors

Models in human neuroscience often focus on a single type of brain feature, such as functional connectivity, to predict behavior. Although this approach is useful for targeting specific neural mechanisms, constraining a model’s feature space to a single modality may limit predictive power. Open-access data sets including a variety of scan types (e.g., T1-weighted, T2-weighted, proton density, T2-FLAIR, DTI, BOLD) facilitate the construction of models incorporating a range of features (e.g., myelination patterns, structural connectivity, task-based and resting-state functional connectivity) to maximize predictive power and uncover the unique contributions of different neural systems to current and future behavior.

Researchers have demonstrated that including multiple feature classes improves individualized predictions in development not just in theory, but also in practice. For example, in the first-ever example of predictive modeling in developmental neuroscience, Dosenbach and colleagues asked whether resting-state functional connectivity patterns can predict an individual subject’s chronological age. Using data from 238 individuals aged 7–30, they trained models to predict categorical (child vs. adult) and dimensional (chronological age) measures of maturity. A support vector machine classifier correctly predicted whether an individual was a child or an adult 91% of the time, and a support vector regression algorithm accounted for 55% of the variance in chronological age. Motivated to find the unique contribution of multiple neuroanatomical features to age predictions, Brown and colleagues built a model based on structural features that accounted for 92% of the variance in age in a sample of 885 individuals aged 3–20. Interestingly, different features contributed to model performance at different ages: Whereas T2 signal intensity in subcortical ROIs was most diagnostic of age in childhood, fiber tract diffusivity and subcortical structure volume were most informative in adolescence, and ROI diffusivity was most informative in adulthood. Franke et al. additionally found that predictions of a “brain age” model based on multiple neuroanatomical features were significantly younger for adolescents born preterm than full term. Although the variance explained by functional connectivity and neuroanatomy cannot be directly compared given differences in methodology and participant samples across studies, multimodal approaches may capture more variance in individual differences than do unimodal ones.

Black box models that use an assortment of brain features to predict outcomes may not necessarily provide interpretable links between neurobiology and behavior. How can researchers unravel the unique contributions of different feature classes to individual differences? In modeling alcohol misuse in adolescence, Whelan and colleagues provide one example of how this may be achieved. To start, their model of future binge drinking included neural, behavioral, lifestyle, and genetic factors. They then systematically removed each feature class from the model to isolate its contribution to predictive power. The approach revealed that life history, personality, and brain variables were most uniquely predictive. Other approaches, such as dimensionality reduction strategies and penalized regression methods, can also help eliminate redundant predictor variables and identify those most tightly coupled with individual differences in behavior.

Although hypothesis-driven modeling approaches that use a single feature or feature type to predict outcomes can advance knowledge about the neurobiological bases of behavior, multivariate models that incorporate both structural and functional features may improve prediction accuracy and offer converging insights (e.g., Fig.).


Continue to focus on dimensional outcomes

Centuries of observation and research tell us that cognitive abilities and behavior vary along a continuum at every stage of life. Consider the example of impulsivity: Although variability in impulsivity can be captured, to some degree, with a categorical measure like an ADHD diagnosis, it may be better quantified with dimensional measures such as symptom severity or impulse-control task performance.

When characterizing brain–behavior relationships in development, the costs and benefits of using categorical vs. dimensional measures should be carefully considered. Although categorical labels align with the current diagnostic system in clinical medicine and can help make results easier to interpret and present, dichotomizing continuous variables can reduce statistical power, obscure nonlinear relationships between variables and outcomes, and increase the risk of false positive results,. In addition, categorical models are often built on balanced samples of patients and control participants to avoid biased predictions, but this ratio rarely reflects real-world illness prevalence. Thus, reported measures of a model’s sensitivity and specificity may exaggerate its translational utility, and positive and negative predictive values may be more useful measures of performance (see Box). Dimensional measures may better characterize the full range of behavior and clinically relevant outcomes, especially in development, when small differences in behavioral or neural phenotypes can have important implications for treatment.

Although dimensional measures are frequently used to characterize individual differences in cognitive and developmental neuroscience and psychology, such approaches are infrequent in predictive modeling. Models that predict chronological age,–, fluid intelligence–, attention, and improvements in math skills and autism symptoms, however, demonstrate that such approaches are powerful ways to identify robust transdiagnostic biomarkers of abilities and behavior.

Looking ahead, modeling approaches that consider multiple dimensional approaches at once, or those that identify latent distributions from which behavior emerges, may help delineate subtypes of clinical disorders and improve outcome predictions and treatment. Regression models that predict dimensional outcomes and consider subgroups that make up heterogeneous patient populations will also continue to be valuable complements to classifiers that predict group membership.


Establish boundary conditions

Given that brain structure and function change dramatically across development, models trained in one developmental period (e.g., adulthood) should not always generalize to others (e.g., adolescence). Rather, upper bounds on models’ predictive power will be influenced by the reliability of the brain and behavioral measures, their stability across development, and the developmental trajectories of the underlying neurobiology.

Testing models across different developmental periods can help identify critical change points in the relationship between neurobiological processes and behavior. As a concrete example, the sustained attention connectome-based predictive model introduced earlier generalized from an adult to a developmental sample,. The model, however, did not perform equally well in all age groups. Although predictions were significantly related to ADHD symptoms in children 8–9 (n = 30), 10–11 (n = 28), and 12–13 (n = 41), they did not reach significance in adolescents 14–16 (n = 14; unpublished results). Although certainly not conclusive given the exploratory nature of this analysis and the fact that predictive power is influenced by factors including sample size, data quality, and group variance in ADHD scores, this outcome motivates future research by tentatively suggesting that the functional architecture of attention in adolescence may differ from that in childhood and adulthood. These findings also underscore the importance of understanding the nonlinear expression of dynamic and hierarchical changes in brain features and behavior with development.

Moving forward, it will be important to tailor predictive models to particular scientific questions and/or practical goals. For example, models trained on one developmental period and tested on another can inform questions about common functional mechanisms, whereas models trained on a range of age groups may better characterize trajectories in brain–behavior relationships and offer greater predictive power across the lifespan. Further, it is important to keep in mind that because children and adolescents are not simply “little adults” in terms of either neurocircuitry or behavior, predictions in these populations will likely often rely on development-specific models rather than models defined in adults and applied to developmental data. Future work testing whether models are valid across developmental stages, clinical populations, and cognitive or affective states can provide additional insight into the scope of their generalizability.


Bridge statistical predictability and biological plausibility

Predictive modeling in developmental neuroscience has two parallel goals: to discover how the brain gives rise to behavior across development, and to identify practically useful neuromarkers of behavior and clinically relevant outcomes. It is not always obvious, however, how models that achieve the second goal can help make progress toward the first. Instead, predictive models are sometimes considered opaque “black boxes” far removed from biology and uninformative about the neural circuits supporting behavior. Some models are more susceptible to this concern than others. Supekar and colleagues, for example, used hippocampal volume and functional connectivity to predict children’s response to math tutoring. In doing so, they provide clear evidence of the role of learning- and memory-relevant brain regions in math skill improvements. On the other hand, models that use deep neural networks to generate predictions may sometimes preclude easy (linguistic) interpretations of relationships between predictors and outcomes. As bigger data sets and more sophisticated algorithms result in greater and greater predictive power, it will be important for researchers to keep the first goal of modeling—advances in basic science—in their sights.

Large-scale data sets that include behavioral, neuroimaging, and genetic data provide exciting opportunities for researchers to explore the biological plausibility of predictive models. To illustrate the promise of approaches that link levels of analysis, let’s return to the hypothetical research group interested in impulsivity. Imagine that the research team identifies a pattern of functional connectivity that predicts impulsivity across individuals. A subsequent issue of clear importance is the extent to which this network reflects the underlying function of molecular-genetic mechanisms. To get initial traction on this question, the researchers could ask whether this network is heritable, or whether structural genetic variants predict its function, which in turn predicts impulsive behavior. They could also pursue cross-species work, asking whether important model features map on to known anatomical circuits, or whether hypothetical genes that impact network function in humans affect behavior in rodents. Thus, approaches that combine data sets to bridge levels of analysis and link genotype, neural phenotype, and behavior across development may suggest new etiological hypotheses and possible treatment targets of cognitive function and dysfunction.


Acknowledge limitations to advance understanding

Enthusiasm for large neuroimaging data sets and individualized predictions should be coupled with realistic assessments of potential pitfalls related to methodology, interpretation, and implementation. Carefully considering these limitations, researchers are already beginning to develop new analytic approaches and field-wide standards to address them,.

Methodological pitfalls can erode the impact of predictive models. For example, because head motion introduces significant confounds in both structural and functional imaging data, especially in developmental populations, up-to-date data-collection and preprocessing techniques are necessary for ensuring that predictions do not rely on motion-induced artifacts. In addition, just as descriptive models may reflect sample noise, predictive models may be overfit to training data. Although nested cross-validation techniques can help protect against overfitting, external validation is critical for testing model generalizability (Box). Finally, it is important that methodological choices be tailored to research goals. For example, is the goal to predict current phenotypes or future change? To make absolute predictions (e.g., that a child will grow to be six feet tall) or relative ones (that he or she will be in the 95th percentile for height)? To predict behavior from functional brain features observed during task engagement, or to test whether a cognitive process can be measured in the absence of an explicit task? To maximize subgroup-level accuracy, or population-level generalizability? To prioritize statistical predictability, biological plausibility, or feature weight interpretability? Mismatches between study methods and goals can undermine the usefulness of predictive models.

Working with large data sets also poses several challenges to interpretation. For example, when samples are large enough, brain–behavior relationships with even tiny effects sizes may reach statistical significance. Although such effects may be interesting from a basic science perspective if robust to noise and replicable, they are unlikely to offer much clinical or practical benefit in the near term. In addition, although large data sets may be more representative of the general population than smaller samples, they may offer a “false sense of security” since they can still suffer from selection bias and skewed demographics and are not equally distributed across the globe (See Fig.). The careful evaluation of both statistical and clinical significance will be important for establishing scientifically valid, practically useful models.

Although neuroimaging-based predictive models have the potential to offer significant benefits, challenges can arise when applying them in clinical contexts. Recent work has highlighted the “perilous path from publication to practice”, outlining a variety of scientific, implementation, and business-related obstacles. As scientists pursue individualized predictions, close collaborations with clinicians, bioethicists, industry professionals, and regulatory bodies will be necessary for effectively translating models to real-life patient-care settings,.

Finally, as models begin to make their way from bench to bedside, it is important to consider their ethical implications, especially in the context of development. First, researchers need to keep in mind—and clearly communicate to participants, patients, and the public—that predictive models are probabilistic rather than deterministic in nature, and, just like traditional pen-and-paper tests, will never perfectly predict abilities or behavior. Predictions are thus best considered tools for scientific discovery and opportunities for informing clinical decision-making rather than portents of the future. Moving forward, the potential benefits of predictive modeling in development must be continuously evaluated in light any of potential risks to privacy or hyperbolic claims about our ability to predict the future.


Conclusions

A rich tradition of research in human neuroimaging has made progress in explaining the neurobiology of cognition and behavior. Less attention, however, has been devoted to predicting cognitive abilities and behavior from brain features. Here we argue that predictive modeling approaches that forecast outcomes at the level of individuals are important complements to work describing brain–behavior relationships at the group level, especially in the context of adolescence.

Not only can predictive models enhance the clinical and translational utility of neuroimaging research, they can also account for critical features of behavior often overlooked in cross-sectional studies of the developed adult brain: developmental trajectories, hierarchically emerging brain systems, and individual differences in both. So far, investigating when models accurately predict behavior and when they fail to do so has illuminated potentially adolescent-specific changes in behavioral and neural phenotypes related to risk-taking and attention. Looking ahead, models that offer probabilistic insights into individuals’ current and future behavior from their past developmental brain trajectories have the potential to provide deep insights into human brain development and function in both health and disease.


Box 1 Predictive modeling

Whereas descriptive modeling is the process of learning associations between features and outcomes, predictive modeling leverages these relationships to make predictions from previously unseen data. Here, we reserve the term “prediction” for the output of models applied to novel individuals rather than to describe brain–behavior correlations. Although prediction pipelines are diverse, they typically involve four primary steps: feature selection, model building, model testing, and prediction evaluation (Fig.). Importantly, both feature selection and model building are performed using only training data. The resulting model is then applied unaltered to data from previously unseen individuals.

Feature selection: Methods for feature selection, the process of identifying model predictors, fall into two broad categories: hypothesis-driven and data-driven approaches. Hypothesis-driven methods, which leverage existing knowledge to select features, are useful for testing predictions of existing scientific models. Data-driven methods rely on statistical techniques to identify the features most relevant to individual differences in behavior. These include filter methods (selecting features based relationships with behavior), wrapper methods (considering the predictive power of different feature combinations, e.g., by systematically eliminating the least predictive features from a model), and embedded methods (incorporating feature selection into model building, such as in lasso, elastic net, and ridge regression).

Both hypothesis- and data-driven approaches can incorporate predictors from multiple domains, including genetics, brain structure and function, and behavior. The developmental trajectories of these measures, such as slope, intercept, or inflection point, may also be included. Systematically removing a predictor or predictor class from a model can identify its unique contribution to predicting outcomes or behavior. Although there is no theoretical limit to the number of model features, it is best practice that they not exceed the number of observations to avoid modeling noise (overfitting). Furthermore, it is important to consider the inherent tensions between interpretability, generalizability, and variance explained. While models with fewer features may be easier to interpret, models with more features may capture additional variance in behavior and better characterize complex multimodal neural phenotypes.

Model building: Following feature selection, the relationship between predictors and behavior is formalized with a classifier or regression model. The goal of a classifier, such as a support vector machine or logistic regression, is to make discrete predictions. In neuroimaging research, classifiers represent the vast majority of predictive models: Of all multivariate models in translational neuroimaging, 75% were built to distinguish patients from control participants, whereas <3% were used to predict continuous symptom scores. Regression models, including linear and support vector regression algorithms, make continuous rather than categorical predictions, and can facilitate the development of transdiagnostic profiles of risk or resilience for psychopathology. Both classifiers and regression models can be applied to cross-sectional or longitudinal data, and the latter may incorporate techniques such as growth–curve modeling to predict past or future change.

Model testing: Model testing, or applying a predictive algorithm to test data to evaluate its generalizability, distinguishes predictive from descriptive models. The utility of out-of-sample validation for protecting against overfitting and false positives has been discussed in detail elsewhere,. Here we highlight one dimension along which potential predictive models vary: how far out of sample they generalize.

Internal validation (i.e., k-fold or leave-one-subject-out cross-validation) tests whether a model generalizes to novel individuals from a single data set. Although internal validation is useful for optimizing models and conferring statistical rigor when multiple data sets are not available, it may generate biased estimates of predictive power even when evaluated with permutation testing. Despite this limitation, the vast majority of predictive models in neuroimaging have been tested with internal validation alone. External validation tests whether a model generalizes beyond an initial training data set to individuals from completely independent samples. Curated data sets and platforms such as OpenfMRI that encourage data and model sharing can facilitate external validation and model refinement.

Prediction evaluation: Methods of model evaluation depend on whether predictions are discrete or continuous. Classifier output can be evaluated with percent accuracy; sensitivity (the true positive rate, or percent of correctly identified patients) and specificity (the true negative rate, or percent of correctly identified controls); and/or the positive predictive value (percent of individuals called patients who are true patients) and negative predictive value (percent of individuals called controls who are true controls), which depend on disease prevalence. Regression model predictions can be assessed with measures such as correlation or mean-squared error. In all cases it may be useful to visualize all data points to fully evaluate relationships between behavior and predicted scores or category labels.


Media use and brain development during adolescence

Eveline A Crone, Elly A Konijn — Nature Communications, 2018. PMC5821838, CC BY 4.0.

The current generation of adolescents grows up in a media-saturated world. However, it is unclear how media influences the maturational trajectories of brain regions involved in social interactions. Here we review the neural development in adolescence and show how neuroscience can provide a deeper understanding of developmental sensitivities related to adolescents’ media use. We argue that adolescents are highly sensitive to acceptance and rejection through social media, and that their heightened emotional sensitivity and protracted development of reflective processing and cognitive control may make them specifically reactive to emotion-arousing media. This review illustrates how neuroscience may help understand the mutual influence of media and peers on adolescents’ well-being and opinion formation.


Introduction

Media play a tremendously important role in the lives of today’s youth, who grow up with tablets and smartphones, and do not remember a time before the internet, and are hence called ‘digital natives’,. The current generation of the adolescents lives in a media-saturated world, where media is used not only for entertainment purposes, such as listening to music or watching movies, but is also used increasingly for communicating with peers via WhatsApp, Instagram, SnapChat, Facebook, etc. Taken together, these media-related activities comprise roughly 6–9 h of an American youth’s day, excluding home- and schoolwork (https://www.commonsensemedia.org/the-common-sense-census-media-use-by-tweens-and-teens-infographic),. Social media enable people to share information, ideas or opinions, messages, images and videos. Today, all kinds of media formats are constantly available through portable mobile devices such as smartphones and have become an integrated part of adolescents’ social life.

Adolescence, which is defined as the transition period between childhood and adulthood (approximately ages 10–22 years, although age bins differ between cultures), is a developmental stage in which parental influence decreases and peers become more important. Being accepted or rejected by peers is highly salient in adolescence, also there is a strong need to fit into the peer group and they are highly influenced by their peers. Therefore, it is imperative that we understand how adolescents process media content and peers’ feedback provided on such platforms. Adolescents’ social lives in particular seem to occur for a large part through smartphones that are filled with friends with whom they are constantly connected (cf. “A day not wired is a day not lived”). This is where they monitor their peer status, check peers’ feedback, rejection and acceptance messages, and encounter peers as (idealized) images on screens,. Likely, this plays an important role in adolescent development, and we therefore focus primarily on adolescents’ social media use. Most media research to date is based on correlational and self-report data, and would be strengthened by integrating experimental paradigms and more objectively assessed behavioral, emotional, and neural consequences of experimentally induced media use.

Recently, cognitive neuroscience studies have used structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine how the adolescent brain changes over the course of the adolescent years. The results of several studies demonstrate that cognitive and socio-affective development in adolescence is accompanied by extensive changes in the structure and function of the adolescent brain. Structurally, white matter connections increase, allowing for more successful communication between different areas of the brain. The maturation of these connections is related to behavioral control, for example, connections between the prefrontal cortex and the subcortical striatum mediate age-related improvements in the ability to wait for a reward. In addition to these changes in white matter connections, neurons in the brain grow in number between conception and childhood, with greatest synaptic density in early childhood. This increase in synaptic density co-occurs with synaptic pruning, and pruning rates increase in adolescence, resulting in a decrease in synaptic density in late childhood and adolescence. Structural MRI research revealed that the peak in grey matter volume probably occurs before the age of 10 years, but dynamic non-linear changes in grey matter volume continue over the whole period of adolescence, and the timing is region-specific. Interestingly, changes in grey matter volume are observed most extensively in brain regions that are important for social understanding and communication such as the medial prefrontal cortex, superior temporal cortex and temporal parietal junction. Figure displays the extensive changes in the human cortex during adolescence.

Given that brain regions involved in many social aspects of life are undergoing such extensive changes during adolescence, it is likely that social influences—which also occur through the use of social media as the internet connects adolescents to many people at once—are particularly potent at this age in coalescence with their media use. Also, subcortical brain regions undergo pronounced changes during adolescence. There is evidence that the density of grey matter volume in the amygdala, a structure associated with emotional processing, is related to larger offline social networks, as well as larger online social networks,. This suggests an important interplay between actual social experiences, both offline and online, and brain development.

This review brings together research on media use among adolescents with neural development during adolescence. We will specifically focus on the following three aspects of media exposure of interest to adolescent development: (1) social acceptance or rejection, (2) peer influence on self-image and self-perception, and (3) the role of emotions in media use. Finally, we discuss new perspectives on how the interplay between media exposure and sensitive periods in brain development may make some individuals more susceptible to the consequences of media use than others.


Being accepted or rejected online

Experiencing acceptance or rejection when communicating via digital media is an impactful social experience. Extensive research, including large meta-analyses, has demonstrated that social rejection in a computerized environment can be experienced similarly as face-to-face rejection and bullying, although the prevalence of cyberbullying is generally lower, (and studies vary widely: prevalence rates depend on how cyberbullying is defined and measured). In all, cyberbullying peaks during adolescence and large overlap has been found between victims and bullies. In part, this overlap could be explained by victimized adolescents seeking exposure to antisocial and risk behavior media content. The next subsections will describe recent discoveries in neuroscience on the neural responses to online rejection and acceptance.


Neural responses to online social rejection

The emotional and neural effects of being socially excluded have been well captured by research involving the Cyberball Paradigm (https://cyberball.wikispaces.com/). Cyberball is a virtual ball-toss game in which the study participant tosses a ball with two simulated players (so-called confederates) via a screen. After a round of fair play, the confederates, who only throw the ball to each other, exclude the participant in the rejection condition. This results in pronounced negative effects on the participants’ feeling to belong, ostracism, sense of control, and self-esteem. Even though the paradigm was not designed to study online rejection as it occurs today on social media, the findings of prior Cyberball studies may provide an important starting point for understanding the processes involved in online rejection. In fact, inspired by Cyberball, a Social Media Ostracism paradigm has recently been developed by applying a Facebook format to study the effects of online social exclusion.

Using functional MRI (fMRI), researchers have observed increased activity in the orbitofrontal cortex and insula after participants experienced exclusion, possibly signaling increased arousal and negative affect. In addition, stronger activity in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is observed in adolescents and young adults with a history of being socially excluded, maltreated, or insecure attachment, whereas spending more time with friends reduced ACC response in adolescents to social exclusion. This may possibly protect adolescents against the negative influence of ostracism or cyberbullying, although all these studies are correlational. Therefore, it remains to be determined whether environment influences brain development or vice versa. Moreover, ACC and insula activity have also been explained as signaling a highly significant event because the same regions are also active when participants experience inclusion. Furthermore, studies with adolescents observed specific activity in the ventral striatum, and in the subgenual ACC when adolescents were excluded in the online Cyberball computer game, the latter region is often implicated in depression. Thus, being rejected was associated with activity in brain regions that are also activated when experiencing salient emotions,. These studies may indicate a specific window of sensitivity to social rejection in adolescence, which may be associated with the enhanced activity of striatum and subgenual ACC in adolescence,.

Social rejection has also been studied using task paradigms that mirror online communication more specifically. In the social judgment paradigm, participants enter a chat room, where others can judge their profile pictures based on first impression. This can result in being rejected or accepted by others in a way that is directly comparable to social media environments where individuals connect based on first impression (for example,’liking’ on Instagram). A developmental behavioral study (participants between 10 and 23 years) showed that young adults expected to be accepted more than adolescents. Moreover, these adults, relative to adolescents, adjusted their evaluations of others more based on whether others accepted or rejected them, possibly indicating self-protecting biases (Fig.). Neuroimaging studies revealed that, being rejected based only on one’s profile pictures resulted in increased activity in the medial frontal cortex, in both adults and children, and studies in adolescents showed enhanced pupil dilation, a response to greater cognitive load and emotional intensity, to rejection.

Taken together, these studies suggest that adolescents show stronger rejection expectation than adults, and subgenual ACC and medial frontal cortex are critically involved when processing online exclusion or rejection. In the next section, we describe how the brain of adolescents and adults respond to receiving positive feedback and likes from others.


Neural responses to online social acceptance

The positive feeling of social acceptance online is endorsed through the receipt of likes, one’s cool ratio (i.e., followers > following; Business Insider, 11 June 2014: http://www.businessinsider.com/instagram-cool-ratio-2014–6?international=true&r=US&IR=T.) or popularity, positive comments and hashtags, among other forms of reward,. Neuropsychological research showed that being accepted evokes activation in similar brain regions, as when receiving other rewards such as money or pleasant tastes. Most pronounced activity was found in the ventral striatum, together with the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and ventral tegmental area, which is consistently reported as a key region in the brain for the subjective experience of pleasure and reward, including social rewards. Likewise, being socially accepted through likes in the chat room task resulted in increased activity in the ventral striatum in children, adolescents, and adults,. This response is blunted in adolescents who experience depression, or who have experienced a history of maternal negative affect. Apparently, prior social experiences—such as parental relations—are an important factor for understanding which adolescents are more sensitive to the impact of social media. In this regard, media research showed that popularity moderates depression and that attachment styles and loneliness increases the likelihood to seek socio-affective bonding with media figures.

Interestingly, several studies and meta-analyses using gambling and reward paradigms have reported that activity in the ventral striatum to monetary rewards peaks in mid-adolescence– (Fig.; see Box for views on adolescent risk taking in various contexts). These findings may suggest general reward sensitivity in adolescence such that reward centers that respond to monetary reward may also show increased sensitivity to social reward in adolescence. Social reward sensitivity may be a strong reinforcer in social media use. A prior study in adults showed that activity in the ventral striatum in response to an increase in one’s reputation, but not wealth, predicted frequency of Facebook use. In a similar vein, adolescents showed sensitivity to “likes” of peers on social media,. In a controlled experimental study, adolescents showed more activity in the ventral striatum when viewing images with many vs. few likes, and this activation was stronger for older adolescents and college students compared to younger adolescents. Thus, the same region that is active when being liked on the basis of first impression of a profile picture, is also activated when viewing images that are liked by others, especially in mid-to-late adolescence, possibly extending into adulthood (see also ref. for similar findings on music preference). These findings suggest that heightened reward sensitivity in mid-adolescence that was previously observed for monetary rewards may also be present for social rewards such as likes on Instagram. However, further research is needed to examine whether this is a specific sensitivity in early, mid or late adolescence, or perhaps this social reward sensitivity emerges in adolescence and remains in adulthood.


Online peer influence

In addition to adolescents’ sensitivity to the feeling of belonging to the peer group, the peer group also has a strong influence on opinions and decision-making. Peers can exert a strong influence on adolescents through user-generated content on social media,. Co-viewing, sharing, and discussing media content with peers is common practice among adolescents in line with their developmental stage in which peers become more important than others. For example, adolescent girls often share pictures and comment on the “ideal” degree of slimness of the models they see via media when deciding how a ‘normal’ body should actually look,. Several recent neuroimaging studies, summarized below, have examined how the adolescent brain responds to peer comments about others and self, and subsequent behavioral adjustments and opinion changes. Even though not all of these designs were specific for online environments, the findings provide important starting points for understanding how adolescents are influenced by peer feedback in an online environment.


Neural responses to online peer feedback

Neuroimaging studies in adolescents showed that peer feedback indeed influences adolescents’ behavior. Neural correlates may provide more insight in the specific parts of the feedback that drives these behavioral sensitivities. One way this is demonstrated is by having individuals rate certain products such as music preference or facial attractiveness. After their initial rating, participants received feedback from others, which was either congruent or incongruent with their initial rating. Afterwards, individuals made their ratings again, and the researchers analyzed whether behavior changed in the direction of the peer feedback. Indeed, both adults and adolescents adjusted their behavior towards the group norm, demonstrating general sensitivity to peer influence. Furthermore, when receiving peer feedback that did not match their own initial rating, participants showed enhanced activity in the ACC and insula, two regions involved in detecting norm violations,. More specifically, increased ACC activity was associated with more adjustment to fit peer feedback norms in adolescents.

Peer feedback effects are not only found for how individuals rate products, but also can strongly influence how they view themselves. Girls are especially sensitive to pressure for media’s thin-body ideal, and peer feedback supporting this ideal is associated with more body dissatisfaction,. We recently showed that norm-deviating feedback on ideal body images resulted in activity in the ACC-insula network in young females (18–19-years), which was stronger for females with lower self-esteem (Fig.). Interestingly, the girls also adjusted their ratings on what they believed was a normal or too-thin looking body in the direction of the group norm. Together, these findings suggest that peer feedback through social media can influence the way adolescents look at themselves and others.


Neural responses to prosocial peer feedback

Interestingly, however, we also found that peer feedback can influence social behavior in a prosocial direction, for example, by having peers positively evaluate prosocial behavior that benefits the group. Neuroimaging studies of social cognition have demonstrated that thinking about other peoples’ intentions or feelings is associated with activity in a network of regions, including medial prefrontal cortex, the superior temporal sulcus and the temporal parietal junction, also referred to as the social brain network. In an online peer influence study, adolescents could donate money to the group, which would benefit not only themselves but also others. Prior to the study, the participants met the other participants (confederate peers) that were not part of the group that was dividing the money. These peers, however, gave online feedback through likes on the participants’ choices. More likes were given when participants donated more to the group. This feedback was followed by higher donations, and was associated with enhanced activation in the social brain network, such as the medial frontal cortex, temporal parietal junction and superior temporal sulcus. Notably, the change in social brain activity in the peer feedback condition was more pronounced for younger adolescents (ages 12–13-years) compared to mid-adolescents (15–16-years). Together, these studies suggest that early adolescence may be an especially sensitive period for social media influences in risk-perception as well as prosocial directions. These findings fit well with Blakemore and Mills’ suggestion that, adolescence may be a sensitive period for social reorientation and social brain development, although results vary regarding whether sensitive periods are more pronounced in early or mid-adolescence. Understanding the specific sensitive windows may be important to target future interventions. Therefore, future research is needed to examine whether this is a specific sensitivity in early-to-mid-adolescence, or whether and how social reward sensitivity remains in adulthood.


Precedence of emotions and impulsivity

A third factor that affects how adolescents process (social) media relates to the intense emotional experiences that usually accompany adolescence. Emotional needs may guide adolescents’ media use and processing; for example, feeling lonely may ease the path to connect to a media figure or to rely on social media for one’s social interaction,. Furthermore, being engaged in media fare may evoke strong emotional reactions, such as when playing violent video games or when experiencing online rejection,. Adolescents in particular appear to be guided by their emotions in how they use and process media. For example, the degree of anger and frustration experienced by early-to-mid adolescent victims of bullying was associated with increased exposure to media fare portraying antisocial, norm-crossing and risk-taking behaviors over time, making these youngsters more likely to become bullies themselves. Another study showed that anger instigated a more lenient moral tolerance of antisocial media content in early adolescents but not in young adults. Furthermore, adolescent victims of bullying who regulated their anger through maladaptive strategies (e.g., other-blame, rumination) showed higher levels of cyberbullying themselves.


Neural responses related to retaliation and emotion regulation

Neuroscience studies can potentially provide more insight in the moral leniency following adolescents’ anger. Neuroscience research on adolescent development has shown that the development of the prefrontal cortex, an important region for emotion regulation, matures until early adulthood,. A better understanding of the interactions between brain regions that show direct responses to emotional content, and brain regions that help to regulate these responses can possibly elucidate how adolescents regulate their behavior related to media-based interactions.

Several studies examined this question by focusing on anger following rejection. Rejected-based anger often leads to retaliatory actions. Several paradigms have also shown that adolescents are more aggressive after being rejected online. For example, they gave longer noise blasts and shared less of their resources with people who previously rejected them in an online environment,. More activity in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) after rejection was associated with less subsequent aggression and more giving, possibly indicating that increased activity in the DLPFC helps individuals to control their anger following rejection. Other research showed changes in neural coupling when young men played violent video games. Thus, social rejection can evoke anger, but some adolescents may be better at regulating these emotions than others. Adolescents who regulate these emotions better show stronger activity in DLPFC, a region known to be involved in self-control,.

Applying adaptive emotion regulation strategies (e.g., putting into perspective, refocusing, reappraisal) possibly requires enhanced demands on DLPFC. Possibly, the late maturation of the DLPFC, together with heightened emotional reactivity, may make adolescents more likely to be influenced by media content. For example, research showed that emotional experiences biased participants’ perception of media footage: despite being told beforehand that the footage contained fiction-based materials, they attributed significantly higher levels of realism to it under conditions of emotional arousal than in a neutral state. Subsequently, participants attributed more information value to the fiction-based footage up to similar levels as to the reality-based clip.

One possible direction to better understand how adolescents deal with emotional media content is by examining parallel processes. It is likely that engaging in media is associated with multiple processes such as the fast processing of emotions associated with engagement, sensation-seeking and emotional responses to media content, as well as more reflective and relatively slower processes, such as perspective taking and emotion regulation. We interpret such parallel processing as coordinated networks of an inter-related imbalance between heightened emotional responsivity and protracted development of reflective processing and cognitive control. For example, adolescents show a peak in neural responsivity to emotional faces in the ventral striatum and anterior insula, compared to children and adults,. In addition, adolescents show protracted development of social brain regions implicated in perspective taking, and flexible engagement of lateral prefrontal cortex, possibly depending on personal goals. When media encounters are emotionally gripping, such parallel processing may explain why people may take (fake) information from media as real—‘it just feels real’. The emotional response seems to blur the borders between fact and fake; the instantaneous response based on emotional or accompanying sensory feedback apparently takes (momentary) control precedence over cognitive reflection and biases subsequent information processing. These findings may perhaps also explain how social reality can be perceived in accordance to how the world is represented in emotion-arousing, sensationalist or populist media messages, even when it concerns so-called “fake news”. In all, these suggestions call for further empirical testing, specifically also comparing adolescents and adults, in which the pattern of brain changes is combined with behavioral research and opinion formation.

Another intriguing question for future research is whether regulation or control of media-generated emotions can be trained. It was previously found that training of executive functions is associated with increased activity in DLPFC, but it remains an open question whether activity in DLPFC can be influenced by (aggression) regulation training and behavioral control, and whether this results in changes in the functional and structural properties of the brain. If such training were possible, video games and immersive virtual environments might provide even more useful training environments. In this respect, promising projects are ongoing, testing the use of biofeedback videogames to help youth cope with stress and anxiety and identify physiological markers, and patterns of emotion regulation. Game interventions are also developed to help children to cope effectively with anxiety-inducing situations. These enrichment and training programs may also be useful to test specific media sensitivities by controlling the amount of media exposure. Such designs will have important benefits over studies examining correlations between naturally occurring behaviors and developmental outcomes, which often do not allow for control of other variables such as temperament or environmental changes.

Taken together, individuals differ in how they respond to media content, especially when these evoke emotional responses or are evaluated in an emotion-aroused state. There are only preliminary studies available that link these individual differences to brain development, but possibly the regulating role of DLPFC is important to control emotional responses to rejection, fake news, violent video games, or appealing ideals. These are all questions that need to be addressed in future research, but are highly relevant given the developmental stage and time adolescents engage with these prevalent forms of media.


Outlook for future studies

We described research in three directions that we believe are crucial in understanding how the omnipresent use of (social) media among today’s adolescents may influence them, through the following: (1) social rejection and acceptance, (2) peer influence on opinions of self and others, and (3) emotion precedence in media use and effects. We have provided a first overview of how neuroscience research may aid in a better understanding of these influences in a mediated context. However, study results appear to vary regarding the specific adolescent age ranges; sometimes effects seem specific for early- or mid-adolescents, while in other studies adolescents and (young) adults do not differ and the indicated age ranges also vary widely (e.g., for some, ‘late adolescence’ is between 13 and 17 years old, whereas in other reports, 17–25 years of age is referred to as ‘late’, see also ref.). Most adolescent samples are relatively older, whereas early adolescents (aged 10–15) are understudied and seem of particular interest in regards of sensitivity in these three areas. Therefore, further research is needed to align specific age ranges to developmental stages.

Current media technology opens possibilities to understand sensitivities to media and peers in adolescence. For example, YouTube, Facebook, and Instagram provide excellent environments to study combined with media content and peers’ feedback in adolescence,. Moreover, such social media platforms introduced so-called user-generated content and options to present and express oneself in media environments have increased tremendously, thereby increasing media’s social functions. Taking the ethical aspects of performing social media research into account, as it can impinge on users’ privacy, social media devices also provide great opportunities to understand how media exposure affects day-to-day fluctuations in mood and self-esteem.

A critical question that remains largely unanswered is how adolescents’ abundant media use may impact them developmentally in terms of structural brain development, functional brain development, and related behavior. The scientific evidence thus far is still scarce and results are mixed,. For example, digital-screen time and mental well-being appear to be best described by quadratic functions with moderate use not intrinsically harmful. Several recent studies have shown that habitual use is associated with a reduced ability to delay gratification, but can also have positive consequences such as increased ability to flexibly switch between tasks and feeling socially connected. Adolescents who spend more time on their mobile devices may engage less in ‘real’ offline social interactions and the consequences of these communication changes are not yet well understood. Perhaps, consequences differ among those who experience their online interactions as similar to their offline interactions, or as separate worlds. Important moderators and mediators should also be taken into account to understand how online communication is processed. Finally, being constantly online also affects sleep patterns, which impacts mood as well. In all, the majority of these studies are based on self-reported new media use and outcomes. Integrating both experimental methods and neuroscientific insights may advance our understanding of who is susceptible under which circumstances to which effects, positive or negative.


Conclusion

In this review, we described the emerging body of research focused on how new media use is processed by the still developing adolescent brain. In particular, we highlighted the neural systems that are associated with behaviors that are important for social media use, including social reward processing, emotion-based processing, regulation, and mentalizing about others. As these neural systems are still underdeveloped and undergoing significant changes during adolescence, they may contribute to sensitivity to online rejection, acceptance, peer influence, and emotion-loaded interactions in media-environments. In future research, it will be important to understand these processes better, especially the specific developmental sensitivities, as well as to understand which adolescents are more and less susceptible for beneficial or undesirable media influences.

The review of the literature suggests that peer sensitivities are possibly larger in adolescents than in older age groups. Peer influence effects have been well demonstrated in adolescent decision-making research, showing that adolescents take more risks in the presence of peers and when peers stimulate risk-taking. This seems to hold similarly for peer influence online through online comments, also with less risky behaviors. These findings have been interpreted to suggest that adolescents have a strong need to follow norms of their peer group and show in-group adherence. There is a strong need for studies that experimentally test whether increased influence of peers, possibly through developing social brain regions, combined with strong sensitivity to acceptance and rejection, makes adolescence a tipping point in development for how social media can influence their self-concept and expectations of self and others. It is likely that these sensitivities are not related to one process specifically, but the combination of developmental brain networks and associated behaviors,. A critical question for future research is how neural correlates observed in this review predict future behavior or emotional responses in adolescents.

Social media have at least the following two important functions: (i) socially connect with others (the need to belong) and (ii) manage the impression individuals make on others (reputation building, impression management, and online self-presentation). The emerging trajectory of acceptance sensitivity, peer ‘obedience’, and emotion precedence may make adolescents specifically susceptible to sensationalist and fake news, unrealistic self-expectations, or regulating emotions through adverse use of media. Important questions for future research relate to unraveling whether adolescents are more sensitive to these news items than children and adults, who is most sensitive to which kind of media influence, how (one-sided) media use may influence adolescent development over time, and understand not only the risks but also how media provides opportunities for positive development, such as engaging with friends, forming new peer relations, and experiment with uncertainties or overcoming fears. Studying the interplay between media use and sensitive periods in brain development will provide important directions for understanding how media may impact youth and who is most vulnerable and under which conditions. Key questions for future research are to understand whether recent changes in media usage, delivery, dosage, and levels of engagement (e.g., as more active creators and participants, for example) are leading to different or amplified neural responses in adolescents relative to adults. Using longitudinal research, it will be important to test whether there is evidence that the still developing adolescent brain is more sensitive to, or more likely to be shaped by these changing patterns of media usage.


Box 1 Multiple perspectives on adolescent risk-taking

Adolescence is often defined as a period of increased risk taking and sensation-seeking, this is observed across cultures and across species. However, the way risk-taking is expressed differs across generations. In middle ages, risk-taking in adolescence took place through reckless fights and wars. In contrast, in the late 20th century and early 21st century, adolescents were more prone towards risk-taking in context of alcohol, sex, and drug experimentation. Recently, through social media, new forms of risk-taking are expressed, such as excessive or unlimited self-disclosure or sexting. These observations suggest that social media may be the new way in which sensation-seeking behavior is expressed, which is possibly an adolescent-specific tendency to explore and learn to adapt to new social environments.


Discovering dynamic brain networks from big data in rest and task

Diego Vidaurre, Romesh Abeysuriya, Robert Becker, Andrew J. Quinn, Fidel Alfaro-Almagro, Stephen M. Smith, Mark W. Woolrich — Neuroimage, 2018. PMC6138951, CC BY 4.0.

Brain activity is a dynamic combination of the responses to sensory inputs and its own spontaneous processing. Consequently, such brain activity is continuously changing whether or not one is focusing on an externally imposed task. Previously, we have introduced an analysis method that allows us, using Hidden Markov Models (HMM), to model task or rest brain activity as a dynamic sequence of distinct brain networks, overcoming many of the limitations posed by sliding window approaches. Here, we present an advance that enables the HMM to handle very large amounts of data, making possible the inference of very reproducible and interpretable dynamic brain networks in a range of different datasets, including task, rest, MEG and fMRI, with potentially thousands of subjects. We anticipate that the generation of large and publicly available datasets from initiatives such as the Human Connectome Project and UK Biobank, in combination with computational methods that can work at this scale, will bring a breakthrough in our understanding of brain function in both health and disease.


Introduction

Understanding the nature of temporal dynamics of brain activity at a range of temporal and spatial scales is an important challenge in neuroscience. When studying task data, the aim is to discover the neural underpinnings and brain mechanisms elicited by the task, for which one relates the time course of the measured data to behaviour as comprehensively as possible. That is to say, we are interested in the dynamics evoked by the task. In this case, many repetitions of the same task are typically considered in the hope of characterising and interpreting the differences with respect to some baseline condition. Presumably, the brain adapts to the task at different time scales and in an online fashion, and we would like to capture these changes at as high a temporal resolution as the imaging modality will allow. When studying rest data, where the brain is not engaged in a predefined task, the brain will still process information dynamically, adapting its activity to the current perception of the environment combined with the products of its own spontaneous activity. In this case, then, we are interested in characterising the spontaneous dynamics. Either case, being able to characterise the temporal trajectories of whole-brain network activity at different time scales is, considering the complex and deeply integrated nature of the brain, crucial to understand the ultimate underpinnings of cognition (Buzsáki and Draguhn, 2004, Bressler and Menon, 2010).

The most common analysis technique used for describing brain network dynamics in both task and rest is the use of sliding windows (Wendling et al., 2009, Allen et al., 2014). The sliding windows approach (and methods built upon it) suffers from a number of limitations (Hindriks et al., 2016) that can undermine any conclusions. In particular, they need a pre-specification of the time scale at which the neural processes of interest occur, i.e. the temporal width of the window. This choice is crucial and is a trade-off between two conflicting criteria: too long a window will miss fast dynamics, whereas too short a window will have insufficient data to provide a reliable network estimation. An alternative to the sliding window approach is the Hidden Markov Model (HMM), which can be used to describe brain activity as a dynamic sequence of discrete brain states, each characterised by a distinct pattern of network activity, including functional connectivity and/or spectral content (Baker et al., 2014, Vidaurre et al., 2016, Vidaurre et al., Woolrich). The HMM can be applied to task data to provide a rich description of the brain dynamics; for example, by estimating the HMM in a completely unsupervised way (i.e. with no knowledge of the task), and then post-hoc relating the HMM state sequence to the task timings, to reveal task-dependent functional connectivity dynamics (Vidaurre et al., 2016). This strategy can reveal task-related processes that are too fast to be seen by sliding window analyses (Vidaurre et al., 2016). The HMM can also be used on resting data to capture quasi-stationary states of activity that are consistently recurring over a population (Baker et al., 2014). This allows for the analysis of how certain dynamic properties vary across subjects, such as the transition probabilities between states or the differences of state occupancies (i.e. how much time is being spent in each state). An illustration of the HMM in both rest and task is presented in.

In the context of the HMM, increasing the amount of data can help to achieve richer and more robust conclusions about the dynamic nature of brain activity. In task, for example, having more trials will allow us to have a better understanding of the timing of brain activity in relation to the task and its trial-by-trial variability (which is due in part to noise but also to interesting cognitive processes such as learning). Fortunately, projects like the Human Connectome Project (HCP) (Van Essen et al., 2013) and UK Biobank (Sudlow et al., 2015) are recently producing an unprecedented amount of high quality data, with the number of subjects on the order of hundreds or thousands. However, group-level HMMs (run on data temporally concatenated over all subjects) are computationally expensive to train on such massive data sets. This problem is exacerbated if we use more complex HMM observation models (i.e. the model of the data produced for each HMM state), such as the use of a multivariate autoregressive model (MAR), designed to capture state-specific multi-region spectral information in electrophysiological data (Vidaurre et al., 2016).

In this paper, we propose an alternative to the standard HMM that uses a stochastic variational inference approach that can be applied to very large neuroimaging data sets, by greatly reducing its computational cost. The algorithm is generally applicable to the different instantiations of the HMM framework that are required for different data modalities. In the hope that it will be useful to other researchers, a Matlab toolbox implementing the algorithm has been publicly released. In the present work, we demonstrate the approach's performance on 820 subjects' resting-state fMRI data from the HCP, 5248 subjects' resting-state fMRI data from UK Biobank, and 52 subjects' MEG task-data from the HCP (this last dataset using a MAR observation model at high temporal resolution). Altogether, we use these examples along with simulated data to demonstrate that having a suitable computational method that scales well to large amounts of data can significantly enrich our description of dynamic brain activity.


Methods


The HMM and variational inference

The HMM is a family of models that can describe time series of data using a discrete number of states, all having the same probabilistic distributions but each having different distribution parameters. Thus, the states correspond to unique patterns of brain activity that recur in different parts of the time series. For each time point t, a state variable dictates the probability of each state being active at that moment. a exemplifies the model; on top, there are the state time courses, i.e. the values of the state variable across time; in the bottom, there is a graphical description of some states, in this case parametrised in terms of their mean activation level and functional connectivity. This general framework has different instantiations, depending on the choice of the observation model distribution. The most common variety of the HMM uses a multivariate Gaussian observation model, typically characterising the distribution of each state k by its mean μk and covariance Σk (Baker et al., 2014). It is important to bear in mind that our definition of a network is different from the activation maps that for example Independent Component Analysis (ICA) provides. The HMM Gaussian states contain not only an activation map (encoded by μk) but also a covariance matrix that can be interpreted as a network matrix of functional connectivity (as in e.g a). Another version of the HMM is the HMM-MAR, where the observation model is an autoregressive model and, thus, the states are defined and driven by their spectral signature (Vidaurre et al., 2016). In this case, both the amount of activity and connectivity are established as a function of frequency. A third possibility is the HMM-AR (HMM with autoregressive models), where the cross-channel interactions are not modelled. The AR is an intermediate point of model complexity between the Gaussian and the MAR models that keeps the channel-by-channel spectral information. Both the AR and the MAR have an important parameter: the model order, which controls the amount of detail in modelling the state spectra.

Whichever the chosen observation model distribution, an HMM generally comprises the description of the states, the state time courses (which determines the probability of each state to be active at each time point in the time series) and the transition probabilities between the states (i.e. the probability to transition from each state to each other state). Because here we run the HMM on all concatenated subjects' datasets, the states and the transition probabilities are defined at the group level; the state time courses are however particular to each subject - that is, states can come active at different moments for each subject. Since the probability distribution of each part of the model depends on all others, there is no closed-form solution available. A popular inference paradigm that assumes certain simplifications in the model is variational Bayes (Wainwright and Jordan, 2008), which has its roots in the field of statistical physics, and, earlier than that, in the calculus of variations developed in the 18th century by Euler and others mathematicians. The variational inference methodology introduces certain factorisations in the HMM probability distribution such that we can iterate through different group of parameters, leaving the remaining parameters fixed and thus reducing the computational burden. The goal is the minimisation of the so-called free energy, a quantity that includes the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the real and the factorised distributions and the entropy of the factorised distribution. The equations for the computation of the free energy in the context of the HMM can be found elsewhere (Vidaurre et al., 2016).


Stochastic variational inference for handling large data sets

The estimation of the observation model distribution for the Gaussian case implies the inversion of a Q-by-Q matrix per state, where Q is the number of channels or time series (e.g. brain areas); in the case of the MAR model, it requires the inversion of a PQ-by-PQ matrix, where P is the order of the MAR. In the standard variational inference approach, either case requires the entire data set to be loaded into memory. The estimation of the state time courses (for any HMM type of model, whether one uses variational inference or the maximum-likelihood approach) is based on the so-called Baum-Welch (also referred to as forward-backward) recursions (Baum et al., 1970), which, having computed the likelihood of each state at each time point, requires a complete sequential forward pass through the data followed by a complete backwards pass. Although this process is parallelizable across subjects, it can still be time consuming when the time series are long and/or the number of subjects is large. Therefore, standard variational inference for the HMM can be challenging for large data sets, because of (i) the memory required to estimate the observation models and (ii) the computation time taken by the estimation of the state time courses. In this paper, we make use of the principle of stochastic optimisation (Robbins and Monro, 1951) applied to variational inference (Hoffman et al., 2013) and apply it to the HMM, in order to develop a very efficient optimisation algorithm that addresses both computational difficulties, allowing for the estimation of the HMM on many subjects in just a few hours, and with modest memory requirements.

Standard variational inference guarantees the free energy to decrease at each iteration and, eventually, to converge. Stochastic variational inference instead performs a noisy and computationally cheap update at each iteration. Although those can occasionally lead to small free energy increments, they will typically improve the model. Over many iterations it is guaranteed to converge (Robbins and Monro, 1951, Hoffman et al., 2013). In this case, “noisy” means that we base each iteration on a random subset of M subjects: these are what we need to keep in memory to estimate what we refer to as the interim state observation models and for which we need to compute the state time courses. (Importantly, to obtain an interim state observation model, we must compute its parameters as though N subjects were actually used so that the estimation's properties mimic that of a standard variational step). This way, we have an interim estimation of the observation models, which (thanks to the additivity of the Gaussian and MAR distributions) can be linearly combined with the current estimation to form the new estimation. Such combination is parametrised by some scalar ρ such thatwhere ϕnew, ϕold and ϕinterim represent, respectively, the new, previous and interim posterior distributions of the observation models, and ρ decreases as the algorithm progresses, so that, at iteration c we havewith α and β being some «delay» and «forget» parameters.

The estimation of the state transition probabilities is done exactly with little extra cost by keeping the sufficient statistics of the state time courses, Σt Pr(st) Pr(st-1), where st represents the hidden state at time point t, and Pr(st) represents the probability distribution of each state being active at t.

In Baum et al. (1970), the sampling of the subjects is purely random; here, we propose to (stochastically) promote those subjects that have been historically sampled fewer times. We do this through the following equationwhere wi is the unnormalised probability of selecting subject i, ri the number of times that subject i has been selected in previous iterations (scaled so that mini(ri) = 0) and τ ≤ 1 is a parameter controlling how much we discourage subjects that have been frequently selected to be picked up at the current iteration.

The HMM optimisation is known to potentially suffer from having local minima. For this reason, and although stochastic inference can help to avoid flat local minima by virtue of the noisiness in the updates (Hoffman et al., 2013), the initialisation plays a crucial role because it can get the optimisation process away from poor regions of the parameter space. Hence, we need an initialisation mechanism that is computationally affordable in both time and memory use. The initialisation strategy that we propose here provides a reasonably good solution without being computationally expensive. In short, it consists of running separately the standard HMM inference on subsets of subjects and combining the results into a single solution using a matching algorithm. A detailed description is presented in the Supplementary material.

The algorithm is summarised as follows:Initialise the observation models.Repeat:Choose M subjects at random using probabilities, wi, computed as in (Eq.).Compute the state time courses for the M subjects.Compute the interim state probability distribution using the M subjects as though we had N subjects.Perform an approximate update of the state probability distributions using (Eq.).Perform an exact update of the state transition probabilities.Update ρ using (Eq.).Compute the free energy.

Until the free energy converges.

In this paper, we have used α = 5, β = 0.7, and τ = 0.9. There is a limited impact of the precise choice of α, β and τ. Of more importance is the choice of the value of M, which we varied depending on the data set (see below). As reported in Hoffman et al. (2013), very low values of M can have a negative effect, as the updates become too noisy; very large values can be computationally costly and typically do not bring much benefit. The chosen value is thus a trade-off.

Note that the general stochastic inference framework is the same for the Gaussian and the MAR state models, differing only in the particulars as to how to perform inference of the observation model parameters (step 2c). More comprehensive information can be found elsewhere about variational inference (Wainwright and Jordan, 2008), stochastic variational inference (Hoffman et al., 2013), the Hidden Markov model (Rabiner, 1989), and its applications to neuroimaging (Baker et al., 2014, Vidaurre et al., 2016, Vidaurre et al., Woolrich).


Simulated data

We first used synthetic signals to demonstrate the validity of the proposed stochastic inference approach. We generated two classes of signals using the HMM as a generative model. For the Gaussian observation model, we simulated 6 states, each with 10 regions and a randomly generated covariance matrix. For each subject, in order to verify that the stochastic algorithm produces similar results to the non-stochastic algorithm when there is some inter-subject variability, a small perturbation was applied to the covariance matrix by adding a second random matrix, sampled from the same distribution and scaled by a factor of 1 × 10−2. For the MAR observation model, on the other hand, we used 3 states, each with two channels/regions. These states were obtained from an actual HMM-MAR estimation on the task-MEG HCP data (described below), where we observed that two of the states (red and blue, see Results) were capturing the neural dynamics associated with the task, and the other state (green) corresponded to a baseline state. For both observation models, we simulated state time courses for 200 subjects, with 500 samples per subject.


fMRI data

We used resting-state fMRI data from N = 820 subjects from the HCP, all healthy adults (ages 22–35 years, 453 females) scanned on a 3 T Siemens connectome-Skyra. For each subject, four 15-min runs of fMRI time series data with temporal resolution 0.73 s and spatial resolution 2-mm isometric were available. The preprocessing pipeline is the same as in Smith et al. (2015): following artefact removal using FSL tools (Jenkinson et al., 2012), we used group spatial-ICA to obtain a “parcellation” of 50 components that covers both the cortical surfaces and the subcortical areas; then, we used this parcellation to project the fMRI data into 50-dimensional time series; such time series, of size (number of participants x number of scans x number of time points x number of ICA components = 820 × 4 x 1200 × 50), were standardised so that, for each scan, subject and ICA component, the data have mean 0 and standard deviation 1.

We also used resting-state fMRI data from the UK Biobank, a large-scale prospective epidemiological study aiming to allow the identification of risk factors and early biomarkers relating to many diseases (Sudlow et al., 2015, Miller et al., 2016, Alfaro-Almagro et al., 1000). We used the first public release containing 5847 resting-state subjects (aged 40–69 when recruited). The data was acquired in a 3 T Siemens Skyra using a 32-channel receive head coil with Multiband acceleration of 8x for 6 min and 10 s (490 timepoints), with temporal resolution of 0.735s, and spatial resolution of 2.4 mm isometric. Preprocessing was similar to that for HCP data, including motion correction, intensity normalisation, high-pass temporal filtering and EPI unwarping (Alfaro-Almagro et al., 1000). We then use ICA (Beckmann and Smith, 2004) followed by automated classification and removal of the artefact components (Griffanti et al., 2014). Group-ICA was then run using the first 5248 subjects' cleaned data, resulting in 100 group-level components, of which 55 were manually classified as non-artefact and used for the HMM analyses. Dual regression analysis (Beckmann et al., 2009) is performed to obtain subject-specific node timeseries associated with the group-level parcels, for feeding into the HMM analyses.


MEG data

We used 52 MEG subjects from the HCP having both resting state and the motor task data available (Larson-Priora et al., 2013). Resting state data consisted three sessions (6 min each, eyes open), and the examined task data has two sessions of 14min each. The chosen task sessions consisted of blocks of moving either left or right hand and feet respectively. Here, for simplicity, we used the right hand moves only. We used the preprocessing pipelines offered by the HCP consortium, removing bad channels, segments and bad independent components from task and rest data. After bandpass filtering (1–48 Hz), the MEG data were LCMV-beamformed (Woolrich et al., 2011). Using the AAL atlas, we considered the two parcels representing left and right precentral gyrus, and use PCA to extract the first principal component from each one. The motor task was a simple localizer task that included right hand movements; data epochs were time-locked to EMG onset and downsampled to 100 Hz. For the resting-state data, artificial epochs of the same size as the task epochs were uniformly spread throughout the session. In both the rest and task data, the resulting parcels were then sign-flipped, if necessary, to match the corresponding MEG sensor motor-related evoked fields with same polarity across all subjects (Vidaurre et al., 2016). Parcel time-series were also normalized before being subject to HMM analysis, such that they have mean equal to zero and standard deviation equal to one for all subjects separately.


Available software

The HMM is available in both the standard and the stochastic inference versions as a Matlab toolbox in a public repository. Currently, Gaussian, MAR and AR observation models are available, with the option of working in PCA space to control the dimensionality. This is particularly useful in the case of the MAR model, where the number of model parameters rapidly (quadratically) increases with the number of channels. The toolbox also offers some data preprocessing utilities and two different ways to compute the state spectra once the HMM has been estimated: one makes use of a weighted version of the multitaper introduced in Vidaurre et al. (2016), and the other uses the MAR or AR parameters directly.


Results


Simulated data

The aim is to use the simulated data to verify that the stochastic algorithm's performance is consistent with the standard HMM inference, by comparing model inference using the non-stochastic and stochastic algorithms. We ran (standard) non-stochastic inference and stochastic inference for 100 different random state time courses. Because the ordering of the states in the output is random, we matched the states of the estimation and the ground truth model based on the correlations between the state time courses. Once the states are matched, we use the average correlation between matched states as a similarity measure to compare the estimations to the ground truth, and to compare the standard inference to the stochastic inference. a shows, for three different stochastic batch sizes, the mean correlation between the stochastic and non-stochastic algorithms (left) as well as the mean correlation between the stochastic estimations and the ground truth (right). A full representation of the 100 runs is presented in the form of histograms in. In general, even in the limit of a batch size of one subject, we find the stochastic algorithm still infers state time courses that are well correlated with the non-stochastic algorithm. As expected, however, the similarity between the two algorithms is higher for larger batch sizes (in the limit of a batch size equal to the number of subjects, the two algorithms are exactly equivalent).

Representative examples of the inferred state time courses for a single subject are shown in b and d for the Gaussian and the MAR cases respectively (these examples' accuracies correspond to the median of the 100 runs). The ground truth average activity (mean of the state's Gaussian distribution) and functional connectivity (off-diagonal elements of the state covariance matrices) for the Gaussian case is plot against the standard and stochastic estimations (with batch size equal to 50) in c, where each colour represents a different state, and each dot represents a region (if showing the mean) or a pair of regions (if showing functional connectivity). The state spectra information for the ground truth (solid lines) versus the standard inference and stochastic inference estimations (discontinuous lines) is illustrated in e for the two channels. These results together indicate that the inference is consistent between the standard and the stochastic algorithms for a variety of configuration parameters, with both algorithms able to reasonably recover the ground truth.


HCP resting fMRI data

We used stochastic inference on 820 resting-state fMRI subjects from the HCP to obtain 12 states of quasi-stationary brain connectivity. We ran the algorithm 5 times, with an average running time of 221min (minimum and maximum were 208min and 225min) using a standard workstation (endowed with four Intel Xeon CPU E5-2643 0 3.30 GHz processors). We used M = 30. Some of the results that follow are from a selected run of the stochastic algorithm. However, the different runs were relatively similar (see below). With these results, our goal is to illustrate (i) the type of information the HMM can provide about brain dynamics, and (ii) the ability of the stochastic inference to produce useful and non-trivial results. Note that it is not possible to make a comparison of the standard inference and the stochastic inference in this case because the standard inference is computationally implausible given the size of the data set.

a shows the mean activation maps for three of the twelve networks (states), representing a sensory state, a default mode network (DMN) state, and a visual state (the rest are presented in). Regarding the temporal information, the most fundamental output is the state fractional occupancy, defined as the proportion of time that each subject spends in each brain state. A model that captures the within-subject temporal dynamics effectively (as opposed to a model that only finds between-subject differences) would be expected to have subject-specific fractional occupancies such that single states do not “dominate” entire subjects. In other words, for an HMM to be useful in describing brain dynamics, we expect each subject's time to be shared by various states. A statistic reflecting the satisfaction of this minimum requirement is the maximum fractional occupancy; that is, for each subject or scanning session, how much time of the time series is taken by the state that takes the longest. b shows a histogram with the maximum fractional occupancy. Most subjects have maximum fractional occupancy below 0.4, demonstrating that most subjects need several states to be optimally described.

Another important sanity check is how consistent are separate runs of the stochastic inference. This is important, because the standard HMM estimation is, as mentioned earlier, known to be to some extent dependent on the initialisation, and our algorithm is introducing an additional stochastic factor. To investigate this, we match the states across different HMM stochastic estimations (using the Hungarian algorithm from Munkres (1957), applied to the correlation of the state time courses), and collect the correlation of the state time courses between the re-ordered estimations (i.e. for each pair of matched states from two different runs, we get the correlation between these states' time courses). c shows that these correlations are high (most typically over 0.75), reflecting the robustness of the proposed stochastic inference approach.

A further robustness test, which would also speak to the reliability of the potential scientific conclusions, is to split the data set into two halves and run the HMM separately. Here, we have used 5 different half-splits, computing the correlation between the activation maps and functional connectivity (off-diagonal elements of the covariance matrix) between the two 410-subject HMM estimations for each of the splits. d shows these correlations (averaged across the 5 splits) for each state, with the states ordered from more to less correlated. Most states show a high correlation between the two half-split estimations for both mean activation and functional connectivity, with the exception of one state, which has a relatively low correlation for the activation maps. This state, however, has a mean activation very close to zero in both estimations, with the covariance matrix instead capturing most of the distinct state-specific characteristics of the data when the state is active. Furthermore, examines the stability of the transition probabilities between half-splits, which are also quite robust.

Having assessed the basic validity of the stochastic inference, we analysed in more detail the temporal characteristics of one of the runs. e shows the fractional occupancy for every state along with the distribution of the states' dwell times (which refers to the temporal duration of the state visits). From this figure, we can see certain differences in the sense that some states are visited more than others. However, the differences in terms of dwell times are small. Finally, f shows the transition probability matrix, showing that some (state-pair) transitions are more probable than others (Allen et al., 2014). Altogether, these results demonstrate that the HMM, when combined with the stochastic inference algorithm, can reproducibly model brain dynamics in large fMRI data sets.


Biobank resting fMRI data

Next, we used the stochastic algorithm on 5248 fMRI subjects from the resting-state data set of Biobank, again performing 5 runs of the algorithm with M = 250. The average running time was 144min (minimum and maximum were 141min and 148min). In this case, tests based on half splits and 12 states (see HCP Resting fMRI Data section) revealed that 8 out of 12 states were robust across halves. The HCP data set allowed 12 reliable states possibly because of the higher data quality and more scanning time per subject. Basing then on the reliability of the results, we present here the model with 8 states. Three of them, representing sensory-motor, DMN and visual networks, are displayed in a (the rest are shown in). The rest of the figures (b-f) are analogous to the HCP results, and the conclusions are similar. The HMM can capture the dynamics of brain activity (b), and the stochastic inference was robust and consistent across different runs of the algorithm (c) and between random half-splits of the data set (d and); this consistency was however less pronounced than in the HCP data set, probably due to the very high quality of the HCP data. As with the HCP, there were some differences in fractional occupancies across states. In this case, however, the differences in dwell time were larger than for the HCP, but still not huge.

It is worth noting that, although some similarities exist, there are certain differences between the HCP and the Biobank states. This is possibly due not only to differences in the pipeline and the characteristics of the data, but also to fact that the data is projected into different spaces: whereas the state maps for Biobank are volumetric, the HCP maps refer to the cortical surfaces. Indeed, the ICA decompositions emphasise different areas in the two data sets. To illustrate this discrepancy, shows “representability” maps, where, for each voxel (or grayordinate), we compute the sum of the absolute values of all ICA components. This indicates how much is each region represented by each ICA decomposition. These apparent differences in the independent components on which the HMM was run are likely to explain much of the differences in the HMM results.


Task MEG data

Finally, we test the performance of the stochastic inference algorithm in task using 52 MEG subjects from the HCP. In this case, we used a MAR observation model of order 5 to describe the states, such that, as discussed above, the segmentation will be based on the spectral information of the data. Given the relative simplicity of the task and because we have only two data channels (brain regions), we limit our HMM to infer 4 states only. Again, we run the algorithm 5 times with M = 8, which took 166min on average (with minimum and maximum of 90min and 229min). Note that the size of data set and the number of model parameters just about permits the use of the standard inference approach, albeit at great computational cost. The stochastic algorithm can relatively easily handle this data and model, and, although we here focus on only two regions to allow for straightforward comparisons with previous work (Vidaurre et al., 2016), it has the potential to be extended, for example, to work over more brain regions (e.g. spanning the whole brain).

We next show that, similar to what was previously shown using standard inference (Vidaurre et al., 2016), the HMM can capture differences in activity modulated by the task. a (top left) shows the average state time courses (with standard errors) around the button press event, which can be interpreted as a “state evoked response”, i.e. what is the average probability (across trials) of each state being active at each time point. Two states, blue and red, capture most of the task-relevant dynamics. This is confirmed quantitatively by applying statistical testing, where we tested for each state and time point whether the fractional occupancy of the state is significantly different (higher or lower) at this time point than in the rest of the trial (permutation testing, significance level of 0.01). The results of these tests are depicted on top of a. It can be observed that it is mostly the red and the blue states that exhibit differences across time, suggesting that they are modulated by the task. Note that, unlike the study in Vidaurre et al. (2016), the button presses are here rhythmic and more frequent, possibly producing an entrainment of cortical activity to the movement. This effect, due to the neural activity of the previous button press “leaking” into the next trial, is expressed by the HMM as an oscillatory behaviour of the state time courses.

a also shows the spectral properties of the states, in terms of power (top centre) and coherence (top right). As expected, the estimation of coherence is noisier than that of power. Interestingly, the red state, which represents a strong activation in the beta band in both hemispheres, does not get depressed at the same time of the button press, as might be expected, but a bit later. Again, this is probably due to the resonating activity from the last button press, which was bringing a post-movement increment in beta activity when the new movement was starting. Temporal and spectral information can be combined to produce HMM-regularised time-frequency representations of the activity. This is shown in a (bottom).

As an alternative view to the fractional occupancy, we also looked in b at how the onset of the states (i.e. the instants when a state becomes active) relates to the task. The onset of the states can be interpreted as a point process, with one event per state occurrence indicating the times when this state becomes active. Hence, the Onset Probability measure reflects, for each time point and state, the percentage of trials for which this state becomes active precisely at this time point. Each light line corresponds to one subject, and the thick lines represent the mean across subjects. For visualisation purposes, the curves were smoothed. At the top of b, each grey dot indicates that the dominant state at this time point has significantly larger onset probability than any of the other states (permutation testing, significance level of 0.01), suggesting that it is the red and blue states that primarily attain significance. This figure gives a complementary perspective of the state dynamics. For example, it reveals that the blue state becomes active, on average, at exactly the time of the button press, reaching a peak of fractional occupancy at ∼+0.25s (a), and yielding to the red state slightly later than +0.5s.

c shows the average state fractional occupancy (with standard errors) for an HMM estimation obtained from the MEG resting-state data, where no movement is performed, and trials were artificially assigned to the resting-state session. Here, the states do not show any oscillatory pattern or any other consistent temporal variation (i.e. the average state time courses are flat across the entire trial, and the only difference between states in terms of the global temporal information is the total average fractional occupancy across all time points). Finally, d and e shows that the estimations are very consistent across different runs of the algorithm and between random half-splits of the data set (for the half-splits, the correlations are computed on the power spectral density obtained from the MAR coefficients). Additional temporal information for one of the runs is presented next, showing fractional occupancy and dwell time distribution (f), and the transition probability matrix (g).


Discussion

Current efforts are being undertaken to publicly release large data sets with hundreds or even thousands of subjects. Also, improvements and standardisation of protocols, together with the increase of widespread data sharing, will likely make it possible to combine and fuse neuroimaging data from different recording modalities. The availability of more data allows for more sophisticated analyses that will allow us to ask particular questions for the first time. For these reasons, it is crucial to have methods that can be scaled to large data sets. In this paper, we have proposed a method that can leverage large data sets' availability to address a difficult question: the characterisation of dynamic connectivity in both task and rest.

The HMM methodology has been proven useful in the past (Baker et al., 2014, Vidaurre et al., 2016, Vidaurre et al., Woolrich). In resting, the dynamics of whole-brain resting state networks have been characterised in MEG (Baker et al., 2014) and fMRI (Vidaurre et al., Woolrich), unveiling, for example, that the transitions between states or networks are far from random. In task, the HMM was able to find transient, short-lived states with specific spectral signatures that meaningfully characterised the primary motor cortex dynamics during a simple motor task. Here we have substantially enhanced the method to allow for the characterisation of dynamic brain networks in both task and rest from very large to very large datasets.

The HMM provides a rich description of brain network dynamics, without the limitations of sliding-window approaches. More specifically, as the number of inferred HMM states grows we are potentially able to capture most of the information contained in the data without being bound to a predefined time-scale (the width of the window) and without any of the estimation problems of the sliding window approach (i.e. the uncertainty of an estimation based on just a few data points). For example, as the Biobank data set grows towards the goal of 100,000 subjects, with the proposed stochastic inference approach, we are confident to estimate HMMs with more states while still having more than enough data to estimate each state sufficiently well. Two interesting developments that would boost even further the potential of the data could be (i) the combination of models from different data sets using some principled quantitative approach, and (ii) the possibility of estimating a joint model using different data sets in a single inference process. This would require sufficiently uniform preprocessing pipelines and a mapping of the data to a common brain space (which is not currently the case for the HCP and UK Biobank).

While our method can be readily applied to both rest and task data, the study of functional dynamics in resting-state is however not free of controversy. For example, Laumann and colleagues (Laumann et al., 2016) reasonably argue that most of the observed changes in functional connectivity are due to factors other than true switches in cognitive content, namely head motion, sleep and sampling variability. Provided head motion is handled with care, and acknowledging the influence of sleep and drowsiness (undeniably a genuine neuronal and cognitive process that can be an issue in any analysis, whether on dynamic functional connectivity or otherwise), the main obstacle to identifying fast cognitive changes in resting-state data is the lack of statistical power of the sliding window approaches: because windows are relatively short, the observed changes are mostly driven by the high variance of the estimator (Hindriks et al., 2016). Here, we claim that studying dynamical functional connectivity in resting-state data is not necessarily an ill-posed problem; rather, the increasing availability of data makes possible to approach this problem convincingly, if we have to tools to tackle it. A strong argument supporting this claim is the demonstrated robustness of the method; in particular, if we split any of the three considered data sets into two halves and obtain a separate estimation for each half, the two estimations are highly consistent (see Results).

Note that the contribution of this paper is primarily targeting the computational issues of having a large amount of data in time, sessions and/or subjects. A related but different problem is the case when we have a large number of regions of interest. Unfortunately, the stochastic inference procedure would only address the computational aspects of it and not the overfitting issues. The stochastic scheme can be however useful when there is the possibility of collecting more data. Obviously, using more data will reduce overfitting and increase the computational cost, which can in turn be alleviated using the proposed stochastic inference scheme.

In summary, the approach presented here opens the door to new methodological research based on the HMM. For example, the combination of many different models to obtain an ensemble that perform much better than its parts has been a successful story in supervised learning (Hastie et al., 2003). Here, in an unsupervised learning scenario, we can leverage the computational efficiency of the algorithm to obtain a numerous set of HMMs that can somehow be combined to provide a richer description of the data. How these models can be combined, and what new aspects of data we could investigate by using such a coalescence of individual HMMs (potentially with different parametrisations), will be the subject of future investigations.


Neuromodulation of Attention

Alexander Thiele, Mark A Bellgrove — Neuron, 2018. PMC6204752, CC BY 4.0.

Attention is critical to high-level cognition and attention deficits are a hallmark of neurologic and neuropsychiatric disorders. Although years of research indicates that distinct neuromodulators influence attentional control, a mechanistic account that traverses levels of analysis (cells, circuits, behavior) is missing. However, such an account is critical to guide the development of next-generation pharmacotherapies aimed at forestalling or remediating the global burden associated with disorders of attention. Here, we summarize current neuroscientific understanding of how attention affects single neurons and networks of neurons. We then review key results that have informed our understanding of how neuromodulation shapes these neuron and network properties and thereby enables the appropriate allocation of attention to relevant external or internal events. Finally, we highlight areas where we believe hypotheses can be formulated and tackled experimentally in the near future, thereby critically increasing our mechanistic understanding of how attention is implemented at the cellular and network levels.

Keywords: attention, pharmacology, top-down, neuromodulators, attractor networks, population coding


Main Text

The limited processing capacity of the perceptual system poses a complex computational problem for humans and other organisms: which inputs are relevant to current behavioral goals? Decades of research has now been devoted to understanding how neurons instantiate the required “selectivity” that allows an organism to prioritize, or bias, the processing of relevant over irrelevant inputs. Neuronal processing may be biased by both bottom-up and top-down influences. The former reflects the biasing of sensory processing due to stimulus saliency (brightness, movement, size, for example), which causes features to “pop-out” from their surroundings to capture attention. Top-down processing on the other hand reflects the voluntary guidance of attention to locations, features, or objects in the environment. In this way, top-down attention allows for the voluntary processing of relevant over irrelevant inputs in line with the current behavioral goals of the organism (Desimone and Duncan, 1995).

A network of prefrontal and parietal cortical areas is critically involved in the selection required for top-down attention, and other high-level cognitive functions such as working memory or inhibitory control (Bichot et al., 2015, Corbetta and Shulman, 2002, Fedorenko et al., 2013, Moore and Armstrong, 2003). The state and functionality of this network depend on tightly controlled activity in brainstem neurons that release neuromodulators at their target sites. Neuromodulators configure neuronal circuits and thereby specify output properties (Marder, 2012). They thus shape information processing in local and large-scale neuronal networks, such that relevant, over irrelevant, information is prioritized. This in turn drives behavior the subject hopes to be rewarding or behavior that minimizes adverse outcomes. Understanding precisely how this is achieved at the level of single neurons, local networks, or large-scale networks is vital for basic and clinical neuroscience. Neuromodulators most strongly implicated in high-level cognitive functions are acetylcholine (ACh), dopamine (DA), noradrenaline (NA), and serotonin (5-HT). In this review, we focus on their relevance for top-down attentional control. While we will focus on their role in relation to attention, the above neuromodulators have major roles in other aspects of cognition, such as reward signaling (e.g., ACh and DA, Richardson and DeLong, 1986, Rutledge et al., 2015, Schultz, 2015), working memory (DA, NA, Arnsten and Goldman-Rakic, 1990, Gamo et al., 2010, Mao et al., 1999, Sawaguchi and Goldman-Rakic, 1994, Wang et al., 2004, Williams and Goldman-Rakic, 1995), or inhibitory control (NA, DA, 5-HT, Chamberlain et al., 2006, Nandam et al., 2011, Nandam et al., 2013, Nandam et al., 2014, Winstanley et al., 2006).

An important point to address from the outset is how attention, i.e., the top-down prioritization of behaviorally relevant inputs, differs from working memory. Working memory can be conceived as an active process whereby stimulus or internal representations are stored “on-line” to prevent temporal decay or intrusion from competing or distracting stimuli that are outside the current focus of attention. Dissociating effects of attention from those of working memory is difficult and in practice the two processes are highly interactive (Awh and Jonides, 2001). Attention, as conceptualized in this paper, is a selection mechanism that allows for the preferential processing of task-relevant information over irrelevant (distracting) information, i.e., it is a filter mechanism. This selection is driven by currently active behavioral goals held in working memory. In that sense, attention acts in the service of working memory. However, behavioral paradigms employed in neurophysiological studies highlight the potentially close coupling of attention and working memory (e.g., cue-guided spatial working memory tasks or cue-guided spatial attention task). In the cue-guided spatial working memory task, a brief spatial cue will capture attention, which then triggers the working memory signal that enacts the behavioral goal of a memory-guided saccade to cued spatial location. We contend that covert spatial attention would also be allocated to the cued location during the memory period, rendering the two processes largely inseparable. Here, the neural correlates of either process would be “delay activity”; that is, activity that occurs (or persists) even after a behaviorally relevant stimulus (or cue) is removed from the sensory environment (Fuster, 1973). Similarly, in a cue-guided spatial attention task, a transient cue (either spatial or symbolic) will activate a spatial working memory signal specifying a location that should be monitored for the occurrence of a target, and this monitoring (the preferential processing of information) will be performed by spatial selective attention. Again, in this scenario the effects of attention and working memory during the monitoring period are difficult to dissociate, even if the initial generation of the top-down goal (the working memory) may be briefly separable from the attentional signal (the monitoring itself). Given the pervasive use of these behavioral paradigms in monkey neurophysiology (e.g., Chang et al., 2012, Funahashi et al., 1989), we draw on evidence from both in this review.

The focus of this review will not be on how the different receptors affect specific aspects of cellular signaling, or how behavioral studies have informed our knowledge of cognitive aspects of attention. Rather, we aim to delineate how these neuromodulators enable attentional signaling, either through direct action, or by enabling network states, which favor top-down attentional selection. Such a low-level mechanistic account is necessary to validate work that conceptualizes high-level neuromodulator functions from a computational and theoretical perspective (for example, Yu and Dayan, 2005), and it may help to understand why neuropharmacological manipulations can be task and context specific. Finally, such a mechanistic account is required to guide the development of next-generation pharmacotherapies. We note from the outset that, although a full understanding of the neuromodulation of attention is not possible given current data, we review the state-of-the-art and highlight important questions that can be addressed in the near future.

Neuromodulators act mostly through metabotropic receptors, which activate different G-proteins and thereby trigger second messenger cascades. They affect different receptor types and can thereby enhance or reduce transmitter release, synaptic efficacy, or postsynaptic excitability in neuronal circuits. Exceptions to the metabotropic neuromodulator pathways exist for ACh, which can act through ionotropic nicotinic receptors, and for 5-HT, which can act through the ionotropic 5-HT3 receptor. Detailed reviews regarding the different receptors involved and their action can be found elsewhere (e.g., Beaulieu and Gainetdinov, 2011, Hein, 2006, Nichols and Nichols, 2008, Thiele, 2013). The effects of these neuromodulators follow the classic Yerkes-Dodson (inverted U-curve) dose-response relationship (Yerkes and Dodson, 1908). This describes the phenomenon that either too little or too much neuromodulatory drive is equally detrimental to cognitive ability. This relationship has been described for ACh (Smucny et al., 2015), DA (Vijayraghavan et al., 2007), NA (Aston-Jones and Cohen, 2005, Aston-Jones et al., 1999), and 5-HT (Cano-Colino et al., 2014).

To link neuromodulatory action to attentional effects on neuronal activity, we first provide a brief account of how top-down attention affects neuronal activity, i.e., attention that is directed to spatial locations, objects, or features of the world. Detailed review articles of these effects can be found elsewhere (e.g., Desimone and Duncan, 1995, Maunsell and Treue, 2006, Maunsell, 2015, Miller and Buschman, 2013). Our aim here is to link the effects of attention on single neurons and circuits to those same effects reported for neuromodulators. This link is in many cases indirect, as our knowledge of the actions of neuromodulators on cell and population activity arises largely from studies where attention was not manipulated. Nevertheless, the extant data allow us to delineate likely scenarios that describe how neuromodulator actions could aid attentional selection.


Effects of Attention on Neuronal Processing

Over the course of the past 30 years, a large number of studies have delineated the neuronal signatures of top-down attention. Top-down attention is defined as the cognitive process by which an individual selects and prioritizes the processing of specific aspects of information. This cognitive process has neural correlates, and we use the term “top-down attention” as a descriptor of neuronal activity changes that occur following the selection process. The behavioral benefits associated with top-down attentional selection are then an emergent property of activity changes in single neurons and in neuronal populations that occur within an area and between multiple areas.

One of the main neuronal correlates of attention is an alteration to neuronal firing rates (Reynolds et al., 2000, Spitzer et al., 1988, Treue and Maunsell, 1996). Neurons that represent the focus of attention respond differently to the inputs they receive. In general, neurons representing attended locations, features, or objects show increased firing rates. This phenomenon has been observed across all cortical and subcortical areas investigated (e.g., Krauzlis et al., 2013, Noudoost et al., 2010). However, attention can also result in suppression of neuronal activity for unattended locations or features (Martinez-Trujillo and Treue, 2004). The ways in which attention changes neuronal input-output relationships were originally captured by different models of “gain change.” Gain change describes how neuronal input-output relationships are affected by attention. These gain changes can take different forms, such that responses are either proportionally increased for all stimuli (response gain change), or mostly for less-salient stimuli (contrast gain change), or by a reduction in responses to less-salient (non-preferred) stimuli and an increase in responses to salient (preferred) stimuli (see A, Martinez-Trujillo and Treue, 2004, McAdams and Maunsell, 1999, Reynolds et al., 2000, Thiele et al., 2009, Williford and Maunsell, 2006). These different models can, to some extent, be unified within the normalization model of attention (Lee and Maunsell, 2009, Mitchell et al., 2009, Ni et al., 2012, Sanayei et al., 2015). This model assumes that attention affects the gain of excitatory, but also of inhibitory neurons, thereby normalizing the increased excitation induced by attention. In extrastriate and frontal cortex, attention does indeed increase the activity in putative excitatory and putative inhibitory cells (Mitchell et al., 2007, Thiele et al., 2016). At first glance, it may seem counterintuitive that attention increases firing rates, when increased inhibition should counter such an effect. However, this effect can be understood in terms of competing neuronal populations that represent different locations of features (Reynolds et al., 1999). Attention alters the balance between excitation and inhibition of this competition (Reynolds and Heeger, 2009). The attention-induced normalization supports neuronal computations that enable winner-take-all states (Carandini and Heeger, 2011). Winner-take-all network states occur, for example, when attention biases one neuronal population over another to win the competition for sensory representation (Reynolds et al., 1999, Wang, 2008). The winning population shows increased neuronal activity and suppresses its competitors. Competition can also occur in the decision space. When multiple decisions are possible but competing, the interaction between the representations converges toward a single (winning) choice (Reynolds et al., 1999, Wang, 2008). These winner-take-all states occur naturally in neuronal attractor networks. Attractor networks move from labile states, where they can undergo regular and easy state transitions, to stable (attractor) states, where one representation dominates. The stability of these states is determined by the strength of inhibitory and excitatory drive (Deco and Hugues, 2012, Deco et al., 2014). By increasing inhibitory and excitatory drive, attention can allow competing unstable patterns of neuronal activity (representations) to converge to a more stable pattern of activity, such that a single representation dominates (see D for a schematic). These stable activity patterns can be associated with a specific attentional state (such as a location), an item held in working memory, a decision that has been formed, or a motor plan. Importantly, the stability of the activity pattern in the attractor network (illustrated by the depth of the valley in D) can be influenced by different neuromodulators (see later parts of the review). Cognitive operations or neuromodulators supporting labile states would enhance cognitive flexibility (but potentially at the cost of increased distractibility), whereas cognitive operations or neuromodulators supporting stable states would benefit task focus.

Stabilized attractor networks are characterized by increased firing rates for the winning population and decreased firing rates for the losing populations (the described gain changes). In addition, stabilized attractor networks exhibit reduced neuronal rate variability and rate co-variability (Deco and Hugues, 2012, Deco et al., 2014). These effects equally occur in neuronal populations representing the focus of top-down attention (Cohen and Maunsell, 2009, Herrero et al., 2013, Mitchell et al., 2007, Mitchell et al., 2009, Rabinowitz et al., 2015, Ruff and Cohen, 2014, Thiele et al., 2016). Increased neuronal gain and reduced rate variability both increase the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), that is, the ability of neurons (or neuronal populations) to distinguish between a relevant and an irrelevant stimulus, to detect the presence or the absence of a stimulus, or discriminate between two different stimuli. Alteration of rate co-variability (also termed noise correlation) determines to what extent the neuronal activity in any two cells is redundant and thus limits how much additional information can be obtained by decoding the input from both neurons compared to just one. High levels of co-variation can alternately be detrimental, beneficial, or irrelevant (Abbott and Dayan, 1999, Panzeri et al., 1999). These outcomes are determined by the tuning similarity between the neurons. Specifically, a certain change to the correlational structure of neuronal tuning and of the rate co-variability (noise correlations) increases the amount of information neuronal populations can encode, largely by reducing redundancy (see C for a schematic of this scenario). Thus, attention induces gain change, reduces rate variability, and alters noise correlations, which jointly can increase population coding abilities, i.e., the amount of information a population of neurons can encode about different stimulus or task conditions. Importantly, altered neuromodulator drive can affect neuronal gain, rate variability, and noise correlations in ways similar to attention.

The increase in inhibitory drive may also contribute to attention-induced changes in oscillatory activity in the gamma frequency range (B), which requires cyclic bouts of excitation-inhibition (Buschman and Miller, 2009, Chalk et al., 2010, Fries et al., 2001, Gregoriou et al., 2009, Kohl and Paulsen, 2010). Increased oscillatory activity may improve communication between selected neurons within and between brain areas (Bosman et al., 2012, Gregoriou et al., 2009). However, attention does not solely affect the strength of gamma frequency oscillations. Changes in lower-frequency bands, such as theta (Chang et al., 2016, Womelsdorf et al., 2010), alpha (Bauer et al., 2012, Bonnefond and Jensen, 2015, Buffalo et al., 2011, Buschman et al., 2012, Deco and Thiele, 2009, Jensen et al., 2014), and beta frequency (Bauer et al., 2012) equally are prominent and are assumed to attain specific functional roles. For example, desynchronized alpha oscillations are generally associated with enhanced top-down attentional control (O’Connell et al., 2009), and beta band oscillations have been discussed as a mechanism that promotes feedback influences (Fries, 2015).

It is well established that frontal and parietal areas control top-down attention (Corbetta and Shulman, 2002). These areas induce attentional effects in sensory and associative areas through feedback connections (Buschman and Miller, 2009, Gregoriou et al., 2009, Moore and Armstrong, 2003). In addition, frontal areas are connected to brainstem neuromodulator nuclei, whereby they affect their own neuromodulator tone, as well as the neuromodulator tone in other brain areas (Dembrow and Johnston, 2014). This pattern of connectivity may account for the similarity of neuronal changes associated with top-down attention and those seen when the brain undergoes large-scale “state” changes that are under neuromodulator control (Harris and Thiele, 2011). Because of this, it has been argued that the changes associated with attention are linked to large-scale changes but occur at a more local level and show more modest effects (Harris and Thiele, 2011). Attention indeed controls cortical state in circumscribed neuronal populations within task relevant brain regions (Engel et al., 2016, Rabinowitz et al., 2015). Whether these state changes are induced by direct feedback, by alteration of neuromodulator tone, or by a mix of the two is unknown. An equally important question is whether neuromodulators, through tonic release, simply enable network states upon which feedback input can act to induce the described attentional effects. Alternatively, or in addition, neuromodulators play a more active role, whereby their phasic and more local release directly supports states of attention at the neuronal level.

In the sections that follow, we review the evidence for a direct role of distinct neuromodulators (ACh, DA, NA, 5HT) in attention. This will be followed by more indirect arguments, where the action of a neuromodulator at the cellular or network level recapitulates the action of attention, but for which direct evidence linking the two is not available.


ACh and Attention

The cortically projecting cholinergic system, arising in the basal forebrain (BF), has long been associated with different cognitive functions, such as arousal, attention, learning, memory, and even consciousness (Everitt and Robbins, 1997, Hasselmo and Sarter, 2011, Sarter and Bruno, 1997). However, its contribution to attention has been challenged, on the basis that BF cholinergic projections to the cortex lack spatial specificity (Mesulam et al., 1986, Sarter et al., 2009) and temporal precision (Sarter et al., 2009) and are strongly involved in global brain state changes (Lee and Dan, 2012, Moran et al., 2013, Varela, 2014), such as transitions from sleep to wakefulness, or from quiet wakefulness to active exploration (Harris and Thiele, 2011, Vanderwolf, 1988). These enduring states are assumed to be driven by changes in tonic and burst (phasic) activity levels of BF cholinergic neurons (Lee et al., 2005). In contrast, top-down attention is a mechanism that has high selectivity in the spatial, feature, or object domains, and it can act with high temporal precision (Coull and Nobre, 1998). Yet, ample evidence points to a specific involvement of the cholinergic system in top-down attention. For example, lesions to the cholinergic system in monkeys and rodents produce selective attentional deficits, while sparing other cognitive functions such as learning and memory (Dalley et al., 2004, Gill et al., 2000, McGaughy et al., 1996, Voytko et al., 1994). Increased cholinergic drive benefits attentional performance particularly under high task demand and in the presence of distracting stimuli (St Peters et al., 2011). Finally, polymorphisms of the gene (CHRNA4) encoding the α(4) subunit of α(4)β(2) nicotinic receptors have been associated with individual differences in top-down attentional control (Greenwood et al., 2009).

In addition, the spatial specificity of BF cholinergic projections is much more precise than previously thought (Gielow and Zaborszky, 2017, Zaborszky et al., 2015), whereby cholinergic neurons can project to fairly localized parts of the cortex (or subcortical areas, C for a cartoon) and in turn have highly selective input relationships (Gielow and Zaborszky, 2017).

Activity in cholinergic neurons is not only related to global behavioral states (Lee et al., 2005). Although cholinergic neurons show tonic activity that is state dependent (Manns et al., 2000), they also generate temporally precise phasic ACh release in rat prefrontal cortex upon attention demanding cue detection (A; Parikh et al., 2007, Sarter et al., 2009). Local glutamate co-release is necessary, but not sufficient for these transients to occur (Sarter et al., 2014). Importantly, precisely timed activation of cholinergic neurons by means of channelrhodopsin increases cue detection probability and causes increased levels of false alarms on no-cue trials. Finally, precisely timed inhibition of these neurons results in reduced likelihood of cue detection (Gritton et al., 2016). Moreover, optogenetic activation of cholinergic BF neurons, or their terminals in V1, increases trial-by-trial performance in mice in a visual detection task (Pinto et al., 2013).

How ACh enables neurons to generate attention-related signals is poorly understood. Attention-induced rate changes in macaque primary visual cortex (V1) depend on muscarinic, not nicotinic ACh receptors (Herrero et al., 2008). At the same time, behavioral studies imply a role of muscarinic and nicotinic receptors in attention (Levin and Simon, 1998, Mansvelder et al., 2006). Nicotinic receptors might thus contribute to attention-induced activity changes in higher cortical areas, given that cell-type-specific expression of muscarinic and nicotinic receptors changes with cortical hierarchy (Disney et al., 2006, Disney et al., 2014, Disney and Aoki, 2008). Indeed, in macaque frontal eye field (FEF) muscarinic and nicotinic receptors contribute to neuronal signatures of attention in a cell-type-dependent manner (Thiele et al., 2015). For example, muscarinic receptors contribute to attentional modulation in broad spiking (putative pyramidal) cells, whereas muscarinic and nicotinic receptors contribute to attentional modulation in narrow spiking (putative inhibitory) cells (Thiele et al., 2015).

Together, these data demonstrate that cholinergic signals are involved in attentional signaling, through both phasic and tonic activity. In addition cholinergic input is essential for spatial working memory functions signals in macaque dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC). Spatial working memory is severely impaired following cholinergic depletion of the dlPFC (Croxson et al., 2011). Moreover, nicotinic alpha-7 receptor activation is required to enable NMDA-receptor-mediated spatial working memory signals in layer II dlPFC neurons (Yang et al., 2013), whereas nicotinic alpha4beta2 receptors help to maintain spatial working memory signals in dlPFC under distracting conditions (Sun et al., 2017). Based on this, we speculate that nicotinic receptors are also involved in the ability to keep top-down goals in mind (a form of working memory), which may thus affect the strength of attentional control. It is worth noting that the role played by ACh in dlPFC may differ in important ways from its role in V1. In V1, presynaptic NMDA receptors could mediate ACh release to enhance attention, whereas in dlPFC postsynaptic α7 activation supports NMDA-receptor-mediated working memory signals.


Cholinergic Contribution to Neuronal Coding

At the cellular and network level the effects of ACh mirror those of top-down attention. Attention generally increases neuronal firing rates and most studies report the same when ACh is applied (Disney et al., 2007, Herrero et al., 2008, Pinto et al., 2013, Roberts et al., 2005, Sillito and Murphy, 1987, Thiele et al., 2012, Zinke et al., 2006). Whether the increased activity with attention is a consequence of increased cholinergic drive on a trial-by-trial basis is unknown. Cholinergic transients do not occur on all trials (Sarter et al., 2014). In addition, cholinergic transients have been linked to reward signaling rather than attention (Hangya et al., 2015). This makes a scenario whereby alterations of firing rate on different trials are mediated by alterations in cholinergic drive somewhat unlikely. At the same time, spatial and temporal control of ACh release could in theory be locally induced, even if cholinergic neurons do not change their firing rates (B). How could this occur? Transmitter release can be triggered locally within cortical networks through presynaptic NMDA receptor activation, even if the transmitter releasing terminal does not receive (generate) an action potential (Kunz et al., 2013). Additionally, local glutamate release is a requirement for ACh transients in rat frontal cortex (Parikh et al., 2008). It could be this glutamate release that acts on presynaptic NMDA receptors located on cholinergic terminals, whereby ACh is locally released in a temporally and spatially precise manner. Although speculative, such a scenario could explain why attentional modulation of firing rates and firing rate reliability in V1 depends on NMDA receptor availability (Herrero et al., 2013, Self et al., 2012). The general explanation of these results is that the attentional phenomenon seen in V1 are a direct effect of feedback glutamate signaling, which terminates on NMDA rich synapses. However, it is also possible that feedback-induced glutamate release results in NMDA receptor activation on ACh terminals, causing locally increased ACh levels, which increase firing rates and reduce rate variability (B for an illustration of the possibility). At least in primate FEF, ACh reduces rate variability in a manner analogous to attention (Thiele et al., 2015, Thiele et al., 2016). So how does increased ACh affect rate variability? We contend this is most likely achieved by overall increased, but balanced, excitation and inhibition. This results in gain changes and stabilized attractor dynamics, which in turn reduce rate variability. Stabilized attractor dynamics in this way have additional benefits. Stable attractor configurations (e.g., directions of attention) are less prone to external perturbation (distractions) and may help task focus over short timescales (D). Over longer timescales stabilized attractors could improve overall task focus across trials, conceptualized as “reduced utility cost” (Sarter et al., 2014).

Stabilized attractor networks have additional consequences, which we turn to next. These include altered neuronal correlations and oscillations, which in turn affect the abilities of neuronal populations to encode information and communicate efficiently.


Cholinergic Effects on Population Activity

Attention and ACh both affect neural population coding abilities. Attention induces desynchronized brain states, which are beneficial for coding (Engel et al., 2016, Harris and Thiele, 2011), it alters oscillatory activity in different frequency bands assumed to aid coding and communication (Chalk et al., 2010, Fries et al., 2001, Gregoriou et al., 2009), and it reduces neuronal co-variability (noise correlations, Cohen and Maunsell, 2009, Herrero et al., 2013, Mitchell et al., 2009, Rabinowitz et al., 2015, Ruff and Cohen, 2014) in ways that should benefit information encoding (Abbott and Dayan, 1999, Panzeri et al., 1999). Whether ACh modulation is causally linked to these attentional effects is largely to be determined (but see Bauer et al., 2012). What has been shown, however, is that increasing ACh in the cortex induces effects that are very similar, if not identical, to those described for attention.

First, ACh is critically involved in altering brain states (Harris and Thiele, 2011, Metherate et al., 1992) (but see Constantinople and Bruno, 2011). Second, ACh can increase stimulus-induced gamma oscillations in visual and prefrontal cortex (Howe et al., 2017, Munk et al., 1996), whereas blockade of muscarinic receptors results in increased low-frequency (<12 Hz) oscillations (Harris and Thiele, 2011). Moreover, increasing cholinergic availability results in an enhanced effect of attention on the hemispheric lateralization of low-frequency oscillations (alpha/beta frequency, Bauer et al., 2012). Third, increasing cortical ACh levels reduces noise correlations (Minces et al., 2017, Thiele et al., 2012). To improve population coding abilities, noise correlations need to be altered in specific ways (Abbott and Dayan, 1999, Panzeri et al., 1999). Whether or not a reduction in noise correlation is beneficial to decoding depends on signal correlations. Neuronal pairs with positive signal correlation should reduce their noise correlations, whereas pairs with negative signal correlations should increase their noise correlations. Such changes can be captured by analyzing the slope of the regression between signal and noise correlation (Minces et al., 2017). A reduced slope is associated with better coding abilities in the population. Attention and increased cortical ACh result in such a reduced slope (Minces et al., 2017, Ruff and Cohen, 2014). These results show that ACh alters the covariance structure of cortical networks, thereby improving population coding, rather than simply altering neuronal gain across the cortical mantle. How could an increase in ACh alter the covariance structure of the cortical network in such a way? First, ACh increases overall neuronal gain (Herrero et al., 2008, Thiele et al., 2012), and it increases the efficacy of feedforward connections (Gil et al., 1999). Both of these changes will result in a cortical network that is less affected by slow global activity fluctuation arising from ‘diffuse’ inputs, and thus will drive noise correlations to values closer to zero (irrespective of whether noise correlations are initially negative or positive). Second, ACh reduces intracortical (lateral) synaptic efficacy through presynaptic M2 receptor activation (Hasselmo and Bower, 1992). These lateral connections are dominated by local neurons and by neurons with similar tuning characteristics (Martin, 2002), i.e., neurons with relatively high signal correlations. Reduction of the efficacy of these connections means that neurons have less mutual impact on one another, which likely reduces their noise correlations. Overall, these alterations would induce the specific change that is required to improve coding (C).

In future work, it will be important to determine whether any of the described changes to neuronal activity are specific for different modes of BF cholinergic activity. The slow tonic mode has been argued to be related to global and enduring behavioral state changes, whereas the rapidly fluctuating phasic mode with high temporal precision has been linked to reinforcement learning (Hangya et al., 2015), reward (Richardson and DeLong, 1986), and cue detection in an attention task (Parikh et al., 2007). Notably, brain areas such as the orbital PFC and the insular cortex that encode high-level reward and utility have strong projections to the BF (Mesulam and Mufson, 1984), which could supply a reward/utility signal to cholinergic neurons. The resulting cholinergic signal might then set a cortical processing mode whereby task focus (reward exploitation) is favored. One may thus ask whether fluctuating levels of ACh release are involved in the fluctuating allocation of top-down attention. To answer this, additional cyclic voltammetry in different areas and species or 2-photon imaging of cholinergic terminals in various areas would yield invaluable insight. Alternatively, ACh release, in its tonic mode, might simply shape cortical network interactions such that attention can allocate neuronal resources adequately. In the latter scenario, other sources would provide the temporal and spatial specificity (e.g., feedback from higher cortical areas) to induce the fine-grained coding changes seen with different forms of top-down attention. Proposals have been made where alteration in ACh signals directly link to the allocation of attention (Herrero et al., 2008, Sarter et al., 2009, Thiele, 2013). Even if ACh simply acts to enable these behavioral effects, it is crucial that we delineate the exact mechanism, as this might provide a more nuanced perspective on the use of cholinergic agents to enhance attention.


Attention and the Dopaminergic System

DA is strongly linked to reward signaling and the economic decision variable of utility (Schultz et al., 1997, Schultz et al., 2017, Stauffer et al., 2016) and learning (Waelti et al., 2001). In addition it is a key neuromodulator supporting prefrontal spatial working memory signals (Arnsten et al., 1995, Arnsten et al., 2012, Sawaguchi and Goldman-Rakic, 1991, Wang et al., 2004, Williams and Goldman-Rakic, 1995). The DA system is also a primary pharmacological target for disorders such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), schizophrenia, and Parkinson’s disease, which are associated with attention deficits (Arnsten and Rubia, 2012).

Although long hypothesized, it has recently been shown that DA contributes to spatial attention and to target selection in macaque FEF (Noudoost and Moore, 2011a, Noudoost and Moore, 2011b, Soltani et al., 2013). Noudoost and Moore (2011a) engaged animals in a free saccade target selection task, where target onsets were systematically altered. This led animals to more often choose those targets that appeared earlier. Infusion of D1 antagonists and D2 agonists into selected locations of primate FEF systematically shifted the choice function, biasing choices toward locations represented by neurons that were affected by the DA manipulations. In addition, in a passive fixation task, the infusion of D1 antagonists into FEF altered neuronal responses in remote area V4, as if attention had been allocated to the receptive field of those neurons (B; Noudoost and Moore, 2011a). The V4 response parameters affected were firing rate, sharpness of tuning, and rate variability. However, no effects were found on V4 activity, when D2 agonists were infused into FEF. The discrepant results for behavior and neuronal recordings can be explained by layer-dependent expression of D1 and D2 receptors in macaque cortex. D1 receptors are expressed in supragranular layers (which project to area V4) and infragranular layers of the prefrontal cortex, whereas D2 receptors are expressed only in infragranular layers, which provide output to the midbrain and brainstem (Lidow et al., 1991). It may be surprising that a reduction in D1 receptor action in FEF results in increased behavioral choices of targets presented at the location the FEF neurons represent, and in increased activity of V4 that overlaps with the spatial representation of the affected FEF neurons. However, this could result from the mostly inhibitory nature of D1 action. Blocking this would give the affected FEF neurons a competitive advantage for selection compared with other FEF neurons and may thereby trigger winner-take-all states in the absence of a cognitive trigger signal. This would then enhance the feedback signal to V4 in a spatially selective manner. In a follow-up analysis, these authors used neural network analysis to show that D1 receptors affected choices by increasing the efficacy of inputs and recurrent connections, whereas D2 receptors affected choices by increasing output efficacy (Soltani et al., 2013). The ongoing development of selective D1 agents for use in humans (Arnsten et al., 2017) will provide an opportunity in the near future to arbitrate between the relative roles of D1 and D2 receptors in spatial attention. Already in line with the macaque studies, human work failed to identify a modulatory effect of D2 receptor activation on visual perception (Gratton et al., 2017).

In spatial working memory tasks, which are conceptually related to top-down spatial attention, application of a small dose of D1 agonist increases spatial tuning of macaque dlPFC memory fields by reducing the activity for non-preferred locations (A; Vijayraghavan et al., 2007), whereas application of a D1 antagonist in dlPFC improves the spatial tuning of memory fields by enhancing preferred location activity (Williams and Goldman-Rakic, 1995). Conversely, D2 agonists do not affect spatial coding during the working memory delay period but increase saccade-related activity for preferred target locations. Placed within the context of attention, this would largely match the results reported by Noudoost and Moore (2011a), where D1 receptors are involved in the generation of top-down attentional signals (assumed to be reflected by activity in selected FEF neurons, which affect sensory areas), whereas D2 receptors, located in output layer 5, are involved in motor-related choice activity (Noudoost and Moore, 2011a, Soltani et al., 2013). The functional dissociation between D1 and D2 receptors and their layer-dependent expression raises the question of whether DA inputs are dissociable. From an anatomical perspective, work in rodents provides evidence in favor of this view. The two main sources of cortical DA, namely, the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and the substantia nigra (SN) have somewhat different termination patterns in PFC. Input arising from the rodent SN preferentially terminates in layer I, whereas input from the VTA preferentially terminates in layer V (schematic in C; Berger et al., 1991). Interestingly, layer 5 inputs, which are modulated by D2 activation, are assumed to carry value-based information (in a model of macaque FEF; Soltani et al., 2013), whereas inputs to superficial layers, modulated by D1 activation are assumed to carry stimulus-related information (Soltani et al., 2013). Speculatively, then SN-DA signals might be more task and attention related, whereas VTA-DA signals might be more reward related. Indeed, such differences have been observed in working memory tasks (Matsumoto and Takada, 2013). Whether these results hold in a top-down attention task needs to be determined. However, in rodents performing a 5 choice serial reaction time task (5-CSRTT) it was found that increasing the activity of midbrain dopaminergic neurons using chemogenetics was detrimental to attentional performance, but not response inhibition (Boekhoudt et al., 2017). Importantly, different aspects of attention deteriorated when VTA- or SN-DA neurons were affected. Increasing VTA- or SN-DA activity caused increased numbers of trial omissions, whereas accuracy (a measure of attentional performance; Bari et al., 2008) was only affected when SN-DA neuronal activity was increased (Boekhoudt et al., 2017). Finally, behavioral features common to attentional dysfunctions, such as hyperactivity, can be induced by increasing the activity of VTA- not SN-DA neurons. This hyperactivity was induced when increasing the activity of VTA-DA neurons projecting to the nucleus accumbens, but not of those projecting to prefrontal cortex (Boekhoudt et al., 2016). Taken together, these findings are in line with the hypothesis that DA signals arising in the SN and terminating in superficial PFC aid the generation of feedback attention signals, whereas those arising in VTA and terminating in infragranular layers are related to reward/reward prediction error signaling and thus regulate choice signals (C for a schematic thereof). Additionally, specific subsets of VTA-DA neurons in rodents are involved in either working-memory-related or reward-related activity and have different output and input connectivity. Those involved in working memory (WM) project preferentially to the PFC, whereas those involved in reward/motivation signaling project preferentially to the nucleus accumbens and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) (Lammel et al., 2008). Finally, optogenetic activation of their respective input (lateral habenula versus laterodorsal tegmentum) elicits aversion- versus reward-related behaviors (Lammel et al., 2012, Lammel et al., 2014). Whether similar distinctions exist in primates is unclear and additional work in rodents is required to test the hypothesized relationships between these anatomically segregated connections and the specific signals they might carry. Regardless, it is now well established that DA signals have a variety of different effects on cortical networks, and importantly they serve different functions. These are, at least in part, segregated into specific anatomical subdivisions. Together these multiple effects of DA on cognitive functions helps to strengthen specific aspects of mental representations (Arnsten, 2011), for example, sculpting representation of sensory inputs, and biasing outputs in favor of choices that have a good history of yielding rewards. Within this context, it may not matter whether the mental representation is rule based, WM related, or a top-down attention monitoring signal. It seems clear that DA contributes to all of these, and all of these mental operations are impaired in psychiatric and neurological disorders of putative dopaminergic origin.
Given the illness burden associated with these disorders, there is a clinical imperative for the ongoing development of more selective DA agents. Significant advances have been made in this space with the development of selective D1 agonists (e.g., dihydrexidine), which offer the promise of remediating WM and attention deficits in disorders such as schizophrenia (Arnsten et al., 2017).


Attention and the Noradrenergic System

The noradrenergic (NA) system affecting the cortex arises from neurons located in the locus coeruleus (LC, Loizou, 1969). Theorizing around the function of the noradrenergic system has paralleled that of the other neuromodulatory systems, being argued to be non-specific in its projection and in its function. It was assumed that the cortical projection had very limited anatomical specificity, other than possibly at the level of right hemisphere dominance in humans (Grefkes et al., 2010). Moreover, the assumption was that the level of activity in NA neurons, which varied between different sleep and wake states determined the level of “arousal” (for review, see, e.g., Aston-Jones and Cohen, 2005, Aston-Jones and Waterhouse, 2016). Neurons fire tonically at low rates during sleep, at higher rates during normal wake states, and at yet higher rates when under stress (Aston-Jones and Bloom, 1981, Aston-Jones et al., 1991, Foote et al., 1980). These different rates of activity can be linked to differences in the ability to perform cognitively demanding tasks, with low performance when tonic activity is either low or very high (Aston-Jones and Cohen, 2005, Aston-Jones et al., 1999).

Formulating a coherent theory around NA functions is complicated by that fact that NA has different and sometimes opposite effects dependent on the circuit examined. For example, in sensory cortex NA affects its target neurons through α1, α2, and β adrenergic receptors. α1 receptor activation generally causes excitation, α2 activation causes inhibition (reviewed in Berridge and Waterhouse, 2003), and β adrenergic activation generally increases excitability (McCormick et al., 1991). The overall effect of NA release at the cellular level is a reduction in spontaneous activity and an increase in input-driven activity provided the stimulus is salient (or preferred), thereby improving the SNR (in a manner similar to the filter gain change in A; Foote et al., 1980, Waterhouse et al., 1988, Waterhouse et al., 1998). This specific behavior sets it apart from the action of, e.g., ACh or DA, which, if excitatory, result in either no change of spontaneous activity, or even mild increases of spontaneous activity (i.e., akin to the “response gain” change illustrated in A). At the single-cell level, NA might thus cause a shift toward saliency detection, where weak stimuli are filtered out, and salient stimuli elicit strong responses (A; for an example, Servan-Schreiber et al., 1990). ACh has been hypothesized to cause similar action, not necessarily by altering single-cell filter gain mechanisms uniformly, but rather by network reconfiguration (Thiele, 2013). However, in primate dlPFC α2 receptor stimulation of layer III increases delay cell firing (Li et al., 1999) and reduces distractibility (Arnsten and Contant, 1992), while α1 receptor stimulation decreases delay cell firing (Arnsten, 2011). This discrepancy between the effects of NA on sensory cortex and PFC suggests that NA in PFC may be involved in top-down control (attention, WM) through α2 activation, whereas it is involved in bottom-up state control through α1 activation in sensory cortex. These control mechanisms would be differentially activated based on levels of NA release, as α2 and α1 receptors have differential NA affinity.

As stated previously, one of the main arguments against implicating neuromodulators in top-down attentional signaling is the fact that top-down attention is highly specific in the spatial and/or the feature domain, which affects very localized (or at least very specific) neuronal populations. Although the spatial specificity of the NA projections are insufficient to yield the required top-down resolution, the NA system nevertheless mediates the spatial specificity of WM signals, by dynamically sculpting local network interactions (reviewed in Arnsten et al., 2012). Moreover, the NA projection system is “less unspecific” than previously argued. For example, certain subsets of NA neurons exclusively project to the insular cortex, where they aid in the analysis of enteroception, and these NA neurons in turn are affected by afferents from the enteroceptive system (Chandler et al., 2014a, Waterhouse and Chandler, 2016). Moreover, a subset of LC neurons project only to the PFC and not to motor cortex in the rat (Chandler et al., 2014a). LC projections to the PFC differ from those to the orbitofrontal cortex. The former support attention and extradimensional shifting, whereas the latter support reversal learning (Chandler et al., 2014b). Finally, specific prefrontal neurons, even if localized in the immediate vicinity of one another, are differently affected by neuromodulation, such that layer 5 cells, which project to the brainstem, show different general response properties and are affected differently by NA activation (through α2A receptor activation), than intracortically projecting neurons (Dembrow and Johnston, 2014, Dembrow et al., 2010). These results are testament that the brainstem neuromodulator system, even if comparatively unspecific, can mediate very specific and localized effects at cortical target sites.

As is the case for other neuromodulators, NA neurons also engage in a phasic response mode, where they respond to behaviorally relevant stimuli with brief bursts of activity (Aston-Jones et al., 1991, Aston-Jones et al., 1994, Aston-Jones et al., 1997, Clayton et al., 2004). Given that the phasic activity is task dependent (larger when the animal performs the task well, and larger on correct than on error trials), and it temporally precedes the behavior, it has been suggested that it provides a “temporal attention filter, that facilitates task relevant behaviour” (Aston-Jones and Cohen, 2005). Alterations in baseline (tonic) activity are also linked to behavior, but in a very different manner. Higher baseline NA activity is accompanied by reduced task performance and increased distractibility (Rajkowski et al., 1994). Based on this discrepancy, it has been argued that strong phasic task-related activity (in conjunction with low tonic LC-NA activity) helps the animal to stay task focused (and thereby exploit current reward contingencies; “exploitation”), whereas the high tonic activity (in conjunction with low phasic LC-NA activity) supports a mode where task focus is low and alternative behaviors are explored for their potential benefits (“exploration”, Aston-Jones and Cohen, 2005, Usher et al., 1999; for an interpretation in terms of uncertainty resolution, see also Yu and Dayan, 2005). This distinction can also be couched in terms of high versus low neural gain, which is increasingly thought to influence attention and decision making (Eldar et al., 2013). In the context of attractor networks, the former would be associated with a stabilized state, while the latter would be associated with a less stable state.

Which of the two NA modes directly affect PFC-dependent cognitive signals is not entirely clear, but the tonic mode is a likely candidate. The role of NA on cognitive signals in the PFC has best been studied in relation to spatial WM (Arnsten, 2011, Arnsten, 2013, Arnsten and Jin, 2014, Robbins and Arnsten, 2009). At moderate (non-stressed) levels, NA improves WM performance through α2A receptor activation (Arnsten and Goldman-Rakic, 1985). High levels of NA impair PFC activity and WM performance through stimulation of α1 (Mao et al., 1999) and β1 receptors (Ramos et al., 2005), which have lower NA affinity. The WM delay activity in the prefrontal cortex, while mediated through recurrent excitation dependent on NMDA receptor activation (Wang et al., 2013), is strongly modulated by α2A receptor activation (Wang et al., 2007). The α2A receptor activation improves spatial tuning of WM-related delay activity in PFC neurons, by increasing preferred spatial memory locations, without affecting non-preferred locations (see A for a schematic). Although a number of studies in humans have also manipulated α2A signaling during tasks of spatial attention, results are inconclusive with some studies reporting effects of clonidine (Coull et al., 2001), but not others (Gratton et al., 2017).

A role for NA in other aspects of top-down attention, such as sustained attention, is, however, supported. Low-dose clonidine, which acts pre-synaptically to reduce NA cell firing and release, increases attentional lapses (Smith and Nutt, 1996). Notably, this effect was reversed by treatment of a selective alpha-2-adrenoceptor antagonist. Moreover, methylphenidate, a psychostimulant used in the treatment of ADHD, which enhances NA and DA signaling and improves sustained attention (Dockree et al., 2017). It is plausible that this effect is at least partially attributable to modulation of α2A receptors, since methylphenidate robustly modulates these receptors in PFC.

In summary, multiple lines of evidence support the view that the LC-NA system exerts an important neuromodulatory influence on attention. Although animal work shows potent modulations of cells and circuits supporting spatial WM and attention by NA agents, identifying specific cognitive effects of these agents in humans has been a challenge. Part of the challenge in human work results from the sedating effects of acute dosing of α2A agents (e.g., clonidine, guanfacine). This yields noisy behavioral performance and difficulty in discriminating between task-specific effects of the drug and the non-specific effects of sedation. Although sedation wanes with chronic dosing, such regimens are ethically hard to justify in the non-clinical cohorts that are often employed in psychopharmacology. Establishing specific effects of α2A agents on top-down attention is therefore likely to require the recruitment of clinical cohorts with a clinical indication (e.g., guanfacine in ADHD).


Attention and the Serotonergic System

The contribution of 5-HT to top-down attention may be less direct than that described for ACh, DA, and NA. However, varying levels of 5-HT do affect the ability to engage and perform well in top-down attention and spatial WM tasks.

For example, 5-HT affects spatial tuning of putative pyramidal cells in a memory-guided saccade task in macaque dlPFC. Blockade of 5-HT2A receptors resulted in reduced spatial tuning, whereas activation of these receptors caused increases in spatial tuning by either increasing activity for preferred target locations, and/or reducing activity for non-preferred target locations (Williams et al., 2002). Given the proposed link between spatial WM and spatial attention, we would speculate that similar effects will be found in top-down attention tasks in dlPFC (and possibly the FEF). However, it is equally possible that very different effects occur when using an attention task, as the 5-HT 1A/2A agonist psilocybin impairs attentional tracking in humans, without affecting spatial WM. The former was interpreted as resulting from reduced ability to suppress distracting stimuli, rather than reduced attentional capacity per se (Carter et al., 2005).

Reduced attentional performance is also seen under other conditions. Systemic injection of a 5-HT2A agonist in rats results in reduced accuracy (attention) and increased impulsivity (response disinhibition) in 5-CSRTT (Koskinen et al., 2000). However, direct infusion of a 5-HT2A/C antagonist into rodent mPFC only reduced impulsivity, without affecting attention (Passetti et al., 2003). This discrepancy could indicate that effects on attention/accuracy are induced by 5-HT action in areas different from mPFC. Blockage of 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptors offsets the 5-CSRTT performance deficits seen when NMDA receptors are blocked (Carli et al., 2006, Ceglia et al., 2004). Despite this common effect on accuracy overall, the two receptor subtypes have dissociable functions in relation to attention (accuracy). 5-HT1A blockade improves accuracy by reducing NMDA receptor blockade-induced perseverance, whereas 5-HT2A blockade affected accuracy by reducing impulsivity. Based on this dissociation, it has been suggested that 5-HT2A receptors are critical to modulate attentional control of response inhibition (Aznar and Hervig, 2016).

A role of 5-HT in attentional processes has also been demonstrated in a reversal learning task. Reversal learning describes the phenomenon where subjects have to inhibit responses that are no longer rewarding, shift attention to alternative stimuli, which could be associated with reward, and evaluate the risk/benefit in responding to these novel stimuli. It requires cognitive flexibility and is often assessed using the Wisconsin card sorting test in human and non-human primates (Grant and Berg, 1948, Nakahara et al., 2002), or the attentional set shifting task in rodents (Kesner and Churchwell, 2011). The main anatomical area involved in reversal learning is the orbitofrontal cortex, with its projections to the medial and ventral striatum. Reversal learning requires adequate 5-HT levels, which helps updating of the value/utility of responding to novel (not previously rewarding) stimuli and allows inhibition of previously rewarded responses (Roberts, 2011). In addition to the orbitofrontal cortex, rodent mPFC (or primate dlPFC) are also involved in reversal learning, when extra-dimensional shifts or new stimulus reward association learning (a shift in attention) is required. Extradimensional shifting is improved by 5-HT2A receptor blockade (Passetti et al., 2003), or generally reduced 5-HT input to mPFC (dlPFC). Thus, 5-HT2A receptors in mPFC/dlPFC would be involved in attentional control, whereas 5-HT2A receptors in orbitofrontal cortex are involved in cognitive flexibility and reversal learning (Aznar and Hervig, 2016). Attentional control would, however, be affected by 5-HT2A in an indirect (or negative) manner, whereby low levels of 5-HT improve attention. Unsurprisingly, 5-HT depletion results in improved attentional control in humans (Scholes et al., 2007). Activation of 5-HT receptors results in increased distractibility (associated with reduced focus on recently rewarded items or behaviors) and in increased cognitive flexibility when reward contingencies have changed (Baker et al., 2011, Terry et al., 2005). This is reminiscent of the exploitation versus exploration functions that have been discussed in relation to NA, but by different mechanisms. Exploitation would be governed by low tonic 5-HT in mPFC and orbitofrontal cortex, whereas exploration would be induced when 5-HT levels are high in either area. Potential cellular mechanisms for this effect have been described by Tian et al. (2016). These authors report that 5-HT inhibits mouse layer 6 mPFC pyramidal cells through 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptors. This inhibition results in reduced activity in layer 5 interneurons, thereby increasing what the authors define as “noise” in the layer 5 output layers. A consequence thereof could be an overall reduced threshold to engage in “untested” exploratory behaviors, i.e., a form of exploration.

Overall, the above may fit the notion that 5-HT neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus contain information of the “state value” or “reward value” of the current situation (Roberts, 2011). However, the neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus encode positive as well as aversive future outputs (Bromberg-Martin et al., 2010, Li et al., 2016, Miyazaki et al., 2014), and these can even involve highly specific pathways (Marcinkiewcz et al., 2016). Thus, the coding of dorsal raphe 5-HT neurons appears more diverse than simply representing “reward value.”


Summary and Outlook

Here, we have reviewed the critical role played by neuromodulators (ACh, DA, NA, and 5HT) in mediating attention-induced modulations of neuronal activity at the single-neuron and circuit level. Similarities of action exist across these neuromodulators, such as the common existence of phasic versus tonic modes, with effects that follow U-shaped dose-response relationships, whereby too little or too much neuromodulator drive is detrimental to cognition. However, important differences between their actions also exist.


ACh

Arguably, the classical view is that neuromodulation of attention occurs via cholinergic mechanisms. Yet as we have reviewed, significant gaps in our knowledge exist regarding the specific roles of receptor and cell subtypes, release mechanisms, and local control thereof. At the single-neuron level, ACh mediates attention-induced rate changes that vary regarding their specific receptor involvement between lower (e.g., V1) and higher cortical areas (e.g., FEF). It will be important to delineate these differences in more detail for different excitatory and inhibitory cell types, at different levels of the cortical hierarchy. At the circuit level, ACh reduces rate variability and co-variability via enhanced gain and stabilized attractor dynamics, thereby improving population coding abilities. Behaviorally, stabilized attractors may reduce moment-to-moment distractibility as well as promoting longer-term task engagement.


DA

A role for DA in top-down spatial attention is supported by animal work, but ultimately receptor- and cell-type specificity requires further clarification. For example, the relative expression of D1 and D2 receptors in supragranular (derived from SN-DA neurons) versus infragranular (derived predominantly from VTA-DA neurons) layers of FEF is important for attention. The supragranular layers send feedback to V4 and passive infusion of D1, but not D2, agonists into FEF engendered attention-like modulations of V4 activity (e.g., increased firing rates; reduced rate variability). However, how D1 activation/blockade shapes attention feedback signals at the local level in FEF is currently unknown, and it is unclear whether these effects differ for tonic versus phasic release modes. Overall, these and other data support a view that DA signals arising from SN and terminating in supragranular layers of FEF allow specific local networks to strengthen feedback attention signals. Conversely, those arising from VTA and terminating in the infragranular layer of FEF are related to reward/prediction error signals and directly bias choice signals without necessarily affecting upstream processing.


NA

Despite the diffuse projection of the NA system to the cortex, NA influences a range of discrete cognitive processes (e.g., spatial specificity of WM signals) mediated by specificity in both the receptor subtypes and projections of the NA system. An overall increase in NA release at the cellular level decreases spontaneous activity and increases input-driven activity to salient (behaviorally relevant) stimuli, thereby enhancing signal. NA release modes also vary, whereby a low tonic, high phasic release enables animals to stay task focused and exploit existing (predictable) reward contingencies. How phasic release affects sensory processing, or attentional (feedback) and motor/choice planning (feedforward) signals in cortical areas will be an important area for future studies.


5-HT

Although the role of 5-HT in attention has been less intensively studied, varying levels of 5-HT do influence top-down attention and spatial WM. Some evidence for receptor level dissociation of function exits, with 5-HT1A blockade improving accuracy by reducing NMDA receptor blockade-induced perseverance, whereas 5-HT2A blockade affects accuracy by reducing impulsivity. Expression of 5-HT2A in mPFC/dlPFC appears involved in attentional control, whereas 5-HT2A receptors in orbitofrontal cortex are involved in cognitive flexibility and reversal learning. Current evidence suggest that attentional control is affected by 5-HT2A in an indirect (or negative) manner, whereby low levels of 5-HT would improve attention, by promoting task focus, whereas high 5-HT levels support disengagement.

Overall, this review highlights much greater functional and anatomical specialization in subcortical neuromodulator systems than previously argued. Neuronal subpopulations of the different neuromodulators appear to control separable aspects of attention. Their main role is to allow for enhanced flexibility of cortical coding. Thereby these neuromodulators configure how (and which) specific cortical areas affect behavior. This added flexibility and specificity is recapitulated within cortical layers of an area (e.g., D1 supragranular versus D2 infragranular layers within FEF). Further, as described for NA, specificity of receptor expression and thus neuromodulator influences even exist at the level of local layer 5 pyramidal cells, provided they differ in their output connectivity. Novel genetic tools that allow the tracing and interrogation of specific sub-circuits within these neuromodulator systems have provided invaluable insights at the single-cell, population, and behavioral level. These tools have mostly been employed in rodents, as cell-type-specific targeting is more advanced in these species than currently possible in non-human primates. However, progress is also being made in non-human primates to advance these tools. These advances should ultimately inform our understanding of human attention. Developing these techniques in non-human primates will be necessary because cell-type-specific expression of neuromodulator receptors can differ radically between rodents and primates (Disney and Reynolds, 2014). Innervation pattern can also differ. For example, the dopaminergic innervation of “attention areas” such as the parietal cortex differs radically between rodents and primates (Berger et al., 1991). Critically, the absence of a dlPFC homolog in rodents—a key area controlling attention and WM in primates—(Preuss, 1995) is yet another strong argument for the necessity of non-human primate research.

Important future insights into the mechanistic roles of neuromodulators can also be obtained from modeling studies (Dayan, 2012). Many of the models involved are based on architectures, which exhibit the described attractor dynamics and winner-take-all characteristics and have been successfully implemented, for example, to disentangle the mechanistic roles of muscarinic and nicotinic receptors on attentional bias in macaque V1 (Deco and Thiele, 2011).

Although the field eagerly awaits these advances, it is clear that the extant data refute the prevailing classical view that brainstem neuromodulator systems simply modulate global brain states. Rather, the emerging view is one in which receptor and cell-subtype-specific effects of neuromodulators influence the efficiency of large- and small-scale neuronal networks to instantiate the top-down control of attention.


The temporoparietal junction and awareness

Michael S A Graziano — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2018. PMC6007131, CC BY 4.0.

Visual attention and awareness can be experimentally separated. In a recent study (Webb et al., Cortical networks involved in visual awareness independently of visual attention. Proc Natl Acad USA 2016a;113:13923–8), we suggested that awareness was associated with activity in a set of cortical networks that overlap the temporoparietal junction. In a comment, Morales et al. (Measuring away an attentional confound? Neurosci Conscious 2017;3:doi:10.1093/nc/nix018) suggested that we had imperfectly controlled attention thereby jeopardizing the experimental logic. Though we agree that attention behaves differently in the presence and absence of awareness, we argue it is still possible to roughly equate the level of attention between aware and unaware conditions, and that an imbalance in attention probably does not explain our experimental results.

In 2016, my colleagues and I published an experiment that examined brain activity during a visual task (Webb et al. 2016a). We attempted to determine which networks in the human cortex were active in association with visual awareness. Participants were exposed to two conditions. In one, the participants reported being subjectively aware of a visual stimulus, whereas in the other, due to a 50 ms tweak to the timing of a mask, the same visual stimulus dropped beneath reportable awareness. We independently measured attention drawn to that stimulus, and found it similar between the two conditions. By manipulating awareness, while holding attention as constant as we could, we hoped to identify brain regions associated with awareness independently of attention. The results implicated specific cortical networks including parts of the fronto-parietal control network and the ventral attention network, both of which overlap the temporoparietal junction (TPJ).

Recently, Morales et al. (2017) published a critical commentary on our experiment. Here, I reply to the comment. I will not reply to every detail, but instead focus on the basic concern.

In essence, the concern is that equating attention between the two conditions is tricky. Though we measured attention at one time point (180 ms) after the stimulus onset, we did not measure other time points, and therefore left open the possibility that attention was not fully equated between the two conditions. Perhaps the activity, we obtained was caused by differing levels of attention rather than by differing levels of awareness.

I address three points.

First, it is important to note that the concern is legitimate. My colleagues and I were well aware, and readers should be aware, that equating attention between two conditions is approximate. For this reason, we addressed the issue in the supplementary material of our publication.

In that supplementary material, in a section called “attention confound,” we acknowledged that attention may not have been perfectly equated, and we examined whether a small imbalance in attention could have caused the pattern of results. To address the issue, we performed an additional analysis. We estimated how the amount of attention varied from subject to subject. For some participants, attention appeared to be greater in the aware condition. For others, attention was measured as greater in the unaware condition. We then asked whether this variance was related to the activity obtained in the networks of interest. We found no relationship. An imbalance of attention did not explain the activity in those brain regions.

My second point concerns a specific comment. Morales et al. suggested that our reaction-time measure of attention could have been supplemented. They stated that, “attentional effects can also be measured not in terms of reaction times but by target discrimination accuracy.” Yet we reported that discrimination accuracy was not significantly different between the aware and unaware conditions, again suggesting that overall attention was at least roughly comparable between the two trial types.

My third point concerns an earlier behavioral experiment. In that previous study (Webb et al. 2016b), we used a behavioral paradigm to manipulate awareness of a visual stimulus while measuring attention to the stimulus. We measured a time course of attention over a period of 590 ms after stimulus onset. The amount of attention varied over that time course. The fluctuations were significantly greater when the participants were unaware of the stimulus than when they were aware of it. We argued that awareness of a stimulus helps to stabilize attention on that stimulus, in accordance with our hypothesis that awareness acts as the internal control model for attention (Webb and Graziano 2015).

In their critique, Morales et al. correctly note that in our previous study, attention follows a different time course in the aware and the unaware conditions. They conclude that, therefore, by our own data, attention cannot be considered identical between the aware and unaware conditions, and thus in our brain imaging study, the two conditions cannot be considered to have balanced attention.

I appreciate the concern. Yes, it is impossible to make attention truly identical between the aware and the unaware conditions. However, as shown in Fig. 2A of our behavioral paper (Webb et al. 2016b), the overall amount of attention is similar between the aware and unaware conditions. The fluctuations are greater in the unaware case, but the overall magnitude averaged over the time course is roughly similar in the two conditions (it is not significantly different). It was precisely for that reason that we chose a follow-up study, transferring the same behavioral paradigm into the scanner to measure brain activity (Webb et al. 2016a). Since attention had been measured to be similar in overall magnitude between the two conditions, but awareness was starkly different, present in one condition and absent in the other, the paradigm provided an opportunity to test whether awareness might drive the activity of specific brain networks.

In a brain imaging study, because many trials are needed per condition, one cannot test very many conditions. Therefore, in our imaging study (Webb et al. 2016a), we sampled attention at one time point rather than measuring the entire time course. We had already measured the time course for the paradigm in our previous study (Webb et al. 2016b), and therefore a repeat demonstration was unnecessary. This choice of ours in the imaging study, to spot-test attention at only one time point, appears to be the crux of the critique against our experiment. However, since we had already established the time course in a previous study, the criticism seems to us more rhetorical than substantial.

At its heart, the concern raised by Morales et al. (2017) seems to be that in our behavioral paper, we argue that attention depends on awareness. Without awareness, the dynamics of attention change. Yet in our brain imaging experiment, we argue that we can find a network that is relatively associated with awareness, independently of attention. Thus Morales et al. find what they consider to be a contradiction. Are attention and awareness interdependent, or are they separable? How can they be both? To give an analogy: the motor cortex controls the arm—it helps to stabilize it and direct it. Yet I can still anatomically and functionally distinguish the brain from the arm. Though interacting, they are still separable elements of a larger system. To argue that they must be either interacting, or separable, but not both, is not valid. Just so, my colleagues and I proposed the provisional theory that the brain constructs awareness as an attention schema—a representation that monitors and to some extent predicts attention (Webb and Graziano 2015). That attention schema plays a crucial role in controlling attention. The two processes interact. Change one, and you change the other. And yet it should still be possible to look for separable anatomical bases for them. Keep one (attention) roughly the same, while varying the other (awareness) to one extreme or the other, and we find that a specific brain network is indicated (Webb et al. 2016a).

In conclusion, of course I agree that our brain imaging study is only one crack at the question, from one methodological angle, and no scientist should believe the story without convergent evidence. So far, at least some convergent evidence points to visual awareness associated with cortical networks that pass through the TPJ. In hemispatial neglect, damage to the TPJ classically causes a severe disruption of awareness (Vallar and Perani 1986). In brain imaging studies of visual awareness, the TPJ, especially its dorsal part, often shows robust activity even if it is not emphasized in the text of every paper (e.g. Lumer et al. 1998; Dehaene et al. 2001; Naghavi and Nyberg 2005; Carmel et al. 2006; Persaud et al. 2011; Bor and Seth 2012; Cortese et al. 2016). However, I caution against over-interpreting specific brain areas. A network approach is more realistic (Igelström and Graziano 2017). I stand by the argument that, thus far, increasing evidence points to the TPJ as an important network node related to awareness, both one’s own awareness and attributing the property of awareness to others, without undercutting arguments for other nodes.


On ways to overcome the magical capacity limit of working memory

Zsolt Turi, Ivan Alekseichuk, Walter Paulus — PLoS Biology, 2018. PMC5929568, CC BY 4.0.

The ability to simultaneously process and maintain multiple pieces of information is limited. Over the past 50 years, observational methods have provided a large amount of insight regarding the neural mechanisms that underpin the mental capacity that we refer to as “working memory.” More than 20 years ago, a neural coding scheme was proposed for working memory. As a result of technological developments, we can now not only observe but can also influence brain rhythms in humans. Building on these novel developments, we have begun to externally control brain oscillations in order to extend the limits of working memory.

Brain rhythms or neural oscillations are periodic fluctuations of the electric fields in the cerebral cortex. Neurons, temporally synchronized groups of neurons creating neural assemblies, and brain networks operate in a rhythmic and synchronized fashion. Network oscillations, the aggregate oscillatory activity of a large number of neural assemblies, provide the substrate for information processing and facilitate the local-to-global communication crucial for cognition. Working memory depends on the dynamic oscillatory interaction of brain-wide neural networks. Although correlational studies already suggested that the interaction of neural oscillations play an important role in the working memory capacity limit, Wolinski and colleagues tested this proposition by using a noninvasive electrical brain stimulation technique in order to modulate rather than just observe neural oscillations.

Neural oscillations arise at different frequencies, from the ultra-slow (<1 Hz), over delta (1–3 Hz), theta (3–7 Hz), alpha (8–12 Hz), beta (13–25 Hz), to gamma (>25 Hz) frequency bands. Slower and faster rhythms interact by cross-frequency coupling. The best-known type of such coupling is the phase–amplitude cross-frequency coupling, in which the phase of lower frequency oscillations—e.g., the theta rhythm—correlates with the amplitude of higher frequencies—e.g., the gamma rhythm.

Working memory refers to the ability to encode, maintain, and manipulate multiple pieces of information for a short period in a changing environment. The underlying neural mechanisms must satisfy two seemingly opposing criteria. They should concurrently store new sensory inputs while preventing new items from interfering with already existing memory items. It has been hypothesized that theta–gamma phase–amplitude coupling provides the necessary neural coding mechanism for maintaining working memory and preventing interference.

A core postulate of the theta–gamma neural code model is that during working memory maintenance, each cycle in the gamma rhythm encodes an individual memory item. The theta–gamma neural coding scheme organizes “item-specific” gamma cycles in such a way that each gamma cycle has a certain “position” at a specific phase of the theta cycle, as shown by electrophysiological recording both from rodent hippocampi and from intracranial electrodes in humans. One important assumption of the model is that the frequency of the theta oscillation determines the limit of the working memory’s capacity. Because the gamma subcycles utilize unique phase codes to represent discrete memory items, the lower the theta frequency is, the more gamma subcycles it can host. Therefore, accelerating or slowing down the theta oscillation should result in a lower or higher working memory capacity, respectively.

This intriguing hypothesis begs the use of interventional methods to directly modulate neural activity and study its effect on behavior. Transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS) is a noninvasive neuromodulation technique in which a weak, oscillating electric current is applied to the neocortex via skin electrodes. The tACS-generated oscillating electric field can modulate and entrain the ongoing network oscillations in a frequency-specific manner. In vitro, in vivo, and human experiments have demonstrated the feasibility of tACS for manipulating the phase, the power, and the rhythm of neural oscillations when appropriate stimulation parameters (i.e., frequency, intensity, and anatomical location) are used. Single- and cross-frequency tACS, together with electrophysiological and neuroimaging methods, offer an unprecedented opportunity to study network oscillations and their possible role in cognition, such as the role of theta–gamma neural code in working memory.

In the present issue of PLOS Biology, Wolinski and colleagues approached the role of the theta–gamma neural code by stimulating healthy participants with single-frequency tACS in the theta frequency range while the volunteers performed a visuospatial working memory task. In this paradigm, participants memorized 2 arrays of colored squares presented on the left or the right side of the screen. Participants were requested to fixate on the center of the screen while their attention was covertly deployed toward the cued array of colored squares on the left or the right side of the screen. The number of squares in each array varied between 4 and 6. This number is somewhat lower than the classical capacity limit of working memory, described by Miller in his seminal paper to be 7 ± 2 chunks. However, the capacity limit for visual working memory items is somewhat lower, ranging between 3 and 5 items. At the beginning of each trial, the participants were shown an arrow pointing to the left or the right side of the screen, which informed them as to which array they should attend. Two memory arrays were then presented sequentially. During the first presentation, the participants were to memorize the color of the squares. The arrays disappeared and were then shown a second time. Here, the participants had to indicate whether the squares remained the same during the second presentation or if the colors had changed. The authors used the K value measure of visual working memory capacity, which is unbiased to the working memory span. The K value is the difference between the observed hit and false alarm rates, which is multiplied by the number or items to memorize. To test the hypothesis that a lower theta frequency enabled more gamma cycles to be nested than a higher frequency, Wolinski and colleagues applied single-frequency tACS at 4 or 7 Hz. They argued that if tACS entrained ongoing theta oscillation, tACS at 4 Hz would allow the theta cycle to nest-in more item-specific gamma subcycles than tACS at 7 Hz. This is exactly what the authors found; slow theta tACS increased, while the faster theta tACS reduced the visuospatial working memory capacity. Further confirmation for the hypothesis was the observation that the modulation of working memory capacity was spatially specific for presentation in the hemifield contralateral to the stimulated hemisphere. The electrode montage and the resulting electric field also played a role; the effects only occurred with a right supraorbital return electrode but not with a return electrode positioned over the vertex. That is, Wolinski and colleagues only found behavioral effects of tACS when they targeted a relevant node of the working memory network specifically involved in visuospatial working memory tasks, while the control montage had no impact on the behavior.

The study by Wolinski and colleagues raises questions that will lead to new insights into the functional role of neural oscillations. We can generalize the present discussion and envision some future developments. Under their assumption that tACS at the theta frequency does not affect the speed of the gamma rhythm itself, the 4 Hz theta should accommodate almost twice as many gamma cycles as the 7 Hz theta and thus almost double the working memory capacity. However, the authors found only a 7% difference in working memory capacity between the stimulation conditions. The question is why working memory capacity did not increase to a greater extent with 4 Hz tACS. The behavioral impact of the slow and fast theta tACS in Wolinski and colleagues’ study may be explained by the fact that neural assemblies utilize two functionally separable processing periods. In the so-called duty cycle period, neurons send the information to the downstream neurons, but neurons in the duty cycle are less sensitive to incoming information. In the relaxation period, on the other hand, neuronal assemblies do not transfer neural information but are in a sensitive state to be perturbed by the incoming neural activity. This feature, which is reminiscent of the so-called relaxation oscillators, enables synchronization of the activity of a large number of neural assemblies by providing a predictable time window for neural information transfer. However, it also reduces the time window for perturbation by means of external electrical stimulation, which is applied traditionally in a continuous fashion. Given that the ratio of the duty and the relaxation cycles in the theta cycle is unknown, the behavioral results of Wolinski and colleagues will inspire future experimental work to improve the temporal correspondence of the external stimulation relative to the ongoing network oscillations. Future studies may also test the event-related forms of tACS, in which the stimulation is applied for a short period of time, synchronized with a particular working memory event. Because the neural coding scheme during working memory encoding and during the maintenance periods requires two functionally separable modes, event-related tACS is a promising way to test the functional role of different oscillatory modes.

In their study, Wolinski and colleagues assumed that externally applied alternating current resonated with a brain rhythm oscillating at approximately the same frequency as the applied tACS, which suggests that the brain rhythm can be forced to accelerate or slow down to achieve a full match. Although the significant and opposite behavioral effects of stimulation with slow versus fast theta tACS support the entrainment hypothesis, the precise electrophysiological mechanisms of the neural entrainment effect require magnetoencephalogram (MEG) and electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings in future experiments. Progress toward this goal has been hindered by the fact that despite the initially promising developments, it is still technically challenging to record M/EEG during tACS. As an alternative approach, artifacts may be reduced by using rhythmically applied short pulses, which induce short artifacts, unlike continuous sinusoidal waveforms. Nevertheless, without simultaneous tACS–M/EEG recordings, the exact degree to which the stimulation protocol in Wolinski and colleagues’ study altered the frequency of the natural theta rhythm has yet to be studied in future work.

The intriguing behavioral results from Wolinski and colleagues lead us to the question whether it is possible to tailor the stimulation parameters to each individual theta frequency. The authors conclude that biasing the theta rhythm toward a lower frequency (4 Hz) increases the working memory capacity, while biasing toward the faster theta (7 Hz) reduces it. But is a further reduction of the theta frequency even more beneficial for the working memory or other cognitive processes? From a system-level perspective, the various brain rhythms cannot exist too close to each other or to each other’s harmonics. This might, otherwise, create an overlap that could compromise the phase coding role of neural oscillations. Oscillations that are too slow could also impair the ability of the brain to react to the external stimuli in a rapid enough manner. To answer this question, a more “fine-grained” examination of the theta range, which spans from 3 to 8 Hz, will undoubtedly be of interest. Finally, direct manipulations not only with theta but with theta and gamma rhythms would strengthen the arguments in favor of the theta–gamma model. According to the Arnold tongue model of oscillatory entrainment, frequency entrainment depends both on the proximity of the stimulation frequency to the individual’s rhythm and on the effective stimulation dose actually reaching the neural tissues. This dose varies due to interindividual differences in head anatomy. Thus, some participants respond to the standard low-intensity stimulation better than the others. An individualized approach promises to improve the effectiveness of tACS.

Based on the computational modeling results performed on a template head model, Wolinski and colleagues targeted a relevant node of the working memory network that is involved in visuospatial working memory. It remains to be seen whether individualized simulations of the spatial distribution of the resulting electric field can further optimize the behavioral effects of the stimulation. Inspired by the behavioral results of Wolinski and colleagues, future studies may also explore whether network stimulation between hemispheres or between lobes can further improve the behavioral impact of the stimulation.

A further perspective for tACS that excites many researchers is its translation into clinical practice. From the biomedical viewpoint, transferring it from bench to bedside in a patient population would require a deeper understanding of tACS-evoked electrophysiological effects and its dose and frequency responses. From the cognitive viewpoint, the main focus of Wolinski and colleagues’ work was directed to the visual working memory capacity. It therefore remains to be seen whether the theta stimulation has other beneficial or detrimental behavioral effects and, if so, whether one can avoid inducing detrimental effects while keeping the beneficial ones with an individualized stimulation.

Modern cognitive neuroscience and computational psychiatry attribute numerous cognitive functions in normal and pathological states to the neural oscillations. In particular, theta rhythm has been associated with goal-directed behavior, including working memory, attention, and decision-making. The theoretical frameworks, such as the theta–gamma neural code, move the research focus from the individual brain rhythms to their hierarchy and interplay. The correlation between the well-known capacity limit of working memory and the number of theta-nested gamma subcycles has attracted the attention of many investigators. By investigating the causal role of theta oscillations in working memory capacity, Wolinski and colleagues are making a thought-provoking contribution that inspires manifold future studies.


Human white matter and knowledge representation

Franco Pestilli — PLoS Biology, 2018. PMC5940236, CC BY 4.0.

Understanding how knowledge is represented in the human brain is a fundamental challenge in neuroscience. To date, most of the work on this topic has focused on knowledge representation in cortical areas and debated whether knowledge is represented in a distributed or localized fashion. Fang and colleagues provide evidence that brain connections and the white matter supporting such connections might play a significant role. The work opens new avenues of investigation, breaking through disciplinary boundaries across network neuroscience, computational neuroscience, cognitive science, and classical lesion studies.

Advancing neuroscientific understanding requires combining experimental data analysis and visualization with theoretical models along three main research axes: brain structure, function, and human behavior. Likely, such understanding will necessitate integration across methodologies, measurement types, and scales, spanning from the micro- (genes’ and proteins’ structure and function) and meso- (neuronal assemblies and local cortical circuitry) to the macroscale (brain cortical folding and white matter tracts). Neuroimaging is the primary method of measurement in living human brains, spanning across all three primary axes and at least two of the measurement scales.


Evidence for distributed and localized semantic knowledge representation

Critical to understanding brain and behavior is clarifying the principles of human knowledge representation. A plethora of scientific findings from neuroimaging, lesion studies, and computational modeling has sparked debates on the degree to which functions and knowledge are localized to specific regions or distributed across multiple regions of the brain cortex [–18]

Although this commentary is not meant to serve as an exhaustive review, it bears mentioning that on the one hand, since the early work of Broca, Penfield, Meynert, and Wernicke, among others, it has been shown that multiple regions in the human cortex are necessary for or have selective responses to sensory, motor, perceptual, linguistic, or abstract cognitive functions. Indeed, as of today, the dominant model for the representation of semantic knowledge in the human cortex proposes the involvement of multiple spatially localized, functionally specialized but interconnected brain regions. Several regions of the cortex have been reported to respond preferentially to objects, such as animate or inanimate artifacts, and to motor planning for object-centered actions, among others. Over the years, this model has received substantial evidence from multiple measurement methodologies, both from lesion studies as well as from neuroimaging.

On the other hand, perhaps following the legacy of Flourens and Lashley, much work has been reported that is consistent with the existence of distributed representations spanning across multiple cortical regions sharing some degree of functional overlap. Indeed, human knowledge could, in principle, be distributed dynamically and ubiquitously throughout the cerebral cortex, even though some regions of the cortex might respond preferentially to specific categories of actions or stimuli. In fact, compelling reports have measured semantic knowledge signals distributed across the entire human cortex. Using functional neuroimaging and advanced computational methods, it has been shown that cortical signals map semantically neighboring concepts to spatially neighboring regions. Furthermore, the semantic representation of the cortical signals can change relative to the allocation of attention during behavioral tasks at hand. These results suggest that the space of semantic knowledge could, in principle, be mapped smoothly and dynamically across the human brain cortex. shows an example of the spatial distribution of brain responses to semantic categories; panel C shows the corresponding organization of the semantic knowledge. Color clusters demonstrate continuous but segregated distributions of semantic knowledge. The results can also be taken as an indication that multiple signals could coexist within each brain area. Dynamic signal multiplexing such as the one reported by has been previously demonstrated in the primate brain. The widespread distribution of semantic signals across the human cortex suggests leveraging the network neuroscience paradigm. Critical to such a goal is understanding the relation between semantic representation and the pattern of structural brain connections and the white matter tissue within.


Mapping disconnection syndromes via representational dissimilarity

The work of Fang and colleagues attempts to relate semantic knowledge—the meaning of words describing objects, things, or actions, such as “dog,” “the sky,” or “travel”—to the structural brain substrates in the human white matter network to demonstrate that semantic representation is not limited to cortical regions but also extends into the connecting white matter pathways. The authors use a clever cocktail of machine learning and computational methods, combining more classical brain lesion data in a group of patients to predict the patients’ object-naming performance. The pattern of brain lesions was mapped to white matter connections as defined in an atlas. After that, a support vector machine classifier and representational dissimilarity analysis—the inverse of the correlation between brain and behavioral measurements—were used to predict patients’ object-naming performance from the brain lesion pattern data in each white matter connection. In addition, the authors mapped the semantic similarity of a large set of objects in an independent set of control subjects. This mapping allowed them to represent the rich semantic knowledge space of the objects using representational dissimilarity, and such representation was necessary to connect brain connections to behavior. Finally, the two measurement domains for brain and behavior obtained with different data modalities were combined. The authors computed the correlation (Brain and behavior) between the object-naming dissimilarity matrices for each white matter connection collected on the patients’ brain data (Brain), with the behavioral dissimilarity matrix describing the objects’ semantic space collected in the control subjects (Behavior). The procedure allowed the authors to characterize the potential involvement of each connection in the semantic knowledge representation.

This approach is a clever extension of previous methods using representational dissimilarity analysis on functional neuroimaging data that can be thought of as a modern, computational incarnation of the classical disconnection syndrome analysis. The authors identified a series of connections likely to contribute to communicating information relevant for semantic knowledge (see Fig 3 of Fang and colleagues). Several of these connections appear to project to the temporal lobe and map across regions spanning multiple cortical lobes. This is consistent with previous reports on the role of the temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes in language processing, memory, and knowledge representation. Importantly, the large extent of connections and the areas to which they project, speak to the models introduced in. shows a map of some of the principal cortical regions whose connections are identified by Fang and colleagues as relevant. This figure was reconstructed for illustration purposes only. To do so, the regions touched by the connections reported by Fang and colleagues were highlighted in different colors. The figure also shows some of the major known human white matter tracts. These tracts were not reported by Fang and colleagues but were segmented here for illustration purposes using open services and data available at brainlife.io—a modern open cloud services platform for brain analysis—and established methods for human white matter mapping. Whereas Fang and colleagues focus on brain connections, in the next section, we propose a series of white matter tracts potentially involved in knowledge representation.


A proposal for white matter tracts potentially involved in semantic knowledge representation

A large body of literature supports the view that long-range brain connections wrapped in myelin sheaths are often bundled together. These bundles of coated axonal projections are generally referred to as white matter tracts or fasciculi. Fang and colleagues studied brain connections by looking at the cortical terminations of the connections passing through the lesion areas. Their connectivity analyses did not identify, however, which of the known human white matter tracts are involved in the measured behaviors. Yet in principle, this information would be possible and important to obtain because such tracts are highly studied and could provide valuable knowledge for understanding brain disease and even for planning and guiding surgical procedures.

A full such analysis of the white matter tracts shared by the reported connections would require substantial additional work and data well beyond that by Fang and colleagues. Nonetheless, I performed some qualitative analyses and attempted to propose some candidate white matter tracts that might be relevant to the findings of Fang and colleagues. shows some of the major white matter tracts whose terminations are known to reside within the cortical regions significantly involved in knowledge representation as reported by Fang and colleagues (see their). Given the pattern of connectivity identified, it is likely that at least the inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus, the arcuate fasciculus, the inferior longitudinal fasciculus, the uncinate fasciculus, and the superior lateral fasciculus could be involved in semantic knowledge representation. Additional white matter tracts could, in principle, also include the vertical occipital fasciculus and the posterior arcuate. This is, inevitably, a large number of large white matter tracts. It suggests that a complex behavior, such as knowledge representation, might be implemented by the coordinated activity of multiple brain areas communicating via several of the major brain highways. Given the large-scale involvement of distal cortical areas in human semantic knowledge representation, clarifying the role of the white matter tracts could become critical in understanding the fundamental mechanisms of knowledge representation because of their significance in large-scale brain communication. Importantly, understanding brain communication would inform clinical diagnoses with the potential to clarify the relation between the brain and psychiatric diseases. Fang and colleagues bring a modern, computational approach to one of the classic patient literatures on the disconnection syndromes that is foundational to our understanding of many types of brain disease.

Understanding the human brain is a priority for the scientific community not only because it defines us as species but because psychiatric diseases have profound effects on society. For example, just in Europe, yearly estimates suggest that up to 200 million individuals may be impacted by brain disease, affecting up to 25% of the European population over the course of their lifetime. Such impact accounts for up to 800 billion euros in annual costs, representing nearly 38% of the European gross domestic product. These estimates may, unfortunately, be destined to rise because of the steady aging of the European population. The statistics for Europe are just a reflection of a worldwide phenomenon, highlighting the urgent need for better understanding of the human brain. Computational neuroimaging provides some of the most promising approaches to address such profound societal needs.

We are, in many ways, still in the early stages of understanding the role of human white matter in knowledge representation. More generally, both the structure and functional role of white matter are poorly understood and still reside within the least explored side of brain science. Indeed, only recently have we become aware of the critical role that white matter plays in establishing successful, healthy trajectories across long-term life events such as development and learning and in the aging brain. The properties of white matter tissue within the major white matter tracts have been shown to be associated with human cognitive, perceptual, and emotional abilities and to be critical for a healthy brain. Yet much more research will be needed to understand the human white matter.

I like to think about the role of myelin and white matter in the brain as that of a tuning mechanism for a musical instrument. The whole orchestra can be in the theater ready to play a concert, but the performance will fall short unless all instruments are well tuned. The white matter acts as that tuning mechanism that permits the symphony of the brain to attain its most masterful form. Our understanding of brain function will be incomplete without understanding the significance of white matter tissue organization and the pattern of connections it supports. The work of Fang and colleagues helps us move forward by proposing new ways to understand the human brain and cognition. Their results suggest that if knowledge is widely distributed across the cortex, then disruptions to a subset of connections can lead to altered semantic tuning, even though most of the knowledge representations distributed across the cortex would remain intact. Much work will be needed to relate the properties of white matter tissue organization to human knowledge representation, and this avenue of investigation is an exciting and important one.


Brain–computer interface use is a skill that user and system acquire together

Dennis J McFarland, Jonathan R Wolpaw — PLoS Biology, 2018. PMC6044535, CC BY 4.0.

A brain–computer interface (BCI) is a computer-based system that acquires, analyzes, and translates brain signals into output commands in real time. Perdikis and colleagues demonstrate superior performance in a Cybathlon BCI race using a system based on “three pillars”: machine learning, user training, and application. These results highlight the fact that BCI use is a learned skill and not simply a matter of “mind reading.”

A brain–computer interface (BCI) is a computer-based system that acquires, analyzes, and translates brain signals into output commands in real time. BCIs are distinctive in that they do not use the brain’s normal output pathways of peripheral nerves and muscles. BCI studies have focused mainly on restoring communication and control to people paralyzed by chronic neuromuscular disorders, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), brainstem stroke, or high-level spinal cord injury. Most of these studies have been demonstrations of proof of principle with able-bodied users. Long-term independent use of BCIs for communication or control by individuals who can actually benefit from them is limited to a handful of case reports and one group study.

One prominent class of BCIs use sensorimotor rhythms (SMRs). SMRs are oscillations (i.e., mu [8–12 Hz] and beta [18–30 Hz]) in electroencephalographic (EEG) activity recorded over sensorimotor cortices; they change in amplitude with movement, imagined movement, or preparation for movement. People can also learn through a training protocol to increase or decrease SMR amplitude and can use this control to move a computer cursor or operate another device. Furthermore, they can learn to use several different SMRs to control movement in multiple dimensions simultaneously and to support sequential mouse-like control.

The performance of BCIs that use SMRs (as well as that of BCIs that use cortical neurons) improves with training. Their usage is in large part a skill that is acquired through practice. The BCI user learns to encode his/her intent in brain signal features (e.g., SMRs) that the BCI can record, extract, and translate into output commands. Thus, BCI operation entails the effective cooperation of two adaptive controllers: the user, who seeks to encode his/her intent in brain signals that the BCI can recognize; and the BCI, which adapts to recognize these signals and translate them into the intended output commands.

Many BCI studies have largely ignored the user-training component of BCI operation. They have focused almost exclusively on machine learning (e.g., on the BCI learning how to recognize the brain signals associated with particular types of motor imagery). This popular trend probably results from an emphasis on the inadequate notion that BCI users are simply executing pre-existing cognitive tasks such as motor imagery.


Box 1. BCI use as an acquired skill

It is often assumed that the way to train users with a sensorimotor rhythm (SMR)-based BCI is to ask them to generate specific mental states through motor imagery. Different BCI commands are often linked to different imagery (e.g., imagine hand movement to move the cursor up and foot movement to move it down). However, as the user’s SMR control improves, and particularly when users advance to controlling multiple dimensions, users tend to abandon the use of imagery. While motor imagery may provide a logical and effective starting point for user training, it becomes unnecessary and may even be an impediment as training progresses. For example, Kober and colleagues found that those subjects who reported using no specific mental strategy after 10 SMR training sessions showed improved performance. In contrast, subjects reporting various mental strategies after 10 training sessions showed no improvement. These results suggest that successful SMR control after extended training involves implicit learning mechanisms. Thus, SMR-based BCI control after extended training resembles typical motor performance in that it tends to become automatic (i.e., implicit) with practice. Indeed, studies in animals show that BCI control involves plasticity in corticostriatal systems typically involved in motor control. Viewing SMR control as similar to other forms of motor control suggests using principles of motor learning in designing SMR-based BCI applications and in training people to use them. Motor learning involves both explicit and implicit processes, which have different characteristics. Explicit instructions can interfere with implicit processes, particularly in well-trained people.

In contrast, the article by Perdikis and colleagues in this issue illustrates the importance of recognizing and facilitating both adaptive aspects of BCI operation: adaptation by the user and adaptation by the BCI. They describe their SMR-based BCI training of two people with tetraplegia to compete in the Cybathlon BCI race; these two users went on to dominate the competition. The authors ascribe this success to a mutual learning approach that gives equal importance to “three pillars”: machine learning, user training, and application. They note that the other entries in the Cybathlon relied predominately on machine learning. They assert that their success supports the view that “BCI is a skill to be learned.”

As noted above, the fact that BCI use is a skill has been emphasized previously, and Perdikis and colleagues acknowledge that their conclusions are limited by the fact that they are based on an uncontrolled study of only two individuals. Nevertheless, their study is distinctive and notable because the BCI users were severely disabled and, most important, because it reports their performance in a highly competitive and stressful setting (rather than simply in a protected laboratory environment). Given these considerations, the results provide impressive new evidence of the effectiveness of a mutual learning approach.

One of the users in the Perdikis and colleagues study had the best overall performance but did not do well (i.e., “choked”) in the final competition. This finding may illustrate an important feature of skilled performance: the focus of attention can be critical. Studies of motor performance show that an external focus of attention to the outcome of an action results in performance that is superior to that associated with an internal focus on the mechanics of the action. Indeed, Schucker and colleagues report that individuals who choked under pressure reported greater attention to the details of their movements (i.e., allocation of attention to the different body parts that were involved in movement execution). It may be the case that this BCI user was a victim of an internal focus of attention. Ultimately, the effectiveness of various strategies for BCI control should clarify the nature of this type of skill and lead to methods for improving user performance.

Perdikis and colleagues also discuss the difficult problem of mutual learning: the ongoing adaptive interaction of the user’s brain, which produces the signals measured by the BCI, and the BCI itself, which translates these signals into commands. Although there has been considerable work on the design of controllers that involve a single adaptive element, coadaptation in BCI design represents an important new challenge.

Future BCI studies would do well to consider the three pillars of mutual learning stressed by Perdikis and colleagues. More emphasis on user learning and application design are likely to move this exciting area of research forward. The ultimate goal should be the development of fast and accurate BCI systems that can be reliably operated by the individuals with severe neuromuscular disabilities who can benefit from their use.


Funding Statement

National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering of the National Institutes of Health (grant number 1P41EB018783). The funder had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.


Phase-coding memories in mind

Nicole Hakim, Edward K Vogel — PLoS Biology, 2018. PMC6133377, CC BY 4.0.

Temporarily holding information in mind is an important part of many cognitive processes, such as reasoning and language. The amount of information that can be actively held “in mind” at any time is greatly limited—research suggests that we can only actively hold three or four pieces of information at once. A central question in cognitive neuroscience is how a system comprised of billions of neurons can actively maintain such a limited amount of information. A new study published in this issue of PLOS Biology by Bahramisharif and colleagues provides significant insights into this question.


Introduction

The human brain is a powerful cognitive tool that has given rise to exceptional accomplishments: the development of life-saving vaccines, the establishment of civilizations, and the exploration of the moon. Our brains can store what seems to be a nearly infinite amount of information that we have learned over a lifetime, and we use this acquired knowledge to construct a coherent sense of the world around us. Despite these exceptional capabilities, the human cognitive system is greatly restricted in terms of how much information can be actively held “in mind” at a given moment. That is, despite the general feeling that we have awareness of much of our immediate environment, we have access to only a tiny sliver of it—sampling the physical world around us in bite-sized amounts of information from only three or four objects at a time. This “working memory” system allows us to temporarily hold information in a readily accessible state so that we can utilize it to perform complex cognitive tasks, such as reasoning and language. It is often considered to be the “mental workspace” for thinking. It is also a primary source of variation across humans in overall cognitive ability. An individual’s working memory capacity is a stable trait that is a strong predictor of his or her fluid intelligence, language skills, and scholastic achievement. One central question in cognitive neuroscience is how a system comprised of billions of neurons with trillions of connections can manage to maintain only three or four pieces of information at any point in time. In this issue of PLOS Biology, a new study by Bahramisharif and colleagues takes us one significant step closer to understanding how information in working memory is coded in brain activity and potentially why it is so limited.


A forest of heterogeneous neurons

Revealing the mechanics of working memory at the neural level has been a vexing challenge for cognitive neuroscience. On the one hand, there is abundant evidence showing persistent neural activity related to performance on working memory tasks. Many neurons in prefrontal and posterior parietal regions show sustained firing during the retention period for stimuli that match the selectivity of the cell, often referred to as delay activity. On the other hand, however, is decades of research showing that the responses of individual neurons that contribute to working memory performance are highly heterogeneous in terms of both selectivity and time course. Some neurons show sustained firing, while others show bursts of activity at seemingly random moments during the retention period. This heterogeneity of inputs to the system greatly complicates any attempts to establish a coherent memory coding scheme. However, the examination of single-neuron activity may provide too narrow of a view to determine how a large-scale brain-wide system, like working memory, operates. Instead, significant progress has been made when considering activity that is pooled across many heterogeneous individual neurons, giving rise to a “population-level” response. These population codes are well suited to accommodate massively heterogeneous inputs and yet still provide a stable and persistent signal that is suitable to guide working memory maintenance.


Phase code model of working memory

When large groups of neurons fire together, they can create rhythmic electrical patterns. These neural oscillations can occur in multiple frequencies bands, including gamma (25–100 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), and alpha (8–12 Hz) rhythms. This oscillatory activity is thought to facilitate communication between different areas of the brain and has been proposed to play a central role in the maintenance of working memory representations. For example, previous research has suggested that gamma oscillations integrate individual features of memoranda held in working memory. From this view, gamma helps to link together the various features of an object by integrating activity from several populations of neurons, each representing a given feature (e.g., color, orientation, position, etc.) by having them rhythmically fire together at that frequency. Additionally, theta and alpha oscillations have been shown to track allocation of attention and to underlie attentional and executive coordination of sensory information. Oscillations at these frequencies have additionally been shown to modulate neuronal excitability by controlling neuronal firing, which could influence information held in working memory. While this neural synchronization proposal may provide an elegant solution to how the features of an object are bound together through coordinated firing patterns, it raises an even more important question: how can we hold multiple objects in memory at the same time? That is, how can multiple objects be represented in the same frequency band without accidentally confusing which feature goes with which object? One potential solution has been proposed by the Lisman/Idiart/Jensen (LIJ) model of cortical phase coding.

Oscillations at different frequencies often interact with each other in various ways. One common way is referred to as phase amplitude coupling in which the amplitude of a high-frequency oscillation is modulated as a function of the phase of a lower frequency oscillation. Previous work has shown that phase amplitude coupling happens throughout the brain, including in the hippocampus, basal ganglia, and neocortex. The LIJ model of cortical phase coding proposes that gamma and theta/alpha oscillations interact to maintain multiple object representations simultaneously by segregating them in different parts of the phase of the low-frequency wave. Specifically, individual objects held in working memory are represented by unique bursts in the gamma frequency band that occur in line with different moments of the theta/alpha band. For example, one object may be represented in a gamma burst that is coincident with the peak of the theta wave, while another object may coincide with the trough of the wave. Thus, multiple objects can be coded simultaneously without confusion because they are each represented in distinct portions of phase space. An exciting implication of this model is that it naturally proposes a potential explanation of why working memory is so limited to begin with. That is, it clearly articulates which neural resource actually limits working memory: phase space. There are only a certain number of distinct gamma bursts that can fit within a single cycle of theta/alpha, which sets a potential limit for how many representations can be kept separated at once. When more items are attempted to be stored, the representations overlap in phase space, which results in confusion errors. While the LIJ phase coding model is compelling and provides a clear explanation of capacity limits, obtaining empirical evidence for this model has been challenging. This is, in part, because gamma activity is difficult to measure from scalp-based electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) methods. The skull and scalp are essentially low-pass filters that greatly limit our observations of high-frequency activity, such as gamma.


Evidence for phase code model of working memory

One of the first studies to provide evidence in favor of phase-dependent neuronal coding was conducted with population recordings in the prefrontal cortex of monkeys. In this study, the monkeys were presented with a sequence of two images that they had to remember over a short delay. Following this delay, three images appeared on the screen; one was a novel image and the other two were the images from the beginning of the trial. The monkeys’ task was to look at the image that was presented first within the sequence. This task required that the monkeys remember both the images and the sequence in which they were presented. They found that the two remembered images were represented in distinct locations in phase space. Additionally, the image that was presented first in the sequence was located earlier in phase space. This study provided some of the first evidence that individual objects can be represented at distinct phases in an oscillation; however, it did not show that different frequency oscillations interact to maintain information in working memory.

A new, exciting study by Bahramisharif and colleagues (2018) in this issue of PLOS Biology extends these findings to recordings in the human brain and finds evidence in support of the LIJ model of phase coupling. Individuals who have epilepsy that is not responding to traditional forms of treatment often undergo surgery in which electrocorticography (eCoG) grids are implanted on the surface of their brain. Medically, these eCoG grids are used to determine the locus of their seizure activity. However, when patients give consent, they can also volunteer to participate in scientific studies in which electrical activity on the surface of their brain can be recorded while they perform cognitive tasks. In this new study by Bahramisharif and colleagues (2018), they recorded electrical activity from 15 patients with eCoG grids implanted in their occipital and temporal lobes.

While recording activity from these eCoG grids, Bahramisharif and colleagues presented the patients with serial sequences of three random letters that they had to remember over a blank delay. They were immediately presented with a single letter, and they had to determine whether that letter was part of the original memory sequence. They examined neural activity at “letter-selective” cortical sites, which are areas that show dissociable patterns of activity for individual letters. Previous research has illustrated that the amplitude of gamma activity, which is linked to theta oscillations, can distinguish the identity of a currently viewed letter. In these “letter-selective” cortical sites, Bahramisharif and colleagues found that each of the three letters were encoded as bursts of gamma activity at distinct positions in the phase space of the theta/alpha band. Additionally, the position of each item in the phase space depended on the position in the list when the item was presented. For example, if patients were presented with the sequence “Q, D, R,” the “Q” would be encoded in an earlier part of the phase space than the “D” and the “R.” Thus, the phase coding itself provided a cue regarding the temporal order of the memory stimuli. These results provide clear evidence that individual items can be represented at distinct phases in an oscillation in the human brain. Given the rarity of access to direct neural recordings in humans and the clarity of their findings, these results provide the strongest support for the LIJ model of cortical phase coding to date.


Funding Statement

The authors received no specific funding for this work.


Learning what to approach

Neir Eshel, Elizabeth E. Steinberg — PLoS Biology, 2018. PMC6198981, CC BY 4.0.

Most decisions share a common goal: maximize reward and minimize punishment. Achieving this goal requires learning which choices are likely to lead to favorable outcomes. Dopamine is essential for this process, enabling learning by signaling the difference between what we expect to get and what we actually get. Although all animals appear to use this dopamine prediction error circuit, some do so more than others, and this neural heterogeneity correlates with individual variability in behavior. In this issue of PLOS Biology, Lee and colleagues show that manipulating a simple task parameter can bias the animals’ behavioral strategy and modulate dopamine release, implying that how we learn is just as flexible as what we learn.

Learning the value of objects in the environment is critical for survival. Some mushrooms are deadly; others provide sustenance. Rain in the dry season can be a harbinger of life, while in a monsoon, it means heading for cover. How do animals learn these values and adapt them over time? One of the most common ways is through trial and error. As we explore our environment, we make predictions about the value of stimuli around us. If outcomes match our predictions, there is no need to adapt. If outcomes are different, we use that discrepancy to improve our predictions for the future. This difference between actual and expected outcome is known as prediction error, and it turns out to be crucial for learning in animals as well as machines. As befitting such a conserved learning mechanism, the brain has developed a fine-tuned system to encode it.

In the 1990s, Schultz and colleagues recorded monkey dopamine (DA) neurons and discovered a curious response. When monkeys received an unexpected reward, such as a drop of juice, DA neurons became excited. If animals received the same reward but fully expected it, DA neurons showed no response. Instead, DA neurons fired to the earliest reliable predictor of the reward, typically a sound or picture that indicated juice was coming soon. Finally, if the reward was expected but never materialized, DA neurons dipped below their baseline firing rate at precisely the moment when the reward was anticipated. Together, these results imply that DA neurons encode the difference between actual and expected reward—in other words, reward prediction error (RPE), the precise signal already known to facilitate learning.

The link between DA and RPE has been replicated and extended numerous times in a host of species and tasks (for review). Notably, modern neuroscience tools have confirmed that prediction error neurons are indeed dopaminergic and have revealed a local circuit in the ventral tegmental area that is partially responsible for calculating the RPE signal. Furthermore, causal manipulations have demonstrated that both positive and negative DA RPEs are sufficient to cause associative learning.

While RPE signaling may represent the dominant population response, as more investigators began to study DA and reinforcement learning, it became apparent that DA neurons also encoded other signals. In rats trained to associate an audio–visual stimulus (insertion of a metal lever) with the delivery of a food pellet into a nearby receptacle, an intriguing relationship was found between heterogeneity in DA signaling and individual variability in behavior. Some rats, termed “sign-trackers,” readily approached and engaged with the reward-predictive lever cue, even though this behavior had no effect on subsequent reward delivery. Other rats, termed “goal-trackers,” used the lever only to time entry into the receptacle in anticipation of food; otherwise, they ignored the lever. Strikingly, these behavioral strategies were characterized by distinct DA responses: DA RPE signals were observed only in sign-trackers. For goal-trackers, cue-evoked DA release was weak, and the DA response to expected reward failed to decline, even when the rats had clearly learned the cue–reward association. Furthermore, pharmacological blockade of DA signaling disrupted the sign-tracking response but had no effect on goal tracking. These data suggest that individual differences in allocating attention and attributing value to meaningful stimuli may be driven, at least in part, by endogenous variation in the function of midbrain DA neurons.

The empirical finding that stimuli can acquire different motivational properties in individuals trained on the same task is difficult to explain computationally with DA RPEs. To address this problem, Lesaint and colleagues recently proposed a model that builds on previous efforts in two important ways. Typically, reinforcement learning algorithms use RPEs to drive learning about the value of states, not discrete stimuli. The Sign-Tracking and Goal-Tracking (STGT) model instead uses RPEs to create factored representations in which the value of stimuli can be adjusted independently, enabling the lever and food cup to acquire distinct motivational properties.

The second key advance is that values calculated by multiple learning systems are integrated as a weighted sum instead of relying exclusively on a value derived from RPEs. Given the wide range of situations that humans and other animals encounter in complex, unpredictable environments, it is unlikely that a single learning system can optimally address all potential problems. The STGT model leverages two previously described systems, termed model free and model based. Model-free systems learn the value of actions and events through trial and error and store this information for later use. When the same stimuli are encountered again, past experience serves as a guide to estimate future outcomes. In contrast, model-based systems draw on an internal model of the world to make cognitive predictions of future events by forward inference. Model-based systems are able to flexibly generate goal-directed choices based on prospective assessment of the consequences of events or actions, without those consequences actually having to be experienced. Model-free and model-based learning systems offer complementary advantages and are thought to be implemented by distinct neural circuits. Notably, DA RPEs are ideally suited to drive model-free learning.

The STGT model integrates stimulus values computed by model-free and model-based systems, with individual variation determining the weight assigned to each component. For sign-trackers, the DA-dependent model-free system dominates, assigning greater value to the lever that perfectly predicts reward. Goal-trackers preferentially rely on the DA-independent model-based system, which infers the optimal behavior to maximize reward and favors approach to the location where it will appear. Intermediate behavioral phenotypes are easily explained as a balanced weighting of values computed by the two systems.

In this issue of PLOS Biology, Lee and colleagues test a specific hypothesis from the STGT model: changing the intertrial interval (ITI) will modulate DA signaling and bias animals between sign tracking and goal tracking. The logic goes like this: the longer the ITI, the more times an animal might visit the food cup between trials, when there is no food available. Each time this happens, DA neurons encode a negative RPE, and the value of the food cup goes down. Eventually, the food cup loses its salience to the animal, and the animal becomes more likely to sign-track, approaching the lever rather than the food cup. After all, the lever is more reliable at signaling reward: it always predicts food delivery, while the food cup often does not. Mirroring the behavior, DA neurons might show large bursts of activity both when the lever is presented—denoting the lever’s increased value to the animal—and when the food cup actually contains food, since this has become surprising. All of these predictions are reversed if the ITI is short and the animal has limited opportunity to visit an empty food cup.

The experiment was simple: on each trial, a lever was presented for 8 s, followed by pellet delivery into the food cup. Some animals then waited 60 s for the next trial to begin, while others had to wait 120 s. As expected, Lee and colleagues found that rats randomized to the 120-s ITI were more likely to sign-track (i.e., approach the lever), while rats randomized to the 60-s ITI were more likely to goal-track (i.e., approach the food cup). This was particularly apparent at the beginning of each trial; after 4 s, the two groups behaved similarly. While the rats were performing the task, the authors used fast-scan cyclic voltammetry to measure a proxy of DA release in the nucleus accumbens and found that the long-ITI group showed significantly higher DA release to both the lever and the food cup compared to the short-ITI group. In fact, the short-ITI group did not show any significant DA response to the reward after learning. These results correlated with the amount of time the rats interacted with the food cup during the ITI: the more time rats spent with the food cup during the ITI, the higher the DA release to both the lever and the food cup. These changes in behavior and DA release developed over a similar time course, implying that they either drive each other or that they are both driven by a common factor.

Together, Lee and colleagues show that a simple manipulation—changing the amount of time between trials—can modulate behavior and DA release in the nucleus accumbens. Based on the STGT model, the authors interpret their results as reflecting interactions with an empty food cup between trials, triggering a lower estimate of the food cup’s value, and biasing the rats toward a model-free, sign-tracking approach. Curiously, when the rats were nudged toward sign-tracking behavior, their DA responses did not recapitulate the sign-tracking pattern observed by Flagel and colleagues, with reward responses decreasing over time. Similarly, when the rats were nudged toward goal-tracking behavior, the DA responses did not show the sustained reward response one might have expected from pure goal-trackers. In both cases, DA release was a hybrid of the two patterns. This demonstrates that sign tracking and goal tracking are not hardwired and unchanging; rather, these tendencies arise from specific interactions the animals have with stimuli in a task. By the same logic, it is unlikely that the DA-dependent model-free system is ever completely offline; instead, animals give this system more or less weight depending on their experience and needs. The simple one-to-one relationship between DA release and behavioral strategy turns out to be much more complex.

These results suggest a number of important future directions. For example, to shore up the correlations between food cup interactions and DA responses, investigators might consider removing the food cup entirely during the ITI. If the STGT interpretation is correct, this should abolish any effect of ITI on the rats’ behavior. If behavioral differences remain, other interpretations must be sought—for example, long waiting times might simply increase the salience of all stimuli, regardless of interactions with those stimuli in the meantime. Another fruitful approach might be a cross-over design, in which rats experience both ITI lengths at different points in the experiment. Is the effect strong enough to shift an individual rat back and forth between sign tracking and goal tracking? Higher resolution, trial-by-trial measurements of DA (e.g., through extracellular recording) might also be crucial to explore the complicated temporal dynamics of behavior on this task. Finally, causal manipulations of the DA circuit, especially through temporally specific means such as optogenetics, would go a long way toward demonstrating that patterns of DA activity actually control behavior in this task, rather than simply reflect it.

For the field more generally, numerous fascinating questions remain open. Where in the brain do model-based and model-free learning occur, and what determines the relative weight between them? How are RPEs calculated in the first place? Is DA the only relevant circuit for RPE-driven model-free learning, or are there redundant circuits, for example, in the cerebellum? What are the genetic or environmental factors that bias some animals to sign-track and others to goal-track under equivalent testing conditions? What relationship does this phenomenon have to disorders of learning or habit, such as OCD or addiction? Finally, emerging evidence from multiple species indicates that a subset of DA neurons is activated by unpleasant or painful stimuli. Is there undiscovered individual variability in behavior or DA activity within the aversive domain? Should aversive DA signals be integrated into computational frameworks for reward learning, or do these represent entirely separate computations? These questions will take concerted effort across many labs and multiple years, but they may hold the key to some of the most fundamental questions in neuroscience: how we learn about rewards and punishments and how this process breaks down in neuropsychiatric disease.

Zooming out even further, it is important to note Lee and colleagues’ general approach. They studied a computational model of an interesting physiological phenomenon, developed a specific hypothesis from that model, and then collected new data to test this hypothesis directly. What they found partially validated the model but also brought up new and unanticipated questions. Regardless of the specific results, this is the scientific method at its purest, and it should be celebrated.


The mysteries of remote memory

Zimbul Albo, Johannes Gräff — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2018. PMC5790827, CC BY 4.0.

Long-lasting memories form the basis of our identity as individuals and lie central in shaping future behaviours that guide survival. Surprisingly, however, our current knowledge of how such memories are stored in the brain and retrieved, as well as the dynamics of the circuits involved, remains scarce despite seminal technical and experimental breakthroughs in recent years. Traditionally, it has been proposed that, over time, information initially learnt in the hippocampus is stored in distributed cortical networks. This process—the standard theory of memory consolidation—would stabilize the newly encoded information into a lasting memory, become independent of the hippocampus, and remain essentially unmodifiable throughout the lifetime of the individual. In recent years, several pieces of evidence have started to challenge this view and indicate that long-lasting memories might already ab ovo be encoded, and subsequently stored in distributed cortical networks, akin to the multiple trace theory of memory consolidation. In this review, we summarize these recent findings and attempt to identify the biologically plausible mechanisms based on which a contextual memory becomes remote by integrating different levels of analysis: from neural circuits to cell ensembles across synaptic remodelling and epigenetic modifications. From these studies, remote memory formation and maintenance appear to occur through a multi-trace, dynamic and integrative cellular process ranging from the synapse to the nucleus, and represent an exciting field of research primed to change quickly as new experimental evidence emerges.

This article is part of a discussion meeting issue ‘Of mice and mental health: facilitating dialogue between basic and clinical neuroscientists’.


Introduction

Episodic memories are encoded within hippocampal and neocortical circuits and can be retrieved long after they were initially allocated within the network. Recent mnemonic information is thought to be dependent on an intact hippocampus, labile, readily amenable to disruption by N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor (NMDAR) antagonist or protein synthesis inhibitors, and more specific for details on contextual features. On the other hand, remote memories, which we define here as memories lasting at least two weeks in rodents, are considered to be more stable or resilient to disruption as time passes by, independently retrievable by cortical entities such as the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) for contextual memories, and more generalizable. It is also believed that these remote mnemonic traces are shared by a distributed modality-specific (i.e. presenting a particular relationship between a stimulus-specific sensory modality pathway and behavioural performance) cortical network, and further maintained by several subcortical structures such as the basolateral amygdala and mid-thalamic nuclei.

Within each structure of the network, formation, storage and retrieval of such a trace are likely contained in one and the same specific subpopulation of cells, named ‘engram', which has certain characteristic features such as prime threshold activation by learning, the capacity to undergo plastic cellular and molecular changes, and the ability to get reactivated by a partial or incomplete stimulus. However, with a few notable exceptions, what and where engrams are implicated in remote memory storage and how they change over time have received little experimental attention thus far.

Zooming into such memory traces, the synaptic storage of mnemonic information is thought to occur in basal and apical dendritic spines in pyramidal neurons: dendritic spines represent a means for structural remodelling in the brain where plastic changes occur during learning and memories get stored. Notwithstanding, from engrams to spines surprisingly little evidence exists in the literature on the grounds of remote information processing, maintenance and storage to account for the lifelong and persistent nature of the mnemonic signal.

Inside neuronal cells, epigenetic mechanisms, i.e. ‘the structural adaptation of chromosomal regions so as to register, signal or perpetuate altered activity states', might provide a nucleus-based solution to address some of these current issues and controversies, and to long-term memory storage in general. Indeed, epigenetic mechanisms have for long been known to stably shape cellular identities throughout development, and can also readily react to changing environmental contingencies, but their importance in relation to across scale integration of learning processes from molecules to circuits is still in its infancy.

In this review, we uncover the still incomplete evidence on remote memory consolidation, from classic views to most recent ones, and attempt to understand how contextual information gets processed and stored in hippocampal–neocortical networks across different scales. Unless otherwise specified, we focus on contextual memories, as most of the literature on remote memories centres on contextual cues driving hippocampal–cortical interactions.


Memory consolidation and remote memory theories

The term memory consolidation was proposed more than 100 years ago by Müller & Pilzecker and refers to a process by which new memories become gradually stabilized in order to persist for a long time. Historically, the hippocampus has been viewed as a temporary memory structure, while the cortex as one for long-term storage. The hippocampal formation is a three-layered structure—in contrast with the characteristic six layers of the neocortex—and comprises three distinct sub-regions: the dentate gyrus (DG), the hippocampus proper—also called Ammon's horn—consisting of CA3, CA2 and CA1, and the subiculum. Its deepest layer is rich in basal dendrites of principal cells while the most superficial layer contains the apical dendrites of the neurons and the large majority of axons that provide inputs. In terms of connectivity, the majority of hippocampal afferents originate from the entorhinal cortex via the perforant path and contralateral and ipsilateral hippocampal subfields. Contained within the sheets of cells is a functional trisynaptic circuit, oriented transverse to the main longitudinal septo-temporal axis, with entorhinal projections to dentate granule cells, granule cell projections onto CA3 pyramidal cells and CA3 pyramidal cell projections to area CA1, via the Schaffer collaterals.

According to the standard consolidation theory (a), a memory is initially hippocampus-dependent but, over time, undergoes a fortifying, i.e. consolidating, process and eventually becomes represented in a distributed cortical network independent of the hippocampus. However, this classic view on consolidation is currently changing as more experimental evidence accumulates. Consolidation is nowadays viewed as occurring both at the synapse and at the system level: Synaptic consolidation refers to gene expression and synaptic changes occurring during the first minutes to hours after learning, whereas system consolidation spans a much broader, i.e. days to weeks, time scale until stability is achieved while transferring the mnemonic trace from hippocampus to cortex.

On top of that, another view on memory consolidation has gradually emerged, which refers to the distributed nature of long-term storage and which is known as multiple trace theory (MTT). MTT challenges some of the views of the standard consolidation theory as it attributes the hippocampus with a more enduring role throughout consolidation and retrieval, while conceiving the simultaneous importance of multi-site mnemonic traces across brain areas (b).


Synaptic consolidation

Synaptic consolidation refers to the cellular, molecular and synapse-based events neurons must undergo within the first few hours following learning to initially allocate unstable mnemonic traces into hippocampal circuits for later cortical and network consolidation. Although considered a relatively fast biological process, numerous studies report structural plastic changes in the form of dendritic spine formation and remodelling within 24 h. Accordingly, synaptic consolidation is thought to be not only neuronal activity-dependent, but also gene- and protein synthesis-dependent. Among the best characterized changes for synaptic consolidation are the activation of CREB (cAMP response element binding protein)-dependent gene expression changes as well as the translation, at activated synapses, of the immediate early gene (IEG) Arc (activity-regulated cytoskeletal protein), believed to play a key role in actin cytoskeletal dynamics and to regulate the membrane expression of various postsynaptic receptors. In addition to such cytosolic plasticity-related proteins, dendritic mRNAs have also been proposed as diffusible plasticity-related molecules that may underlie synaptic consolidation. The long-term synaptic plasticity associated with these early changes is then also accompanied by structural changes at synapses, which involve, among other processes, actin polymerization and the p21 kinase-activated cofilin cascade, which promotes cytoskeleton assembly and regulates spine morphology.

Because of the inherent short time scale of the abovementioned changes, synaptic consolidation as a first step towards the formation of mnemonic traces cannot, however, account per se for the extended dynamics, stability and persistence required for truly long-lasting memories. For instance, synaptic plasticity itself, such as long-term potentiation (LTP) is classically known to be responsible for the learning of new associations and spatial features, but its role in remote storage is less clear. In this regard, the synaptic tagging and capture hypothesis, which essentially states that tagged synapses (which are defined as short-lived targets of unknown molecular identity, important for subsequent neural plasticity, and previously induced by activity-dependent processes during learning and memory) can capture plasticity-related proteins that stabilize synaptic modifications, offers an alternative. For instance, it has been proposed that under strong tetanization, a given synaptic pathway can undergo a local tag setting with the synthesis of diffusible plasticity-related proteins that are then captured by tagged synapses, a necessity for the maintenance of late long-term potentiation (L-LTP), which itself is a pre-step towards enduring memories.

In a related set of ideas regarding synaptic tagging but with more emphasis towards remote memory circuits and behaviour, an interesting study using c-Fos imaging and local pharmacological inactivation proposed that early tagging of cortex during memory encoding is required for the formation of enduring associative memories that support remote memory storage. Accordingly, synaptic and cellular tagging mechanisms could generate an activating and strengthening signal in relevant distributed cortical cell assemblies over time, favouring a post-learning mechanism underlying systems-level memory consolidation. In this study, the social transmission of food preference (STFP) task, a hippocampus-dependent ethologically based variant of associative olfactory memory, was used to show early involvement of the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), a critical site for remote storage of this type of memory. Remote memory formation was impaired when hippocampal activity was pharmacologically silenced during the early (1–12 days), but not the late (15–27 days), post-learning period. Unexpectedly, however, silencing neuronal activity in the OFC early post-learning also impaired remote memory and structural plasticity, indicating that early cortical activity is required for subsequent maturation and stabilization of the mnemonic traces. Such early tagging in the OFC was found to be NMDAR-dependent and to trigger signalling cascades leading to histone acetylation, an epigenetic modification. Intriguingly, the engagement of the OFC was odour-specific, which suggests that tagging may minimize interference during the consolidation process, for instance by making the new trace more compatible with existing cortical mental schemas. Thus, this new variant of synaptic tagging and capture (c) attractively shows how local molecular changes may mark synaptic plasticity in circuits implicated in remote memory consolidation, but awaits further confirmation for other types of memories.


Standard system consolidation theory

Moving beyond the focus on local synaptic processes to a more systems level, the standard consolidation model proposes that long-term memory encoding involves early plasticity within hippocampal circuits, whereas reorganization of the neocortex is required weeks to months later to subserve remote memory storage (a). The hippocampus is thus thought to be of time-limited importance and only initially needed for storage and recovery of a memory: as memories mature they become increasingly dependent on the cortex in a ‘mnemonic shift' or ‘information transfer' from the hippocampus. Lesions of the medial temporal lobe (MTL), accordingly, would lead to a retrograde amnesia for pre-lesion events, with a temporal gradient observed for long-term episodic memories.

Indeed, much past and present emphasis on temporal lobe localization of memory function can be attributed to the clinical and cognitive characterization of the profound anterograde and temporally graded retrograde amnesia observed in patient H.M., after bilateral surgical resection of most of his MTL was performed in an attempt to ameliorate his suffering from intractable epilepsy (for an extended review). Although there is no prediction about the involvement of different MTL structures in remote memory nor the relationship between lesion size and remote memory loss, numerous other studies also testify to the reversible inactivation of the ACC as being disruptive to remote memories without affecting recent ones.

Yet, as several studies on NMDAR functioning—critical for synaptic plasticity as well as learning and memory—exemplify, there appears to be a need for an update on this theory as first, the hippocampus might also be required for remote memory storage, and second, the ACC might also be needed for recent memory formation. For the hippocampus, ibotenic hippocampal lesions immediately after conditioning (but not 24 days later) were found to not only prevent dendritic spine growth in the ACC, but also to impair remote contextual fear memory. Similarly, intact hippocampal NMDAR function was found to be necessary not only for recent, but also for remote contextual fear and spatial memory consolidation. For the cortex, cingulate NMDAR function was not only critical for the induction of local LTP, but its pharmacological or genetic blockade also impaired the formation of early contextual fear memory. Furthermore, divergent patterns for NMDAR blockade in adult neocortical and hippocampal pyramidal neurons have been speculated as forming the basis for differential spine regulation and turnover dynamics in both structures, further lending support that there might be alternative explanations as to how remote contextual memories are formed and stored.


Multiple trace theory (distributed cortical–hippocampal network for remote memory)

An alternative view to the standard consolidation theory is the multiple trace theory (MTT). MTT states that the hippocampus is needed for re-experiencing detailed recent or remote episodic memory, contributes to formation of cognitive schemas, and postulates that long-term storage of information occurs in a distributed cortical network where different modality-specific ‘fragments of a memory' co-exist across different sensory cortices (b). According to MTT, each time an episodic memory is retrieved it is subsequently re-encoded, thereby leading to the formation of multiple traces mediated by ensembles of hippocampal–neocortical neurons. MTT has thus three components: (1) an initially formed memory remains dependent on the hippocampus for as long as it is available; (2) a hippocampal memory over time supports the development of a less integrated or schematic version of the memory in the neocortex (retaining the gist of the original memory, but fewer contextual details); (3) a dynamic interplay exists between the cortical and the hippocampal versions of the memory such that one or the other may be dominant depending on the circumstances at retrieval.

While the precise demonstration of each criterion in a single study remains elusive, several experiments nevertheless provide strong evidence in support of MTT. Using optogenetic inhibition or local lesion studies in prefrontal cortical areas, several studies independently showed an early involvement of the prefrontal cortex in remote contextual fear memories. Likewise a pervasive involvement of the ACC in memory encoding was reported through the use of NR2B antagonists and protein synthesis inhibitors. Conversely, in studies focusing on the persistent involvement of the hippocampus, the need for an intact hippocampus to avoid deterioration of remote memories was reported using excitotoxic lesions, optogenetically, and by using protein synthesis inhibitors at stages when the hippocampus was assumed to be no longer required, namely following remote memory recall. This last study sparked considerable interest as it showed that even during remote memory stages mnemonic information can enter a period of lability akin to the initial consolidation phase itself, coined ‘reconsolidation' (for comprehensive reviews on this topic).

Interestingly, mnemonic neural ensembles have also been identified outside of the medial prefontal cortex (mPFC), namely in retrosplenial cortex, where optogenetic stimulation was reported sufficient to produce both context-specific memory changes. Finally, in an impressive brain-wide imaging study, post-training chemogenetic silencing of previously identified high-degree memory nodes, which are important for long-term memory storage based on the analysis of IEG expression patterns and belong to neither the hippocampus nor the ACC, were also found to disrupt remote fear memory consolidation. Together with a study showing remote memory consolidation deficits upon systemic administration of anisomycin, but not of local infusions into the ACC, these studies emphasize a more widespread nature of the mnemonic signal across time and the brain than previously anticipated.


Engrams in remote memory

As mnemonic traces seem to be of a more distributed nature, the next logic step is to locate these traces within the engaged brain structures. Mnemonic ‘engrams' were proposed more than a century ago as the physical substrate of a memory within the brain and owing to recently developed genetic tools have lately become available for visualization and activity manipulations. An engram is conceived as an ensemble or population of activated (at encoding, by learning or conditioning) excitatory neurons in brain structures of mnemonic circuits designed to retain over time (with enduring plastic cellular changes) learned associations encountered in the environment and capable of being reactivated by a part of the original stimulus for recall. Although several elegant studies have testified to the importance of engrams in memory encoding and recent memory storage, most of them, for technical reasons, focused on the DG as opposed to CA1, although it is hippocampal area CA1 that has traditionally received more attention in the field of episodic memory research. And, only few studies have attempted to address the formation and maintenance of remote engrams.

Among them, Tayler et al. labelled neurons with human histone H2B-GFP driven by a doxycycline-inducible IEG c-Fos promoter in a TetTag double transgenic mouse system (H2B-GFP TetTag mice) during a contextual fear conditioning task. They found a large network of tagged neurons in hippocampus, amygdala and neocortex, which was activated upon recent retrieval, but after two weeks the pattern of activation of the ensemble only persisted in cortex. These findings naturally favoured the classic view of temporal consolidation but incorporated also features of MTT as multiple sites contained mnemonic information.

In another study Denny et al. designed a tamoxifen-inducible ArcCreERT2 transgenic mouse line to compare encoding and expression at recent and remote timepoints in the hippocampus. This ArcCreER mouse line is similar to the TetTag mouse line mentioned above but based on the IEG Arc promoter to access the engram population, and on tamoxifen to restrict such access to specific timepoints. They found a greater than chance percentage of reactivated cells in the DG and also in area CA3 for recent memories. However, over time (30 days) animals generalized between contexts and both reactivation rates decreased, which could be interpreted as hippocampal memories being redistributed to cortical sites. However, when encoding neurons in DG or CA3 were optogenetically silenced using the Arch-GFP line, memory retrieval was impaired, which highlights the necessity of the original ensemble's lasting activation for fear expression. Since in mice with reduced neurogenesis—mediated, in part, by the DG—contextual fear memory appeared to be less precise and the degree of reactivation in CA3 (but not DG) was reduced, the authors concluded that the degree of CA3 activation (but not DG) was related to the strength of the memory trace, despite the acknowledged importance of engram cells within the DG in contextual fear memories

Finally, in the most recent study regarding remote memory consolidation, Kitamura et al. used a series of state-of-the-art optogenetic and calcium imaging tools and found that neocortical prefrontal memory engram neurons were already generated rapidly during initial conditioning through inputs from both the hippocampal–entorhinal system and the basolateral amygdala. With time, these prefrontal engram cells became functionally mature, whereas hippocampal engram cells gradually became silent. Although this study did not assess activity-dependent labelling of prefrontal engrams for direct comparisons with hippocampal ensembles, this is the first report of its kind to probe the hippocampal–mPFC circuitry during long-term memory consolidation in an engram-specific manner. Interestingly, these findings combine elements of both the standard and the multiple trace theory of system consolidation, and thus await further confirmation in other studies.


Long-term memory and dendritic spines

The question, nevertheless, remains, within engram cells, but also more generally speaking, what are the neuronal structures that store a memory? Dendritic spines represent the postsynaptic component of excitatory synapses and their growth has been postulated as a necessary mechanism of neural circuits to accommodate plastic changes taking place during a learning-engaged signalling cascade. The size and density of spines during this structural remodelling process have been found to change in a number of synaptic and behavioural plasticity paradigms, leading to the suggestion that they may form a structural basis for long-term memory. Dendritic spines show different shapes: mushroom, thin, stubby and branched types, while the types most reported in memory studies are the thin spines with a small head (i.e. thin spines), thought to be highly plastic due to their underlying experience-dependent rewiring capacity, and the spines with a large, mushroom-like head (i.e. mushroom spines), which are considered more stable and to represent the physical substrates of long-term memories.

In support of the classic system consolidation theory, Restivo et al. reported a time-dependent increase in spine density in the hippocampus for recent and in the ACC for remote memories, respectively (a). Furthermore, ibotenic hippocampal lesions immediately after conditioning, but not 24 days later, impaired remote memory and prevented dendritic spine growth in the ACC, emphasizing that the hippocampus is of crucial, but time-limited importance in driving structural plasticity in the cortex. Further, in accordance with the idea that cortical memories are expressed independently of the hippocampus at remote timepoints, Vetere et al. reported that when ACC spine growth at two different times (1 and 42 days) following contextual fear conditioning was locally disrupted using viral injections of the transcription factor MEF2, which negatively regulates spinogenesis, memory consolidation was impaired.

In contrast, another study found that the ratio of thin spines to mushroom spines in the mPFC was already significantly increased 1 h following contextual fear conditioning (b), supporting the idea of early cortical structural remodelling at the time of memory encoding. Importantly, here, the formation of not only recent but also remote memories was impaired by a temporally precise optogenetic inhibition of excitatory mPFC neurons during conditioning. Although this study only provided snapshots of dendritic spines (using the Golgi–Cox impregnation method), it nevertheless emphasized the crucial role of an early involvement of mPFC spines in remote memories, akin to the MTT.

To complicate matters even further, a recent two-photon microendoscopy study monitored turnover dynamics of basal dendritic spines in hippocampal pyramidal neurons and found a near full erasure of the synaptic connectivity pattern within 15 days post-learning. This finding is not only in stark contrast with cortical spine stability described above, but also stipulates that hippocampal spines may not be suited to support longer-lasting memories (mPFC spines were not monitored in this study), although spines are known to occur in an engram-specific manner. In agreement with these ideas, a reduced number of spines in DG engram cells at 14 days post-training was recently reported, despite the fact that behavioural fear expression could be elicited optogenetically (c). Collectively, these incongruent findings point to the need for an alternative explanation to spine dynamics for remote memory stability.


Epigenetic modifications and remote memory

An interesting fact in memory consolidation is the observation that the longer-lasting it is, the more resistant it appears to disruption, giving rise to a consequential passage of time effect once a commitment for a permanent change has taken place. But what might this change be, if it is not at the level of the spine? Certainly, a change of lasting nature. As such, epigenetic mechanisms were postulated more than 30 years ago to explain the lifelong basis of a memory, and demonstrated for the first time to be implicated in LTP and memory formation 20 years after the original postulate. Ever since, an increasing number of studies have pointed towards the importance of epigenetic mechanisms to resolve the short-lived nature of synaptic events associated with LTP, learning and memory, and the need for a self-perpetuating signal to preserve long-lasting memories.

Epigenetic mechanisms studied in the field of memory research are essentially of two types, namely DNA methylation, and post-translational modifications on histone tails. DNA methylation, a mainly transcriptionally repressive transcriptional mechanism, is based on the covalent addition of methyl groups to cytosine bases in CG-rich stretches of the DNA, called CpG islands. Through gene-specific analysis of CpG islands in the promoter region of calcineurin and reelin, cortical DNA methylation has been found to not only accompany but also be necessary for memories lasting 30 days, while the hippocampus was characterized by only transient changes in the days following contextual fear conditioning. More recently, another study reported increased DNA 5-hydroxy methylation levels, another type of DNA-based epigenetic modification, at the CpG-enriched coding region of the IEG c-Fos, but not of Npas4, for remote contextual fear memories, while both genes showed the same epigenetic modification for recent memories. These studies point to the intriguing possibility of gene-specific DNA-based epigenetic modifications that are important for long-term memory maintenance.

In like manner, posttranslational histone modifications in terms of acetylation, phosphorylation and methylation have also been found to occur transiently (1 day) in the hippocampus, but more persistently (7 days) in the cortex, where they facilitated the consolidation of object memories. Several other studies have confirmed a role for histone acetylation in long-term memories. Transgenic mice that express CREB binding protein with reduced histone acetyltransferase activity failed to stabilize short-term into long-term memories, yet their behavioural phenotype was rescued by the administration of the histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), Trichostatin A. HDACi-mediated increments in histone acetylation were further found to be associated with improved remote olfactory memory retrieval by infusing sodium butyrate (NaB) or Trichostatin A into the cortex in the first few days following learning, but not long (15 to 27 days) after acquisition, which supports that notion of a ‘priming’ capacity of epigenetic modifications. In another recent study, HDACi promoted long-term memory but not short-term memory retention of spatial information immediately after a subthreshold spatial learning.

In addition to posttranslational histone modifications, histone exchange and turnover have recently also been implicated in memory consolidation. When H2A.Z, a variant of the core histone H2A, was depleted locally in hippocampus, both recent and remote memory testing were improved, in sharp contrast to its local depletion in mPFC, upon which freezing was higher at remote (30 days) testing only. In similar fashion, when histone turnover with the H3 variant H3.3 was genetically prevented, both novel object recognition and contextual fear memory consolidation were reduced, testifying again to the implication of chromatin-based processes in long-term memory maintenance.

A major drawback of all but a few of these studies is that epigenetic modifications continue to be investigated at the heterogeneous whole-tissue level. Notwithstanding, because these changes are indeed detectable at such a gross level, their implication in memory formation cannot be neglected. Future work analysing epigenetic modifications of different cell types, within dedicated circuits and in response to established memory-related signalling cascades, are likely to clarify this view.


Synopsis

In the present review, we have collected the available evidence on the current knowledge of remote memory consolidation. Important experimental data have surged in recent years on the relevance of cortical modules in remote memory formation beginning at its encoding state, a revolutionary concept that dares to break the dogma of labile memories shifting from hippocampus to neocortex at later stages as stated by standard theories of consolidation. In addition, the importance of the hippocampus at retrieval, from recent to remote timepoints, is also more in agreement with the MTT than the standard consolidation model. Nevertheless, the unidirectional, irreversible hippocampal–neocortical transfer during consolidation continues to attract substantial attention given clinical data from patients with retrograde amnesia, although unequivocal experimental evidence in support of it is lacking (for a review). One potential explanation for this apparent discrepancy might be that MTT requires a transformation of memories over time into schematic representations, but if memories are hippocampus-bound—such as episodic or contextual ones—then mnemonic signals can remain available in the hippocampus for longer periods of time and their retrieval is more readily available. What is more, the vast majority of studies on memory consolidation—for practical and technical reasons—investigated discrete retrieval at two timepoints post-acquisition for recent and remote memories, which implies that no neural signature of the spatiotemporal dynamics of consolidation has been established yet. As a result, we do not precisely know the circuit or cellular mechanisms for this information transfer nor its molecular characteristics.

Since the biological marking for remote memories in cortex already occurs at the time of encoding, it is likely that a parallel, simultaneously occurring process along key anatomical structures determines the fate of the memory into its remote configuration. This idea emphasizes (1) a location-dependent process where molecular changes will take place along critical periods; (2) that the fate of a memory is determined at encoding (at least until recall); and (3) that genetic and molecular processes, rather than activity-dependent neuronal firing along circuits, are responsible for system consolidation over a longer time scale. But what could control the expression of critical genes in certain brain structures to give the specificity and temporal precision needed for this tagging process?

In our view, epigenetic changes can form part of both molecular-synaptic and circuit-system level consolidation: the former because epigenetic modifications can lastingly alter intracellular signalling cascades to influence excitability and thereby modify synaptic properties; the latter because these changes may also occur simultaneously across brain regions in order to favour stability or further modify mnemonic signals. These changes may thereby account not only for the molecular and temporal precision needed for a long-term storage task but also for accommodating plasticity driven by learning, as epigenetic modifications readily react to changing cellular environments. Accordingly, once a remote memory is committed to its fate, it will take an enormous amount of energy to overcome its new entropic state, or in molecular terms, the activation of the molecular signal machinery in reverse order will be unlikely. This would for instance explain the known resistance to revert a remote memory into a labile state. In support of this epigenetic idea, remote fear memories have recently been shown to respond to HDACi treatment during reconsolidation making them more amenable for attenuation. Cortical DNA hyper-methylation has also been proposed as a mechanism to account for long-lasting changes in ACC and remote memories. However, how precisely learning triggers these epigenetic changes, how well they are conserved across brain regions, and how these changes are signalled to and from the nucleus to the synapse remain to a large extent still elusive.

Part of the inherent difficulty in making assertive conclusions on theories of remote memory consolidation derives from the different techniques and paradigms used by different laboratories, but also from our limited understanding of the dynamics of certain mnemonic processes under certain conditions, for instance how a natural stimulus-driven retrieval might differ from an optogenetic activation of the ensembles emerging from that experience. Also, our knowledge of engrams as neuronal entities themselves is hitherto based on IEG-dependent labelling, itself likely the result of high levels of expression of the transcription factor CREB, and thus far from being all-inclusive. Indeed, owing to their very recent appearance on the centre stage of memory consolidation, we still know little about engrams in terms of (1) their afferent or efferent connectivity with other structures of the fear circuit, (2) their internal anatomical connectivity or functional nodes, (3) their regulatory cycle of activity, maintenance and disappearance, (4) their overlap with other neuronal non-fear local ensembles such as spatial hippocampal information/context ensembles, or (5) the prefrontal cortex ensembles for association with multimodal sensory information. Research on cell type specificity, cell-to-cell interaction and long-range connectivity of circuit assemblies remains pivotal for understanding their long-term maintenance, as for instance astrocyte–neuronal metabolic induction was reported to be important for memory consolidation and several types of interneurons important for engram sizing.

Furthermore, it is also sometimes difficult to compare experimental results within the same brain area owing to inexistent data on comparison across subfields, their functional internal connectivity or intrinsic physiologic firing patterns during remote memory, or simply the stereotaxic coordinates used during surgery. As a result thereof (or not), sometimes contradictory results within the same anatomical region have been reported by different laboratories, e.g. the strength of a memory associated with more stable CA3 engrams versus DG engrams, BLA being a critical nodal point in consolidation coordinating remote memory retrieval versus BLA patterns of reactivation fading off together with the hippocampal ones after recent stages, or retrosplenial cortex playing a critical role for storage of remote memories versus being without apparent importance.

Finally, incomplete and sometimes contradicting results also originate from our current understanding of synaptic remodelling in the form of dendritic spines for remote memories. Whether the transfer of mnemonic information happens in the form of synaptic remodelling is to date unclear as evidence speaks both in favour of synaptic remodelling supporting remote fear memories, and against it. In this respect, it might be of high interest to replicate the work on optical erasure of synaptic memory traces done in motor cortex in the context of remote memories, for a more causal relationship.

In the meantime, while these issues are being addressed, more data generated and current techniques improved, our knowledge on remote memories is likely to continue to consolidate.


The surprising subtleties of changing fear memory: a challenge for translational science

Merel Kindt — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2018. PMC5790831, CC BY 4.0.

Current pharmacological and psychological treatments for disorders of emotional memory only dampen the affective response while leaving the original fear memory intact. Under adverse circumstances, these original memories regain prominence, causing relapses in many patients. The (re)discovery in neuroscience that after reactivation consolidated fear memories may return to a transient labile state, requiring a process of restabilization in order to persist, offers a window of opportunity for modifying fear memories with amnestic agents. This process, known as memory reconsolidation, opens avenues for developing a revolutionary treatment for emotional memory disorders. The reconsolidation intervention challenges the dominant pharmacological and psychological models of treatment: it is only effective when the amnestic drug is given in conjunction with memory reactivation during a specific time window, and a modification of cognitive processes is a boundary condition for changing fear. Notwithstanding the dramatic effects of targeting memory reconsolidation in the laboratory (i.e. proof of principle), the greatest hurdle to overcome is that the success of the manipulation depends on subtle differences in the reactivation procedure. These experimental parameters cannot be easily controlled in clinical practice. In harnessing the clinical potential of memory reconsolidation, a heuristic for bi-directionally translating behavioural neuroscience and clinical science is proposed.

This article is part of a discussion meeting issue ‘Of mice and mental health: facilitating dialogue between basic and clinical neuroscientists’.


Introduction

While many of our precious memories fall into oblivion, fear memories are typically strong and resistant to decay. The general failure of forgetting emotional memories may in some respects be evolutionarily advantageous, but the robustness of fear memories can be a double-edged sword in patients suffering from emotional memory disorders: the disorders that have sparked the quest for a means of therapeutic forgetting.

Since the time of the ancient Greeks, people have imagined memories to be a stable form of information, as if they are indelible portraits of our past. The metaphors for this persistence have changed over time: from impressions in a wax tablet by Plato, to computer analogies that are still popular today. The most widely accepted view in science was that memories were only initially labile and sensitive to disruption (short-term memory), after which they became fixed or ‘consolidated’ into the physical architecture of the brain (long-term memory). At the turn of this century, a major breakthrough in neuroscience was achieved with the (re)discovery that fear memory is not inevitably permanent, but can change when retrieved. Nader and colleagues demonstrated in rats that, upon a reminder cue, consolidated memories may return to a labile state, requiring de novo protein synthesis for restabilization in order to persist. This process is now referred to as the ‘memory reconsolidation hypothesis’ and offers a window of opportunity for targeting fear memories with amnestic agents. Over the past decade, evidence for persistently reducing fear response by pharmacologically interfering with the process of memory reconsolidation has progressed from animals to humans. In a series of laboratory experiments, we convincingly demonstrated that disrupting the process of memory reconsolidation with a drug neutralized the affective expression of a fear memory without changing the actual recollection of the threatening event. A technology that instantaneously dampens the emotional impact of unduly intense fear memories would signify a true paradigm shift in the practice of psychotherapy. Instead of multiple sessions of cognitive behavioural treatment or daily drug intake with a gradual and often temporary decline of symptoms, it involves one single instance of treatment that leads to a sudden—albeit delayed—decline in fear. The reconsolidation intervention is furthermore in stark contrast with a fundamental tenet of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), a well-established treatment for disorders of emotional memory. The CBT model postulates that a change in cognitive processes (i.e. threat beliefs) is a condition sine qua non for obtaining a treatment effect, while a cognitive change is not required for the reconsolidation intervention. In contrast, when a cognitive change takes place during the reconsolidation intervention, this actually poses a boundary condition for the treatment. The reconsolidation intervention also represents a shift in the use of pharmacological agents to alleviate symptoms. It involves just one single administration of a very common drug (i.e. 40 mg propranolol HCl) administered during a specific time window. In other words, the procedure is more like ‘neurosurgery’ than psychotherapy. Although these findings suggest the possibility of a paradigm shift in clinical practice, a reconsolidation intervention for horrific or otherwise undesirable memories has not left the hypothetical arena. Until now, an abrupt reduction in fear response using a single amnestic drug administered upon memory reactivation has only been reliably demonstrated for very specific fears, which are typically induced in the laboratory, and more recently in a subclinical sample of people with spider fear. Irrespective of these dramatic effects (i.e. proof of principle), the results of the reconsolidation intervention for more severe emotional memory disorders such as chronic post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are both promising and disappointing. It is worth noting, however, that the swift translation from basic to clinical science could easily bypass several important steps. Laboratory experiments in animals and humans illustrate that the effect of the reconsolidation intervention depends on subtle differences in the reactivation procedure in interaction with the learning history, while these experimental parameters cannot be easily controlled in clinical practice. In harnessing the clinical potential of memory reconsolidation as an alternative treatment for emotional memory disorders, a bi-directional translational approach is warranted. Not only are fundamental insights on the principles of learning and memory from the animal and human literature indispensable, clinical observations need to be considered as well. These insights and observations provide operational tools for testing novel hypotheses on different levels of analysis: from behavioural neuroscience to clinical science, and vice versa.


Emotional memory and psychopathology

Although there is a growing interest in discovering transdiagnostic processes to understand the aetiology and treatment of mental disorders (e.g. Research Domain Criteria initiative of the National Institute of Mental Health), clinical science is still oriented toward the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) in which diagnoses are based on symptom counts nominated by clinical consensus. The claim made here is that emotional memory is at the root of a broad range of mental disorders, from anxiety disorders and PTSD to addiction and eating disorders. In daily life, emotional memory is generally used to indicate the recollection of specific emotional events, while in neuroscience it refers to a much broader taxonomy of subjective, behavioural, physiological and neural mnemonic outputs, with the common denominator that they reflect emotional learning in the recent or distant past.

The focus of this paper is on fear memory, which is obviously most relevant for the treatment of anxiety disorders and PTSD. These disorders often do not result from direct fear learning experiences such as traumatic events; they may also result from indirect or vicarious learning experiences. Yet, irrespective of the learning history, fear and anxiety disorders are represented in the brain as associative memory networks. The leading model for studying associative fear learning and memory is Pavlovian fear conditioning, which has proven to be an excellent paradigm across a wide range of organisms in the laboratory. It involves the repeated pairing of an initially neutral or ambiguous cue (e.g. a tone or picture as conditioned stimulus, CS) with an inherently aversive stimulus (e.g. an electric shock as unconditioned stimulus, US). As a result, the CS and US representation will become connected in the brain. Evidence for memory consolidation is based on later retention tests where re-exposure to the CS elicits a conditioned fear response (e.g. freezing in rats, potentiated startle reflex in humans). Insofar as associative fear memory is regarded as the core of emotional memory disorders, it does not only entail contingency learning where the originally neutral or ambiguous stimulus (CS) becomes a valid predictor for a negative experience (US). The feared stimulus also becomes imbued with the affective and motivational properties of the reinforcers (US) they predict, which influences behaviour in a number of powerful ways.

In addition to its utility in understanding the formation and consolidation of fear memory, the Pavlovian fear-conditioning paradigm has also proven to be a suitable translational model for developing and advancing treatment for emotional memory disorders. Fear extinction is one of the most extensively studied procedures for reducing learned fear. It involves a decrement in conditioned fear responding that occurs with repeated presentation of a conditioned fear stimulus without the aversive consequence (i.e. unreinforced). As a result, the conditioned stimulus gains new predictive properties. Although extinction-like exposure treatments (i.e. in vivo or imaginary confrontations with the feared object without the expected adverse consequences) are among the most effective strategies to assuage excessive fears, there are many patients who experience a relapse even after initially successful treatment. Explanations for the return of fear after CBT-like interventions can be found in the behavioural neuroscience literature on associative fear learning and memory. Fear-conditioning research in animals and humans has reliably shown that subsequent to extinction training, the conditioned fear response can easily return through memory retrieval techniques: re-exposure to unsignalled USs (i.e. reinstatement), a context change (i.e. renewal), testing several weeks later (i.e. spontaneous recovery) or accelerated re-acquisition. Together, these phenomena constitute strong evidence that extinction does not erase the original fear memory, but it rather reflects the formation of a new association (CS/no US) that inhibits expression of the fear memory. The extinction memory competes for behavioural control at retrieval, while the fear response driven by the original fear memory is only temporarily suppressed. Even after successful fear extinction, the fear memory remains intact and may resurface, resulting in a return of fear. The implication for clinical practice is that, irrespective of the potential of extinction training as a means of therapeutic forgetting, the fear symptoms may easily return when patients are confronted with an unexpected aversive situation, when leaving the therapeutic exposure context, or simply with the passage of time.


Paradigm shift in changing fear memories

The discovery that fear memory in animals is not necessarily permanent but can change when reactivated may therefore be a promising alternative for the treatment of emotional memory disorders. Nader et al. showed in their landmark study that infusion of a protein synthesis inhibitor (i.e. anisomycin) shortly after memory reactivation produced post-reactivation amnesia. Noticeably, short-term fear memory (4 h) was still intact after memory reactivation and drug administration, but the long-term expression of fear memory (24 h) was strongly reduced. Consistent with a time-limited role for protein synthesis in consolidation, delaying the drug infusion until 6 h after memory reactivation produced no amnesia. This process known as memory reconsolidation refers to two phases by which previously consolidated memories (i) transfer to a transient destabilized state upon reactivation and (ii) require a time-dependent restabilization to persist. Gene transcription, RNA and protein synthesis are necessary for this restabilization and offer a window of opportunity for either pharmacological or behavioural interventions to neutralize the fear memory. Despite the compelling evidence for memory reconsolidation in the laboratory, an obvious limitation in human memory research is that the neurobiological processes of memory destabilization and restabilization can be neither directly observed nor locally targeted. Hence, the critical conditions for targeting the process of memory reconsolidation in patients with emotional memory disorders are still largely unknown.

The most convincing studies showing post-reactivation amnesia in animals used protein synthesis inhibitors (i.e. anisomycin) infused locally into the amygdala, a key brain area of fear conditioning. Given the toxicity of protein synthesis inhibitors, there is no translational feasibility for using these drugs in humans. However, at the time our first reconsolidation experiment was designed, there were also a few successful demonstrations of post-reactivation amnesia in animals with an alternative pharmacological agent: the β-adrenergic receptor (β-AR) antagonist propranolol, which was infused either systemically or locally into the amygdala. Even after systemic infusion, the effects of propranolol on reconsolidation are achieved by targeting the amygdala, and disruption of fear memory reconsolidation is correlated with a reduction of synaptic potentiation in the lateral amygdala selective to the reactivated fear memory.

Propranolol could potentially be interesting for studying post-reactivation amnesia in humans as it can be marked as a nontoxic drug when taken in a low dose and only once. Our research demonstrated that one pill of propranolol (40 mg) administered prior to or after memory reactivation effectively neutralized the fear-conditioned startle response and prevented the return of fear 1 day/month later. The repeated observation that memory retrieval techniques did not lead to the re-emergence of fear memory expression, as is generally observed after extinction training, supports the superiority of disrupting reconsolidation as a means of therapeutic forgetting. Importantly, the fear-erasing effects of propranolol only occurred for the memory traces that were reactivated and only when administered within a specific time window upon the reminder cue. Hence, the fear reduction cannot be explained by a general fear-dampening effect of the drug, indicating that the reconsolidation intervention is noticeably different from traditional pharmacological treatments.

In the past 15 years there has been a wealth of demonstrations conveying memory reconsolidation across species (including roundworms, crabs, chicks, honeybees, rodents and humans), learning tasks and amnestic agents. Although these findings suggest that memory reconsolidation is a fundamental process, there are also experimental conditions under which reconsolidation does not seem to occur. For instance, animal research indicates that the success of memory reconsolidation is dependent on both the age and strength of memories, with older and stronger memories becoming increasingly resistant to disruption. These conditions are subsequently viewed as boundary conditions of reconsolidation, but evidence for boundary conditions is based on negative findings with a single reactivation procedure. There is, however, no single, universally effective reactivation procedure that always induces reconsolidation. For instance, remote or strongly trained memories may be rendered labile by longer reminder sessions or by exposure to novel stimuli at reactivation. Strong memories can also undergo reconsolidation if they are reactivated at remote time-points. In light of these findings, it has also been postulated that true boundary conditions for reconsolidation do actually not exist. This is in line with the alleged evolutionarily conserved role of reconsolidation as a way to keep memories up-to-date, should conditions require such adaptation. As such, even repeated trials of the same training procedure could induce reconsolidation as long as the reactivation procedure involves a discrepancy or a match/mismatch experience between what has already been learned and what can be learned (i.e. Prediction Error, PE). The concept of PE is founded on the work of Rescorla & Wagner, who postulated that surprise will dictate when learning occurs. Likewise, we observed in humans that mere retrieval is not sufficient to induce memory destabilization and subsequent restabilization. Instead, memory reconsolidation is triggered only if the reactivation contains surprising, but relevant, information.

The idea of a crucial role of PE in inducing reconsolidation was launched by Pedreira and colleagues, who reported a necessary role for PE in memory reconsolidation. Since then, PE has been used in several experimental settings, across different species, to trigger reconsolidation. However, the occurrence of PE in animals could only be inferred from the modified memory expression in a later retention test. In our human studies, the amnestic agent (i.e. propranolol) presented before or after memory reactivation specifically affected the emotional expression of fear memory (i.e. fear-potentiated startle response), while the cognitive level (i.e. US-expectancy ratings) remained unaffected. By capitalizing on this striking dissociation between the cognitive and emotional expression of fear memory, we developed a measure of PE that is independent from the observation of fear memory reconsolidation. In particular, we demonstrated in a fear-conditioning study that reconsolidation was induced by reminder conditions that led to a subsequent change in ratings of US expectancy upon CS presentation (i.e. match/mismatch). Reconsolidation occurred whenever the delivery (positive PE) or omission (negative PE) of an aversive stimulus (US) was not fully predicted by the CS that was presented during reactivation. In contrast, reminder conditions that left reported US expectancies unaffected did not induce fear memory reconsolidation. Despite these new insights on PE as a necessary condition for triggering memory reconsolidation, there are several issues that pose a major challenge for translating the process of memory reconsolidation to clinical practice.


A challenge for translational science

If PE is a necessary condition for triggering memory reconsolidation, this does not imply that PE is also a sufficient condition. PE can also give rise to new learning (e.g. extinction learning) and it has been shown that extinction training puts a constraint on reconsolidation. During extinction training, repeated or prolonged unreinforced exposure generates multiple PEs, which eventually reduce both the threat expectancy and fear response. Modern exposure treatment is designed to enhance new learning by disconfirming expectancies regarding the temporal latency, frequency and intensity of negative outcomes. Sometimes the expected outcome is an ‘inability to tolerate discomfort’ or ‘going crazy’, in which case the exposure is designed to test out the ability to accomplish the exposure task despite high levels of fear. For the reconsolidation intervention, a violation of threat expectancy is also necessary, but with the difference that it should not lead to new learning. If the aim of exposure is to trigger the process of memory reconsolidation, then it should be much shorter and occur only once as opposed to traditional CBT. Of relevance is the observation in humans that even before extinction of the fear response can be observed physiologically, boundary conditions for memory reconsolidation may have already been reached. While changes in cognition are assumed to precede behavioural modifications in CBT, a slight decrease of threat expectancy during the reconsolidation intervention demarcates this boundary. Parallel observations in rodents suggest that reconsolidation and extinction not only are mutually exclusive, but also seem to be separated by a transitional phase (i.e. limbo state), insensitive to amnestic agents, presumably because neither of the two opposite processes of memory reconsolidation or extinction is engaged. Consequently, a specific reactivation may be either too similar (i.e. retrieval) to or too dissimilar (i.e. limbo or extinction) from the original memory to trigger reconsolidation. Minor environmental changes define whether reactivation induces retrieval, memory reconsolidation, a limbo state or the initiation of a new inhibitory memory trace. The implication for clinical practice is that the window of opportunity for targeting emotional memory with amnestic agents is small. It is preceded and followed by phases that leave the original memory unaffected.

A further challenge in translating reconsolidation to clinical practice is that there is no single universal reactivation for inducing memory reconsolidation. PE is not simply governed by the reminder session, but by the interaction between the original learning and the reminder session. In a fear-conditioning study, the interaction between the original learning experience and the reminder can be relatively easily manipulated, given that the threat contingency during acquisition and memory reactivation is under experimental control. In clinical practice, however, the learning history of people suffering from emotional memory disorders generally involves many instances of direct or indirect learning experiences, of which patients are often not aware. If we are to design a reconsolidation intervention in clinical practice, we need to establish whether a certain reminder session actually triggers memory reconsolidation.

Germane to this issue is the lack of real-time assessment of PE as a potential marker to induce memory reconsolidation. In the fear-conditioning studies, the PE could only be inferred from a change in reported threat predictions measured from the end of fear acquisition to the retention test the following day. This confirms previous findings on aversive learning in the crab Chasmagnathus showing that reconsolidation does not start at CS onset, but is triggered by CS offset, when the occurrence or non-occurrence of the anticipated threat becomes evident (i.e. match/mismatch or PE). An obvious shortcoming of the current assessment of PE in a fear-conditioning setting is that the threat predictions during exposure to the (un)reinforced CS correspond with a new learning experience. As a consequence, the effect of the CS offset during memory reactivation could only be revealed 1 day later in a retention test. In our future research we aim to develop a real-time marker for memory destabilization independent from the individual learning history. This would enable us to optimally design the memory reactivation for individual patients during the intervention itself (e.g. elongate the exposure).


Memory reconsolidation in clinical practice

In a recent study we have successfully translated the laboratory findings on conditioned fear response to a subclinical trial in individuals with spider phobia. We showed that a single intervention of 40 mg of the β-AR blocker propranolol HCl (double-blind/placebo-controlled) upon a very brief memory reactivation transformed avoidance behaviour into approach behaviour in a virtually binary fashion; an effect that persisted at least 1 year post-treatment. Importantly, the fear-reducing effect was not restricted to the phobic stimulus of the intervention, but generalized to other reminder cues. We also demonstrated that the change in fear behaviour could not be explained by a general fear-dampening effect of propranolol or by an exposure effect, because the abrupt change in fear behaviour was only observed when the active drug (propranolol/placebo control) was given in conjunction with memory reactivation.

To exemplify the heuristic of a bi-directional translational approach in harnessing the clinical potential of a reconsolidation intervention, the unfolding of the reconsolidation intervention for spider fear is presented here in extraordinary detail. Drawing from a range of insights on the necessary and boundary conditions for inducing memory reconsolidation, we inferred that the exposure to the feared cue (i.e. spider) ought to be very brief, but the exact duration of the exposure was still indefinable. Even though the discovery of PE as a necessary condition for inducing memory reconsolidation is informative, the index for measuring PE in the laboratory is inappropriate for a direct translation into clinical practice. To trigger memory reconsolidation, the participants were instructed to approach a tarantula in a terrarium and to touch it, after which they received 40 mg of propranolol or a placebo. As well as being at the far end of the threat continuum, tarantulas can be easily controlled in an experimental setting. They usually sit still in the terrarium and only start moving after they are sprinkled with water. In the first series of pilot cases, the exposure durations varied noticeably between the participants. Although a few participants with subclinical spider fear were actually able to very briefly touch the tarantula, many of them were not and became extremely distressed. Most importantly, the treatment effects were absent or small and not specific for the active drug. In the next series of pilot cases, the participants were only instructed to approach the spider, while the instruction to touch the spider was left out. Although the exposure duration was under experimental control this time, a reactivation by only approaching a tarantula in a terrarium was not sufficiently threatening for the subclinical participants. In one further series of pilot cases, the participants were instructed that they would be asked to touch a tarantula, but after a brief 2 min exposure to the tarantula—and without actually touching the spider—the experimenter closed the terrarium. The participants were then seated next door, where they received an oral dose of 40 mg of propranolol HCl. Given the compelling observations in several pilot cases, this procedure was eventually tested in the randomized controlled trial (double-blind/placebo-controlled) in a new sample of individuals with subclinical spider fear.

Notwithstanding the success of this reconsolidation intervention in changing avoidance behaviour into approach behaviour, the distinctive features of the reactivation session that actually triggered the process of memory reconsolidation remain elusive. Given that all participants profited from the intervention, the lack of variation in the outcome prohibited inferring an index of PE on the basis of their cognitive and emotional expression of fear. Obviously, not the general success of the intervention, but the lack of a valid index for assessing PE in a clinical context has to be addressed. It is worth noting here that the false information regarding the instruction to touch a spider was not meant to trigger PE, but to maximally reactivate the fear memory, while the unexpectedness of the procedure could be easily conceived as a manipulation of PE. Previously, we postulated that a PE should be relevant to the fear memory, while the relief of not touching a spider actually conveys a safety cue. We hypothesize that the actual approach behaviour of the feared cue without experiencing a catastrophe is responsible for the process of memory reconsolidation, but this conjecture has not yet been critically scrutinized. Another drawback of the current intervention involves the feasibility of the false information regarding the instruction to touch a spider, given that this information is easily accessible via the Internet.

A further consideration is that it remains unknown whether a similar procedure would also be effective for patients who are suffering from severe levels of spider fear, as the intervention was originally developed for a subclinical fear of spiders. Fear-conditioning studies showed that stronger fear memories require longer or multiple reactivations in order to induce memory reconsolidation. Likewise, in a new series of pilot cases we discovered that some of the patients with a clinically diagnosed spider phobia (DSM-5, APA) required a different reactivation procedure from that in our previous study. As long as no independent index is available to assess memory reconsolidation in clinical practice, systematically testing different reactivation procedures might contribute to uncovering the optimal and boundary conditions for inducing memory reconsolidation in clinical practice. Currently, we are testing different memory reactivation procedures in patients with spider phobia and other specific phobias; some cases are extremely successful, while others actually fail and do not convincingly profit from the reconsolidation intervention.

Difficulties such as these are even more crucial when targeting more complex emotional memory disorders in patients with PTSD, given that the timing of reactivating trauma memory is under less experimental control than in specific fears or phobias. Although preliminary evidence in patients with PTSD revealed a reduction in a trauma-relevant physiological response following a reconsolidation intervention, these studies did not include the crucial control conditions for demonstrating memory reconsolidation (i.e. memory reactivation with placebo, and propranolol without memory reactivation). Moreover, the initial positive effect of a reconsolidation intervention for trauma memory could not be replicated in three follow-up trials testing different amnestic agents. It bears mentioning, however, that the design of the previous treatment studies raises several questions with respect to the necessary conditions for a reconsolidation intervention. The success of a reconsolidation intervention clearly depends on two conditions: (i) memory reactivation should trigger destabilization of the fear memory, and (ii) the amnestic drug should disrupt the restabilization of the fear memory. In the previous clinical trials, script-driven imagery was used for the reactivation of the trauma memory, even though this method has been explicitly developed to measure retrieval of the trauma memory and not reconsolidation. In light of the observations in fear-conditioning research that retrieval is not sufficient to trigger memory reconsolidation, such a reminder session is probably ineffective in inducing the process of memory reconsolidation. Furthermore, the systemic administration of a low dose (10 mg) of short-acting propranolol HCl 90 min before memory reactivation, combined with a low dose (20 mg) of long-acting propranolol HCl immediately prior to script-driven imagery is not theoretically grounded. If upon memory reactivation, propranolol targets the process of memory reconsolidation, the β-ARs are presumably involved during a specific time window after memory reactivation. We have recently tested the timing of drug administration and discovered that propranolol was effective when systemically administered 90 min or 1 h before memory reactivation, immediately after, and 1 h after memory reactivation. When given 2 h after memory reactivation, propranolol was no longer effective. Hence, by exploiting the pharmacokinetic signature of propranolol (Tpeak = 1–2 h; T1/2 = 5 h), we identified a delayed and specific time window (less than 4 h post-reactivation) during which β-adrenergic receptors are decisively involved in the reconsolidation of fear memory. This observation seems to be in line with observations in animal studies where peaks in noradrenalin 1–2 h after (re)learning are related to the reconsolidation of memory. For a proper translation to clinical practice, insights on the necessary and boundary conditions to induce memory reconsolidation in the laboratory should be taken into account.

In summary, before strong conclusions can be drawn as to the relevant features of a reactivation procedure to modify maladaptive memories, a systematic search into reconsolidation interventions is warranted. In concert with efforts to demonstrate fear-reducing effects of pharmacological memory manipulations, alternative approaches to target memory reconsolidation have been developed as well. From these non-pharmacological approaches, the reactivation–extinction procedure has been most extensively studied. Drawing upon the idea that reconsolidation serves as a means of updating memory under changing environmental conditions, it has been suggested that extinction training after a brief reminder might serve to incorporate the inhibitory learning into the reactivated memory trace. Unlike the pharmacological amnestic interventions, the reactivation–extinction procedure has not been widely replicated thus far. Another consideration regarding the reactivation-extinction procedure is that superior extinction learning rather than the process of memory reconsolidation could also explain the fear-tempering effects. Irrespective of the manipulation, the delicate transitions between the different memory processes (i.e. retrieval, reconsolidation, limbo and extinction) pose a huge challenge to clinical research on memory reconsolidation. In pursuing ways to overcome the putative boundary conditions on triggering memory reconsolidation, collaborative efforts between animal and human researchers are essential. In addition to a trial and error approach, future research should aim to uncover a real-time index for memory reconsolidation, which would enable an independent test of the boundary and optimal conditions of a memory reconsolidation intervention in clinical practice.


Conclusion

Basic science in animals and humans suggests that we are on the verge of a breakthrough in reconsolidation-based interventions, but the critical conditions for targeting the complex and pervasive fear memories typically encountered in clinical practice are yet unknown. Translating basic findings from animal literature to clinical trials without a full understanding of the mechanisms of change very often leads to disappointing and confusing results. Alternatively, as most often seen in clinical psychology and psychiatry, treatments emerge from the field of therapy, with researchers subsequently dissecting what may be effective about the interventions. Dozens of treatment effects studies have appeared in the literature showing that different intervention techniques are either more or less effective. Research at the applied level has important social and policy significance, but it is ill-suited for elucidating the determinants and mechanisms of change. Large-scale clinical trials provide the type of data that patients and decision-makers need to choose among alternative modes of treatment.

In the quest for a means of therapeutic forgetting, a transdiagnostic perspective with a focus on the neurobiological principles of emotional learning and memory is proposed, rather than orienting toward the DSM with the focus on isolated diagnostic categories of mental disorders. While basic science and clinical science are generally separate worlds, integrating these disciplines in a bi-directional translational heuristic may foster our understanding of the mechanisms of change in the treatment of emotional memory disorders. Insights from basic science may shape clinical interventions, and vice versa, clinical observations, preferably from small-scale case series, may fuel basic science, with the eventual aim to decipher the dynamic interplay between the plasticity and stability of emotional memory.


Multiple memory systems, multiple time points: how science can inform treatment to control the expression of unwanted emotional memories

Renée M. Visser, Alex Lau-Zhu, Richard N. Henson, Emily A. Holmes — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2018. PMC5790835, CC BY 4.0.

Memories that have strong emotions associated with them are particularly resilient to forgetting. This is not necessarily problematic, however some aspects of memory can be. In particular, the involuntary expression of those memories, e.g. intrusive memories after trauma, are core to certain psychological disorders. Since the beginning of this century, research using animal models shows that it is possible to change the underlying memory, for example by interfering with its consolidation or reconsolidation. While the idea of targeting maladaptive memories is promising for the treatment of stress and anxiety disorders, a direct application of the procedures used in non-human animals to humans in clinical settings is not straightforward. In translational research, more attention needs to be paid to specifying what aspect of memory (i) can be modified and (ii) should be modified. This requires a clear conceptualization of what aspect of memory is being targeted, and how different memory expressions may map onto clinical symptoms. Furthermore, memory processes are dynamic, so procedural details concerning timing are crucial when implementing a treatment and when assessing its effectiveness. To target emotional memory in its full complexity, including its malleability, science cannot rely on a single method, species or paradigm. Rather, a constructive dialogue is needed between multiple levels of research, all the way ‘from mice to mental health’.

This article is part of a discussion meeting issue ‘Of mice and mental health: facilitating dialogue between basic and clinical neuroscientists'.


Introduction

Your memory is a monster; you forget - it doesn't. It simply files things away. It keeps things for you, or hides things from you - and summons them to your recall with a will of its own. You think you have a memory; but it has you!

From: ‘A prayer for Owen Meany: a novel’.

After psychological trauma, people can report vividly seeing the event unfold again in their mind's eye. For example, a person who was mugged at gunpoint while working at the cash till in a shop might see in their mind's eye vividly the gun pointed at them, the sunlight glance off the metal, hearing the sound of the safety lock clicking. This sensori-perceptual retrieval of an episode brings back with it the intense emotional experience of fear and the thought their life is about to end (for further examples). These types of episodic memories are known clinically as ‘intrusive memory’—a core clinical feature of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and described in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition (DSM-5) as ‘recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic event(s)’ ([PTSD criterion B1; p. 271]). A critical aspect of this form of memory is that it springs to mind unbidden—that is, against the person's will. Thus, in the experimental memory literature, intrusive memories are a type of episodic memory that has been retrieved ‘involuntarily’.

Involuntary retrieval is not restricted to episodic memories. Anxiety and stress-related disorders also involve automatic physiological responses, triggered either spontaneously or in response to (internal or external) threat-associated cues. For example, a person may experience increases in heart rate, muscle tone and perspiration when revisiting the location of an accident or assault, or when reminiscing about the event. Although one might not necessarily think of anxiety and stress-related disorders as ‘memory disorders’, this paper builds on the assumption that many of their symptoms are involuntary expressions of memory of previously experienced or imagined emotional events. Understanding what aspects of memory are maintaining the disorder may provide a way to progress much-needed treatment development.

To date, there is a good evidence base for the effectiveness of psychological treatments for both anxiety (e.g. obsessive compulsive disorder and social anxiety) and stress-related disorders (e.g. PTSD). Specifically, the types of psychological treatment recommended are forms of cognitive behavioural therapy and, for PTSD, also eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) therapy. While the UK national clinical guidelines among others emphasize the aforementioned treatments, it is also noted that psychological treatment trial methodology has been a topic of debate. Recently, some advances have been made with pharmacological treatments, specifically for anxiety disorders, although less so for PTSD. It will be of interest to examine similarities and differences in mechanisms underlying effective treatments, regardless of modality (psychological or pharmacological). Overall, however, it is clear that even our best treatments need improvement: a substantial proportion of patients do not benefit from them, or experience a relapse after initially successful treatment. Furthermore, effective interventions to prevent and treat traumatic stress symptoms within the first hours and days after a traumatic event are lacking. Bringing novel insights from basic science to the field of mental health, to understand mechanisms of change at a fundamental level, seems imperative to drive clinical treatment innovation. Such insights may, furthermore, point at ways to make promising interventions more effective and widely applicable. Yet, translational science is challenging, in part because there is a ‘culture gap’ between basic and clinical science, with little interdisciplinary communication and collaboration, different language to describe the same phenomena, different journals to disseminate findings and thus limited knowledge of needs and discoveries in the other fields. Aside from this gap, there are the methodological challenges associated with laboratory procedures, and boundary conditions, meaning that pioneering attempts to apply laboratory-developed interventions to clinical settings risk failure.

We believe that challenges to translational science arise, at least in part, from a lack of a shared vocabulary, which gives rise to a misunderstanding of clinically relevant targets at one end and insufficient appreciation of basic memory principles at the other end. We argue that, to successfully bridge findings ‘from mice to mental health’, it is essential to clarify (i) what aspects of emotional memory are clinical targets and (ii) when to assess and target these aspects.

We discuss the following questions: — Why study emotional memory to understand anxiety and stress-related disorders?— How to define emotional memory and targets for clinical interventions?— How can the science of memory inform treatment innovation?— What are the challenges of translational science from mice to mental health?— How can neuroimaging in humans contribute to translational science?— How could we facilitate the dialogue between basic and clinical science?


Why study emotional memory to understand anxiety and stress-related disorders?

Emotional memories are particularly resilient to forgetting. This is not problematic per se. Long-lasting memories for aversive experiences can help us deal with similar situations in the future. However, aspects of emotion-laden memories can also form the basis of psychological disorders, particularly when memory retrieval is involuntary. ‘Intrusive memories’—typically of emotional events—are a form of involuntary recall and have been theorized to play a critical role in the development and maintenance of various psychological disorders, such as PTSD, and also including depression, bipolar disorder, social anxiety, agoraphobia, spider phobia and health anxiety. Involuntary memories may differ across disorders: intrusive memories in PTSD replay trauma content from an index episode; intrusions in agoraphobia have content related to agoraphobic themes such as being trapped—whether real or imagined; intrusive memories in bipolar disorder can have a future quality as if pre-playing a mania-inducing event. Although highly specific to the given disorder, what is common is their intrusive and imagery-based natures. Clearly, not all involuntary memories are pathological—involuntarily recall can be useful at times—but when the intrusion contains highly aversive content, is unwanted and disrupts a person's functioning in daily life, then it is maladaptive and can enter the clinical domain. For example, Syrian refugees indicated that intrusive memories of traumatic experiences were linked to concentration problems and functional impairment on tasks associated with adaptation to the host country, such as language learning.

Here, we focus on memory in PTSD and, to a lesser degree, anxiety disorders. In PTSD, patients typically experience intrusive episodic memories of several distinct moments of the wider traumatic event. That is, intrusive memories are not a replay of the whole event from beginning to end, but rather of a few fragments within it—known clinically as ‘hotspots’. Aside from these sensory episodic (predominantly visual) intrusive memories ([PTSD criterion B1; p. 271]), people with PTSD frequently exhibit increased heart rate, sweating and muscle tone in response to trauma-related cues, as well as impaired extinction of such responses. In the DSM-5, the diagnostic criterion B5 for ‘intrusion symptoms’ involves ‘marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s)’ ([PTSD criterion B5; p. 271]), while criterion E for hyperarousal symptoms involves ‘marked alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic events(s) including hypervigilance (E3), exaggerated startle responses (E4) and problems with concentration (E5)’ ([PTSD criterion E; p. 272]). Both intrusive episodic memories and heightened physiological reactivity have been found to be predictive (among other factors) of the development of PTSD. However, while general alterations in physiological reactivity are common across many disorders (e.g. most anxiety disorders), it is trauma-related intrusion symptoms (particularly criterion B1) that are the core clinical feature of PTSD (and acute stress disorder) and distinguish them from other disorders. Interestingly, evidence from experimental studies also suggests that, although physiological reactions in response to trauma reminders and intrusive episodic memories frequently co-occur, they do not seem to be associated with each other, which has implications for intervention development (see §3a).

As yet, it remains unclear whether it is better to focus on the ‘impact’ of a memory, or on the underlying memory itself. When an involuntary memory occurs, it can not only bring back the sensori-perceptual, emotional, psychophysiological and peri-traumatic cognitions described earlier, but it can trigger a cascade of other, more distal symptoms, such as further distress, non-specific hyperarousal symptoms, negative mood and cognitions, and unwanted avoidance. It is these cognitive and emotional reports of the immediate and more distal symptoms that are the typical focus of cognitive therapy. However, even exposure therapy procedures thought to focus more proximally on the trauma memory involve approaches that are thought to leave the original trauma memory unaltered, creating a new inhibitory memory trace instead.

Here, we argue that focusing on treatments that target the underlying memory more directly may be beneficial: controlling the expression of involuntary emotional memories may prevent the occurrence of the other symptoms altogether. Since the beginning of the century, a vast growing body of literature suggests that it is indeed possible to change the underlying memory trace. As explained below, the theory of ‘reconsolidation’ states that memories are not necessarily permanent, but can be updated, reduced or enhanced, under the right circumstances. As we shall discuss, this has inspired a whole new line of research looking at how the plasticity of memories can be used to modify clinically dysfunctional memories. But what exactly do we mean by ‘emotional memory’?


How to define emotional memory and targets for clinical interventions?

Studying memory is complicated by the fact that we cannot directly observe a memory trace, but have to infer it from the different ways it is expressed. In memory research, a variety of behavioural measures provide different ‘read-outs’ of information that has been stored, for example neural responses, peripheral physiology, actions or action tendencies, (subjective) verbal reports or explicit tests of memory. These responses are thought to be indices of some sort of underlying neural ‘engram’, the memory trace, which supports these responses. While in many situations different read-outs converge, below we argue that a distinction between multiple memory systems is useful and paramount to making translational progress.


Multiple memory systems

It is possible to show evidence of remembering in the absence of awareness of that remembering. For example, the Swiss neurologist Claparède concealed a sharp pin between his fingers while greeting one of his amnesic patients with a handshake. Even though the patient reacted with surprise and anger, she forgot the encounter within minutes. However, when the neurologist tried to reintroduce himself shortly thereafter, the patient resolutely refused to shake his hand. She explained her reaction by stating that she was afraid that, perhaps, a pin was hidden in his hand, but even after repeated questioning could not remember that she herself had been stuck with it. While her brain was apparently able to form this association between a neutral handshake and a painful consequence, her brain was not able to voluntarily retrieve the event. The episodic part of the memory had not been stored.

Clinical cases like these, substantiated by abundant scientific evidence, teach us that our mind is made up of a constellation of agents that are, in principle, separable and rely on semi-independent circuits. In cognitive psychology, a classic distinction is made between ‘explicit’ or ‘declarative’ memory (what we can report, including episodic memory for events and semantic memory for facts) and ‘implicit’ or ‘non-declarative’ memory (including priming, reflexes and procedural memory such as aversive conditioning, motor skills and habits) (for a review). Declarative memory is mostly subserved by the medial temporal lobe; most forms of non-declarative memory are subserved by subcortical areas such as the amygdala (aversive conditioning) and the striatum (skills and habits). These memory systems can be independently targeted or damaged.

The idea that memory is composed of different systems is not new, but has now been widely accepted. Furthermore, work in both non-human animals and humans has highlighted that certain types of memory can be modified, while preserving other types. Yet, when translating these findings to develop treatments for psychological disorders, relatively little attention has been paid to specifying what type of memory (i) can be modified and (ii) should be modified. We argue that rather than the traditional declarative versus non-declarative memory system distinction, the clinical focus should be on the intrusive nature of an aversive memory, which could, in principle, stem from both systems. A clinical intervention should thus seek to target the involuntary expressions of the memory (both declarative and non-declarative), without compromising voluntary attempts to access the same information or skill. Voluntary forms of memory need to be preserved, e.g. for legal reasons a person may need to recount details of a trauma (eye witness testimonies and asylum reports). The simultaneous consideration of involuntary and voluntary retrieval of the same events should be a more central feature of traumatic stress research.

Successful translation of insights from basic science to inform clinical interventions, depends on a clear conceptualization of what type of memory is being targeted, and how to model this. A widely used experimental model of traumatic stress responses and other types of aversive learning has been Pavlovian conditioning. Research using this paradigm in rodents shows that it is possible to selectively update one (aspect of) memory, without affecting another, and one response system (e.g. reducing freezing to a conditioned stimulus), but not another (alleviating suppressed reward seeking after conditioning). Similarly, many interventions based on this paradigm in humans show effects on one type of memory read-out (e.g. reduced startle reflexes in response to conditioned pictures), but not on other types (e.g. expectancy ratings of the likelihood of an aversive consequence). Thus, it appears possible that rather than the whole memory, involuntary non-declarative aspects can be selectively targeted. Such dissociations are crucial when designing interventions for disorders such as PTSD: which aspects of memory can we modify, and is the aspect that can be modified, in fact, clinically meaningful?


Aversive conditioning paradigm: modelling involuntary and voluntary memory of threat associations in non-human animals and humans.

The classic model to study simple associative learning and memory is Pavlovian conditioning, which is well suited for research across species. In this paradigm, an initially neutral stimulus (conditioned stimulus, CS+; e.g. a triangle) is repeatedly paired with an intrinsically aversive stimulus (unconditioned stimulus, UCS; e.g. an electric shock), while another conditioned stimulus (CS−; e.g. a circle) is never paired with the UCS. With sufficient CS+/UCS pairings, the CS+ acquires the same aversive qualities as the UCS and will elicit a conditioned defensive response (CR) on its own. After repeated presentations of the CS+ without the UCS, the defensive response usually diminishes, a process that is referred to as ‘extinction learning’. In non-human animals, defensive responses are typically measured by assessing the amount of freezing in response to the CS, or avoidance behaviour; in humans, common measures include skin conductance responses, acoustic startle responses, heart rate, pupil dilation responses, action tendencies, UCS expectancies and subjective distress.

Although aversive conditioning very precisely models the formation of associations between environmental stimuli and allows research across species, it does not model one of the core symptoms of PTSD: intrusive memories of the traumatic event. Involuntary retrieval of an intrusive memory is not the same as a conditioned physiological response: it involves consciously retrieving a memory, i.e. drawing from the declarative memory system. Relatedly, physiological responses to trauma reminders are listed as a separate symptom from intrusive memories in the DSM-5; see earlier. Although a defensive response may very well be part of an intrusive memory, it does not account for its image-based episodic nature. Surprisingly, prominent neural circuitry models of PTSD based on aversive conditioning findings do not include mental imagery, which is a defining feature of episodic recall of an event. This conditioning literature, therefore, does not directly speak to the dissociation between involuntary and voluntary declarative memories.

An alternative experimental model with ecological validity for traumatic stress is the trauma film paradigm, which can model intrusive memories in response to viewing experimental material with traumatic content under controlled settings (for a review). Emerging experimental interventions based on this paradigm have shown effects on one type of memory read-out (e.g. frequency of intrusive memories), but not on other types (e.g. recognition memory test). Thus, it also appears possible that, rather than the whole memory, involuntary declarative aspects (e.g. frequency of intrusions) can be selectively targeted.


The trauma film paradigm: modelling involuntary and voluntary memory of psychological trauma in humans.

The trauma film paradigm has emerged as a well-established methodology to study intrusive memories of trauma, a core symptom of post-traumatic stress and one that can be distressing in its own right. It uses film stimuli in the laboratory, which contain traumatic content that can bring about intrusive memories subsequently in daily life. These memories are typically recorded in a diary, allowing for a frequency count of intrusive memories. Aside from intrusive memories, physiological reactivity and neural activity as well as subjective distress can be measured during and immediately after film viewing. This is similar to what is measured in conditioning paradigms. Additional measures of voluntary memory include free recall and recognition of details of the film. Therefore, this paradigm enables the study of memory for more ecologically valid stimuli, but still within a laboratory setting, conferring additional experimental control.

Although the trauma film paradigm can only be used in humans, there are putative parallels with other types of memory read-out at ‘lower’ translational levels (e.g. distress ratings or psychophysiological measures in the conditioning paradigms), which tentatively allow for translation of findings from basic neuroscience to simple real-life trauma. Yet, this is an understudied area. Given that assessment of intrusive memory frequency in humans typically involves ambulatory recordings over prolonged periods of time, research that directly compares intrusive memory frequency with other read-outs is sparse. The few studies that have assessed both physiology and intrusions in a laboratory setting indicate, however, a dissociation: trauma film reminder cues relative to control cues elicited both intrusive memories and heightened physiological reactions (e.g. skin conductance level) in one study, but the two measures were not associated. Another study found more intrusions to film reminder cues, without heightened physiological reactivity (skin conductance and heart rate). Moreover, individual differences in cue-elicited physiological responses were not predictive of subsequent intrusive memory frequency in everyday life. To translate findings from one memory read-out to another one in humans, future research should systematically examine under which conditions different read-outs converge or diverge.

Not only is memory for a traumatic event likely to rely on different independent systems, but its nature also appears to change over time. In that light, the timing of any intervention is crucial. That is, it is important to appreciate that memory processes are dynamic, and that procedural details concerning timing are crucial when implementing a treatment, and again later when assessing its effectiveness.


Multiple time points

The mind is not a video camera, automatically storing everything that occurs in front of the lens in a way that is easy to retrieve. To come back to the amnesic patient described by Claparède, she may be perfectly capable of remembering her neurologist's name and recognize his face in the short term, providing this information is actively rehearsed. Her failure to explicitly remember the incident with the pin does not indicate that she did not successfully encode the information. Rather, the information appeared not to be successfully consolidated in long-term storage, or lost in storage and therefore not successfully retrieved. Many people may respond with terror during a highly aversive experience, and will experience intrusions for a few days after, but only a few of them develop a disorder like PTSD where intrusions appear to continue for months or years.

A first time point to consider for memory modification is the ‘consolidation’ period: memory does not reach its final form during, or immediately after, encoding (unlike a video recording), but is still malleable for some time after the event. If altered during this malleable phase, the effects become apparent not initially, but at a later time points, after the memory has had a chance to consolidate. The concept of memory consolidation has been most convincingly illustrated by experiments in which pharmacological manipulations administered immediately after encoding left short-term (4 h) retrieval intact, but induced full amnesia in the long term (24 h). Post-encoding processes account for this dissociation, as they induce the synaptic changes, including long-term potentiation (LTP), that are necessary for the stabilization of a memory trace in the hours after its acquisition. This means that memory is initially malleable, i.e. there is the possibility to interfere with it.

While the duration of the consolidation window is typically estimated to be in the order of hours, another form of consolidation may continue indefinitely, with memories becoming more and more integrated into cortical networks. However, this so-called systems consolidation happens mostly offline, when memory is in a stable state and not susceptible to interference.

A second time point to consider for altering memories therapeutically is inspired by the theory of memory ‘reconsolidation’: findings from basic neuroscience indicate that consolidated memories can—upon their retrieval—enter a transient labile state, i.e. become malleable again. During this window, a memory can be updated, that is, new information can be integrated with a reactivated memory to modify future retrievals. For example, extinction learning within this window may diminish conditioned defensive responses more persistently than normal extinction learning, as the safety information has become part of the original fear memory. The re-stabilization of a labile memory relies on a postulated process called ‘reconsolidation’. This process is dependent on de novo protein synthesis, and may be disrupted through pharmacological interventions (e.g. noradrenergic blockade) or behavioural procedures that take away resources necessary for storage of certain elements of the memory (e.g. a competing visuospatial task). To our knowledge, the precise time window of memory (re)consolidation has not been systematically investigated in non-human animals nor in humans, though is assumed to be in the order of hours. The duration may depend on memory system and protocol used, and systematic work (e.g. using optogenetic manipulations to reactivate memory networks, followed by biochemical assays of plasticity markers) is needed to determine when exactly the window opens and closes. Again, the effects become apparent not initially (i.e. post-reactivation short-term memory is intact), but at a later time points after the (updated) memory has had a chance to reconsolidate.

The success of interventions that aim to harness principles of memory plasticity is dependent on their ability to target a memory when it is in an active, labile state. We have discussed two main time points during which memories can be altered: one that draws on theories of memory consolidation and one that draws on theories of memory reconsolidation. Inherent in this is the importance of a third type of time point: the outcome of memory modification cannot be observed until the memory has (re)turned to a stable state. This is important to consider when assessing the effectiveness of an intervention. Time has even further critical consequences: for example and fourth, a time gap of a few minutes may be needed between a retrieval cue and a blockade, to allow a memory to destabilize. Fifth, pharmacological interventions require a precise understanding of temporal profiles of drug actions to target the memory when it is labile. Research is clearly needed to define optimal time points for intervention delivery, which may be key to the success of a treatment.


How can the science of memory inform treatment innovation?


Successful translations

The principles of consolidation and reconsolidation imply that memory is malleable, either directly after an experience or upon reactivation. This has inspired exciting lines of research aimed at modifying emotion-laden memory in humans, with the hope to develop relatively simple-to-deliver strategies that have the potential to interfere with involuntary recall of memories once they are established, i.e. hours, days, months or even years after the trauma.

The first studies that translated findings in non-human animals to humans used classical aversive conditioning to induce a simple emotional memory. These showed that conditioned physiological responses could be eliminated by presenting a single reminder cue (the CS+) and administering a pharmacological agent (the beta-adrenergic antagonist propranolol) or a behavioural intervention (an extinction procedure) within the putative reconsolidation window. These findings have been replicated a number of times, using either the noradrenergic blockade or a behavioural extinction procedure, with effects persisting for over a year (for a discussion of non-replications, see section 4b ‘Challenges to translation’). Notably, these procedures only eliminated the automatic reflexive fear response (involuntary recall) and subjective feelings of fear, while leaving declarative knowledge about the aversive associations intact.

Another line of research, which has drawn on theories of consolidation or reconsolidation (depending on the time window), uses the trauma film paradigm to mimic complex emotional memory in non-clinical volunteers. This has shown that the number of intrusive memories can be reduced, for example, by directly interfering with the molecular processes underlying memory consolidation at the receptor level. Nitrous oxide, also known as ‘laughing gas’, blocks N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors which are important for LTP. Individuals who inhaled nitrous oxide for 30 min immediately after trauma film viewing, compared with medical air (control condition), showed a steeper decline in the number of intrusive memories over the course of one week. This suggests that across species, memory stabilization may rely on similar molecular processes.

Interestingly, a variety of interventions (whether pharmacological or behavioural/psychological or both) could, in principle, interfere with memory stabilization. For example, the frequency of intrusive memories can also be reduced by a relatively simple behavioural approach—by performing visuospatial tasks (e.g. Tetris; complex finger tapping), during a time period when memories are assumed to be labile, i.e. either during trauma film viewing, within minutes to hours after film viewing, or upon their reactivation 24 h after encoding. As expected, the task was not effective when administered before film viewing, or when only the task was given without retrieving the memory first. The rationale behind this procedure is that the task taxes visuospatial working memory resources which are thought necessary to (re)store intrusive memories with strong visual components, acting as a ‘cognitive blockade’. In line with this notion, non-visuospatial tasks appear to be less effective or have no effect. Crucially, when using a visuospatial task, across several studies the cognitive blockade selectively reduced intrusion frequency (involuntary recall), while leaving verbal and visual recognition (voluntary memory) intact (for a review). As mentioned before, that a task could selectively reduce the number of intrusive memories while sparing voluntary memory of a traumatic event is desirable from a clinical perspective: someone would still be able to recall the factual course of events that constitute the trauma (e.g. recognize the perpetrator and testify in court), without having to fear being overtaken by unwanted intrusions of the trauma in their everyday life. Yet, the mechanisms behind this are still not fully understood and require further investigation.

Recently, findings from conditioning studies in non-clinical volunteers have been translated to emotional memory for real-life events in sub-clinical populations. Three studies suggested that phobic responses could be decreased via reconsolidation-update mechanisms (snake or spider phobia; spider phobia). The procedure involved brief exposure to the object of fear (long enough to reactivate the memory, but short enough to prevent extinction; see below, section 4b ‘Challenges to translation’), followed by either a pharmacological manipulation (i.e. the administration of 40 mg propranolol) or a behavioural manipulation (i.e. extinction training). The manipulation changed avoidance behaviour into approach behaviour, with effects lasting up until three-month and 1-year follow-up. Importantly, the placebo group and the propranolol group without memory reactivation (i.e. no brief exposure to the spider) did not improve. Also, in this case, different memory read-outs of the fear memory diverged: initially, no differences were observed in subjective fear reports, but after three months, the reactivation + propranolol group scored in the normal range. This suggests that effects of memory modification may require time to transfer to more distal symptoms, possibly via mechanisms other than memory reconsolidation (e.g. sufficient exposure to the previously avoided stimulus without the concurrent physiological and behavioural fear responses, leading to cognitive reappraisal of threat).

Findings from studies using the trauma film paradigm with non-clinical volunteers and cognitive task interference have recently been translated to hospital settings, testing the modification of real-life emotional memory in the first few hours after a road traffic accident, and after traumatic child birth—i.e. within the putative consolidation time window. Both early phase (proof of concept) clinical studies aimed to prevent the occurrence of intrusive memories of trauma, by having patients play the computer game Tetris soon after the event, as a way to interfere with the consolidation of the image-based components of the memory. In the road traffic accident study, a brief reminder cue was given prior to the cognitive task to orient the patient's memory to the accident, because patients were now in a hospital setting, whereas the accident had occurred in another context. In the traumatic child birth study, a reminder cue was deemed not to be necessary—mothers were in the same hospital setting context in which the trauma occurred as for the delivery of the intervention—and often with the baby. Both studies showed, as predicted based on studies with experimental trauma which used the same outcome measure, that the intervention group recorded significantly fewer intrusions in a diary that they kept in the week following the traumatic event compared with control groups.

Targeting simple phobias and recent real-life trauma memory (i.e. a prevention approach because this is before a clinical diagnosis of PTSD can be made) may be regarded as an early step of intermediate clinical complexity, compared with laboratory research in healthy individuals on the one hand, and the more severe anxiety disorders and PTSD on the other. The more complex the memory becomes (e.g. older, or multiple events), the more important it is to define what aspect of the memory is being targeted and what read-out is used to assess whether it is effective, and to ensure the timing of the intervention uses or induces periods of memory malleability. Real trauma memories are typically stronger and broader than aversive memories formed in the laboratory. Case studies and pilot studies, which combined a memory reactivation procedure and propranolol administration to block reconsolidation of trauma memories in patients with PTSD, seem to be promising, though many more are needed to understand potential limitations and non-replications (see next section). Such small-scale work helps to get the right ingredients to develop a new treatment. To test effectiveness of a treatment once it is there, various types of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are necessary, but as argued below, at present more mechanistic insights may be required before investing in ‘expensive and time-consuming RCTs'.


Challenges to translation

While discoveries of memory plasticity fuelled excitement about the potential to offer brief interventions for mental health disorders with long-lasting effects, there has been considerable scepticism as well, especially among clinicians.

A first criticism that has been put forward is that the effects of the reconsolidation-update manipulation are usually restricted to one response system (for a review). However, we argue to the contrary that this can be an asset therapeutically. While it is true that this means that an intervention does not wipe out an entire memory or miraculously ‘cures’ someone of a full disorder from one day to another, from a clinical point of view this does not mean it is not worth investing in. The elimination of one debilitating symptom may improve quality of life and functioning, and open up resources to tackle (or prevent) other symptoms, as well as have distal effects after time, and it may be possible to target different aspects of the memory one at a time. Moreover, as argued above, for trauma it is an advantage that manipulations are usually restricted to one response system—permanent erasure of all aspects of memory for a traumatic event is not the aim of evidence-based clinical interventions and could, in fact, bring about profound legal, ethical and clinical consequences of concern.

More broadly, specifying clear, precise clinical targets and memory read-outs allows one to systematically test and optimize interventions along the translational pathway, which is impractical if one tries to treat an entire psychiatric syndrome at once. It is well recognized that the current classification system for mental health disorders, DSM-5, poses challenges for research owing to ongoing debate about the precise symptoms that constitute a given disorder and the overlapping symptoms across different disorders. Thus, a ‘precision focus’, focusing on one symptom rather than a whole disorder, may be more helpful when considering the aetiology of disorders. Indeed, arguably, it is the confusion that arises when talking about syndromes rather than symptoms that can stagnate scientific progress across various areas of mental health.

Second, scepticism has been fuelled by the fact that initial attempts to apply procedures in the clinic have been difficult to replicate. For example, the initial finding that trauma cue evoked physiological responding could be reduced following a pharmacological procedure that was postulated to tap into reconsolidation mechanisms was not replicated in a follow-up study. It should be noted that both studies had several important limitations, such as small sample sizes and lack of control groups for either the effects of reactivation or general drug effects. It is important to follow this up and delineate boundary conditions that arise during the complexity of clinical translation. Failed replications are not unique to clinical settings: pharmacological and extinction procedures within the reconsolidation window have sometimes not replicated—though note that there are more successful replications than non-replications. Furthermore, there is evidence that the procedure does not work strongly enough to eliminate all involuntary recall for everyone. Occasional (or partial) non-replications are to be expected at this early stage and yield important clues to direct future lines of research.

An important question is whether studies that failed to find an effect managed to actually trigger reconsolidation. Experimental studies have highlighted so-called boundary conditions—circumstances under which memory updating cannot take place (for a review). The first one is cue and context specificity: the reminder situation that is used to reactivate the memory may need to be identical to the encoding situation, which may be difficult to achieve in clinical practice. However, other experimental studies have found effects of memory modification extending from one reactivated element to other elements of a compound memory, to similar—but not identical—stimuli, including imagined threat events, and to persist across contexts. Furthermore, the finding that interventions in sub-clinical populations were successful in contexts other than the original encoding contexts suggests that this is not such an issue, as long as the targeted memory system is sufficiently engaged. Another boundary condition is the finding that reactivation of a memory is necessary, but not sufficient, to destabilize a memory. Whether or not a memory trace is destabilized may, at least partly, depend on whether there is something to be learned, i.e. whether novel or conflicting information requires an update, highlighting a potential evolutionary function of reconsolidation mechanisms. This may be governed by prediction error, i.e. a mismatch between what is expected and what occurs (for a computational account of when and how prediction may play a role in memory updating). For example, one study showed that in the case that a certain stimulus (CS) always predicted a shock (UCS), a single unreinforced presentation of the CS led to a violation of predictions and triggered memory destabilization. However, in the case of uncertainty (e.g. the stimulus was only reinforced in 50% of the trials during encoding), more unreinforced trials were needed to create a mismatch with what was expected. Similarly, older and stronger memories may require additional retrieval procedures for updating to take place, as do individual differences such as exposure to chronic stress and high trait anxiety.

Thus, the optimal timings (see the earlier section (3b) ‘Multiple time points') and duration of the reactivation procedure are likely to depend on the precise encoding history, with more ambiguous memories possibly requiring more conflicting information, longer durations or possibly multiple retrieval instances. Yet, longer and repeated retrievals of a memory bear the risk of initiating extinction learning (which involves the creation of a new, inhibitory memory trace) instead of memory destabilization. When this happens, no updating appears to take place. Some clinical pilot studies have used script-driven imagery for the reactivation of the trauma memory, similar to EMDR-like treatments: the question is whether the method of retrieval used in these treatments (prolonged, and with no obvious violation of expectancy) would have triggered reconsolidation, or instead extinction learning. Furthermore, memory read-outs during an intervention should not be mistaken for clinical targets. For example, a clinician may be inclined to continue a reactivation procedure until a decline in physiological arousal or subjective distress in response to trauma cues is observed. Yet, such a focus on acute fear relief may be counterproductive, and by inducing extinction learning, in fact prevent modification of the original trauma memory. This would have enormous implications for clinical practice, suggesting that therapists should not merely rely on seeing direct within-session change, but should prioritize capturing longer-term effects, i.e. after their therapy session has ended.

This touches on an important point: we do not currently have an index for memory destabilization or reconsolidation, other than inferring it retrospectively from the strength of memory recall. But this is essentially circular: if we observe a behavioural change, we infer that the memory was modified; if not, we conclude that some of the criteria for updating were not met. While, in an experimental setting, overt expectancies have been used to indicate at a group level whether memory destabilization was achieved, this index may not be sensitive enough to apply in real time on an individual level, as patients may not always be able to voice what they fear and what event violates their expectation. What we need is a memory read-out for offline processes that underlie memory plasticity.


How can neuroimaging in humans contribute to translational science?

Neuroimaging—especially (functional) magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)—has been frequently used for studying memory processes because of the possibility to predict which elements of an encoding episode will later be remembered and which will later be forgotten. So-called subsequent memory paradigms have yielded several markers that predicted the later voluntary recollection of information, or the involuntary retrieval of experimental trauma. Recent conditioning studies showed that patterns of neural activation during encoding can also be used to predict the long-term expression of involuntary non-declarative memory (i.e. physiological responses to conditioned stimuli). Furthermore, neuroimaging has been used to study memory reactivation and offline consolidation processes directly, without having to interfere with them. Perhaps, in time, techniques such as fMRI could help us capture critical time frames for memory updating—a process for which no other read-out exists. Such a read-out may not be feasible for use in clinical practice (yet), but it would allow us to test out procedures in real time that trigger memory destabilization, without having to retrospectively infer it from behaviour.

Another way that neuroimaging could advance translational science is by checking whether neural circuitries underlying a certain read-out of memory (e.g. startle responses) are comparable across species, or across non-clinical and clinical human populations. If so, there is stronger theoretical reason to translate interventions that target that read-out in non-human animals to humans, and eventually to clinical populations. If not, it may be necessary to go back a step and focus on a different read-out, until these ‘intermediate phenotypes' yield sufficient overlap to proceed. By covarying different memory read-outs within and across different translational levels, we may be able—in a ‘Sudoku’ way—to bridge gaps across paradigms and species. Neuroimaging could provide a valuable tool to build these bridges.


How could we facilitate the dialogue between basic and clinical science?

Harnessing the science of memory plasticity seems promising for the innovation of treatments to control the expression of unwanted emotional memories. Yet, to capture emotional memory in its full complexity, including its malleability and its context-dependent activation, science cannot rely on a single method, species or paradigm. Indeed, work on memory updating, including reconsolidation, has been conducted in different species (e.g. crabs, mice, rats and humans), different paradigms (e.g. classical context and cue conditioning, trauma film paradigm, as discussed here, but also operant conditioning, motor tasks) and different modalities (vision, audition and olfaction). A constructive dialogue between different levels of research is difficult as long as clinicians do not familiarize themselves with basic science, and scientists do not go beyond formulating the implications of their findings as merely ‘offering opportunities for the treatment of disorder ‘X’’. Both sides need to communicate and bear the challenges that will ensue in order to make progress. Here, we end with two recommendations. 1. Across translational steps, it is important to have a clear conceptualization of what aspect of memory is being targeted (or not) and how different memory systems map onto core clinical symptom(s).

Scientists need to be clear what memory system they are assessing and manipulating in their experiments, and how it links to clinical phenomena. Clinicians, in turn, need to feedback which clinical phenomena are most relevant to target and are core to a given disorder. For precision, it can be an advantage to focus on one symptom instead of a whole disorder, because it is virtually impossible to model a complete syndrome in the laboratory, especially when there is less clinical consensus than desirable about how symptoms should be clustered in the first place. 2. It is important to appreciate that memory encoding and retrieval refer to dynamic constructs and that many aspects of timing are crucial, both when designing and implementing an intervention, and when assessing its effectiveness.

Memory is not permanent, but can be updated. A range of factors determine whether updating will actually take place. Factors that need to be taken into consideration for treatment include the time since the traumatic event (e.g. immediately post-trauma or later), the time of diagnosis/symptom assessment relative to the intervention (memory read-out), the duration of the consolidation window as well as the reconsolidation window, and the similarities between encoding situations and retrieval cues. To systematically establish timing parameters for an intervention and avoid circular reasoning, an independent (real-time) read-out of memory susceptibility is urgently required. Neuroimaging may be a promising tool to provide such a read-out and validate translational steps across different levels.

With the challenges raised here, one can imagine that it is demanding during the treatment of established emotional memories to define various key parameters of an intervention, including (i) what retrieval cue represents the key aspect of the trauma memory that needs to be changed, (ii) how to present this retrieval cue to destabilize a memory, (iii) how to select an intervention to interfere with a destabilized memory, (iv) how to find the optimal timings to deliver such an intervention, and (v) how to tailor treatment to an individual, i.e. taking into account that the stimulus or procedure that triggers memory plasticity in some individuals may not be optimal for others. It should be noted that some of these challenges (e.g. selecting appropriate retrieval/reminder cues) do not exclusively apply to (re)consolidation-based treatments, but also apply to existing psychological treatments that seek to reduce established trauma symptoms (e.g. exposure therapy and imagery rescripting). Rather than setting challenges aside as definite boundary conditions, we are actually encouraged by the rapid accumulation of knowledge that is advancing our insights about necessary and optimal conditions for effective memory modification. In turn, ‘back-translation’ studies of effective procedures, in practice, may yield invaluable cues for basic research. We think that further progress can be made by investing in frameworks that reduce obstacles in the translational path from mice to mental health.

An effective dialogue to facilitate translational research is dependent on regular meetings and funding opportunities that allow memory scientists to consult with clinicians and vice versa. Scientists often seem unaware that evidence-based psychological treatments target processes of emotional learning and memory. Similarly, experimental work in the laboratory seems abstract and remote to clinicians working with patients with complex trauma. A constructive dialogue is not just important for the field of PTSD and anxiety—maladaptive emotional memory is core to many other psychological disorders. A focus on transdiagnostic processes and single symptoms opens up new opportunities for precision compared with a focus on full disorders. For example, intrusive memories occur frequently in depression and in substance-use disorders (albeit with different content), while cue-induced responses (e.g. craving, approach tendencies evoked by drug paraphernalia) can be reduced by similar reconsolidation-update manipulations as those used in phobias.

If memory is like a monster carrying traumatic information, it may be time to tame it. A first step is to familiarize ourselves with its many heads, each responding to its own triggers and each producing its own sights and sounds. We may come to realize that not all of the heads are ugly and not all of the sounds are terrifying. We can live with the monster, as long as it is not jumping out unexpectedly, carrying the negative emotions, physical stress and sensori-perceptual fragments that impair functioning.


The functional highly sensitive brain: a review of the brain circuits underlying sensory processing sensitivity and seemingly related disorders

Bianca Acevedo, Elaine Aron, Sarah Pospos, Dana Jessen — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2018. PMC5832686, CC BY 4.0.

During the past decade, research on the biological basis of sensory processing sensitivity (SPS)—a genetically based trait associated with greater sensitivity and responsivity to environmental and social stimuli—has burgeoned. As researchers try to characterize this trait, it is still unclear how SPS is distinct from seemingly related clinical disorders that have overlapping symptoms, such as sensitivity to the environment and hyper-responsiveness to incoming stimuli. Thus, in this review, we compare the neural regions implicated in SPS with those found in fMRI studies of—Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), Schizophrenia (SZ) and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) to elucidate the neural markers and cardinal features of SPS versus these seemingly related clinical disorders. We propose that SPS is a stable trait that is characterized by greater empathy, awareness, responsivity and depth of processing to salient stimuli. We conclude that SPS is distinct from ASD, SZ and PTSD in that in response to social and emotional stimuli, SPS differentially engages brain regions involved in reward processing, memory, physiological homeostasis, self-other processing, empathy and awareness. We suggest that this serves species survival via deep integration and memory for environmental and social information that may subserve well-being and cooperation.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Diverse perspectives on diversity: multi-disciplinary approaches to taxonomies of individual differences’.

Keywords: sensory processing sensitivity, autism spectrum disorders, fMRI, neural systems


Introduction

Clinically, sensory processing issues manifest as inappropriate responses to stimuli that involve emotional and behavioural disruptions, and interfere with an individual's daily functioning. As such, ‘sensitivity’ to sensory input may be defined positively as the ability to perceive small changes in stimulus intensity, or as a negative reaction to a low-threshold stimulus. Correspondingly, neural ‘hyper’-responsiveness is ‘over-reactivity’ to a stimulus, while ‘hypo’-responsiveness is the absence of a typical response.

However, a variety of factors affect how individuals express their ‘sensitivity’ to a stimulus, such as their childhood environment, their predisposition to ‘sensitivity’, as well as other individual factors (including co-occurring disorders), and the context in which a particular stimulus occurs. In this review, we will focus on the specific ‘sensitivity’ trait termed ‘sensory processing sensitivity’ (SPS) or ‘high environmental sensitivity’ (ES) as measured by the HSP Scale. Environmental sensitivity is considered a fundamental trait found on a spectrum and is defined as the degree to which an individual may register, process and respond to external factors. Based on the Highly Sensitive Child scale, a reliable self-report measure of SPS or environmental sensitivity, there appear to be three distinct groups of unique levels of environmental sensitivity: low, medium and high, with high sensitivity making up about 20–35% of a UK sample ranging in age from 8–19 years. The three levels of environmental sensitivity are maintained across childhood, adolescence and adulthood, and appear to be comprised of the same neurophysiological and psychological factors but are manifested in varying degrees within individuals, appearing as ‘high sensitivity’ in roughly 30% of adults. High sensitivity is mediated via neural and genetic factors that are thought to predispose individuals to adverse conditions (such as stress, poor health and disorders) in harsh environments, as well as bestowing benefits in supportive ones.

According to SPS theory, the trait is characterized by greater depth of processing, cognizance of subtleties in the environment, being easily overstimulated, having stronger emotional responses (both positive and negative), and empathy to others' affective cues. Found in over 100 other species, including primates, SPS is thought to be a survival strategy that may facilitate behaviours to garner resources, provide responsive care to others, and avoid threats through careful observation of each situation and then comparing it to past observations. However, high sensitivity is not adapted by all organisms within a given species because it has cognitive and physiological costs. Furthermore, if all organisms were equally sensitive, there would be no advantage to it. Hence, high sensitivity is thought to be ‘negative frequency dependent’, found only in a minority of individuals within a given species.

Similarly, differential susceptibility (DS) and biological sensitivity to context (BSC) theories propose that individuals vary in their degree of sensitivity, and thus highly sensitive persons are more susceptible both to the detrimental effects of harsh environments, and the benefits of positive and nurturing ones.

In recent times, there has been increased attention to sensory processing disorders and Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD), particularly in children, which are also characterized by hyper- or hypo-sensitivity to tactile, auditory and visual stimuli. However, in contrast to SPS, individuals with ASD typically show social communicative difficulties, impaired empathy, restricted interests and repetitive behaviours. In children with ASD, social deficits—such as difficulty in making eye contact, facial recognition, responding to others' emotional cues and reciprocating intentions—appear as early as a few months to 2–3 years of age. Indeed, a large body of work, including diagnostic tools, suggests that social impairments in ASD are largely mediated by deficient responsivity of neural structures involved in emotion, facial processing, empathy and reflective thinking. By contrast, fMRI research on SPS has tended to show prominent brain activation of regions that are implicated in empathy, social processing and reflective thinking.

Somewhat similarly, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is also characterized by maladaptive responses to triggering stimuli that are misperceived as harmful due to their similarity to stimuli present during the original trauma. This also leads to a generalized vigilance for threats and difficulty in properly evaluating sensory stimuli. These impairments manifest in one of two ways: as hyperarousal to stimuli or as dissociation that may appear as under-response to the triggering stimulus. These disruptions often result in the inability to properly integrate memories and a fixation on the past. Correspondingly, brain imaging studies suggest that PTSD is associated with dysregulated response in neural regions that process emotion, attention, memory and self-control. These studies suggest there is a general increase in emotional and vigilance-related brain activation in the amygdala; and diminished self-control, shown as PFC deactivation; while remediation from PTSD shows the reverse. Interestingly, some PTSD studies have shown diminished activation in sensory and temporal areas, supporting ideas that PTSD may also manifest as dissociation or lack of present-moment awareness.

Schizophrenia (SZ) and other psychosis-related disorders are also characterized by the inability to inhibit irrelevant information, from stimuli, along with difficulties in social cognition and interactions, which are mediated by impaired theory of mind, emotion-processing, and agency judgments. SZ also manifests as hyper-distractibility and marked deficits in working memory. Its active symptoms include auditory and/or visual hallucinations without corresponding sources in the external world. As such, neuroimaging studies that have compared SZ patients' (versus healthy subjects) response to emotional stimuli (facial expressions) indicate abnormal activation of brain regions involved in emotion, memory, attention, empathy, multisensory integration, reflective thinking and self-control. Clearly, these various disorders have overlapping symptoms, as ASD is also characterized by marked impairments in empathic and social processes and behaviours; and all seem to show maladaptive responsiveness to incoming emotional stimuli. They are also well known and include a broad symptom of categories, therefore, motivating our selection for comparisons.

As evidence suggests that there are behavioural, conceptual and perceptual differences across SPS, ASD, PTSD and SZ—typically with regard to empathy, social interactions and emotional responsivity to salient stimuli—we conducted a systematic review of functional MRI studies examining response to emotional and perceptual tasks across these fields to better understand the similarities and differences, as well as underlying neural correlates, for these conditions that involve ‘sensitivity’ to stimuli. We based this review on fMRI literature even though there are only four fMRI studies of SPS. However, we believe the comparison these allow, although only preliminary, will be useful because of the clear differences across these conditions.


Methods

First, we retrieved the four fMRI studies of SPS, and meta-analyses and review papers investigating ASD, PTSD and SZ with fMRI that involved tasks similar to those in the SPS studies: for example, studies examining responses to affective or social stimuli, emotion recognition or perceptual tasks. For ASD, PTSD and SZ, we focused on systematic reviews and meta-analyses, as the body of work on these are abundant. However, we also reviewed two individual fMRI studies of ASD that examined neural response to positive social stimuli and familiar versus unfamiliar faces, which very directly aligned with a study examining empathy as a function of SPS. Moreover, we only included studies of marked ASD and excluded milder forms of the disorder, such as High-Functioning Autism (HFA) to make for a strong comparison with SPS, as studies have tended to find differing results for samples low on Autism or with experimental paradigms that were not truly measuring empathy.


Results

This review included 27 peer-reviewed fMRI research articles, meta-analyses and review papers examining neural responsiveness to emotional, social or salient stimuli: four regarding SPS, eight ASD, nine SZ and seven PTSD (one meta-analysis reported on social cognition studies for both SZ and ASD). Brain region results and sample characteristics for SPS and ASD studies are shown in the electronic supplementary material, tables S1 and S2, respectively.

We compared patterns of activation and deactivation for SPS, ASD, SZ and PTSD studies. Common activations across all four were shown in the precentral gyrus. Activations unique to SPS were shown in neural structures associated with reward processing (VTA and SN, for positive stimuli only), physiological homeostasis and pain-control (hypothalamus and PAG); self-other processing and empathy (IFG and insula), awareness and reflective thinking (TPJ) and self-control (PFC)—while they showed deactivations or lack of results for ASD, PTSD and SZ in the context of emotional, social and perceptual tasks. However, SZ was dissimilar from SPS, ASD and PTSD in its showing deactivations in the caudate, thalamus, amygdala, cingulate/anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), superior frontal gyrus (SFG), precuneus, medial temporal gyrus and superior temporal lobe/gyrus (STL/STG)—while these areas were activated for SPS, ASD and PTSD (with some variability).

Comparison of SPS and ASD studies showed common neural activations in the caudate, thalamus, STG/STL, supramarginal gyrus and precuneus. However, SPS showed clear activations, whereas ASD showed deactivations, in the VTA/SN (for positive stimuli only); amygdala (emotion), hippocampus (memory), hypothalamus and PAG; as well as regions involved in empathy and self-other processing (insula, AI, IFG, FG); self-control and executive function (MFG and PFC); and the default mode network (DMN) including the temporal, TPJ, parietal and angular gyrus (AG).


Discussion

The present review highlights common and unique neural circuits reported for SPS as compared to ASD, PTSD and SZ–disorders that involve sensory issues and hyper- or hypo-responsiveness to stimuli. A common brain activation reported in the literature across these four conditions was the precentral gyrus; a primary site of motor command that is involved in conscious movement. Common activations for SPS, ASD and PTSD (showing deactivation or lack of activation for SZ) were the caudate (reward processing), thalamo-cingulate circuit (attention) and areas of the DMN (SFG, precuneus and temporal areas) involved in reflective thinking, motor and cognitive control. These results highlight some neural structures that may coordinate hyper-sensitivity symptoms displayed in SPS, ASD and PTSD, and also suggests how SPS may be correlated with some of these conditions. For example, individuals with high (versus low) SPS may be more susceptible to PTSD and other adverse reactions following trauma exposure.

Neural activations that appeared for SPS, but showed deactivations or lack of activations for ASD, PTSD and SZ, were shown in regions that mediate reward (to positive stimuli only), hormonal balance, calm, empathy, self-reflective thinking and self-control (hypothalamus, PAG, IFG, insula, TPJ and PFC). These brain structures highlight some of the primary features that differentiate SPS from the disorders reviewed herein, such as enhanced conscientiousness, empathy and depth of processing. Highly sensitive individuals do experience hyperarousal to some stimuli, such as when feeling empathy towards others' distress or in the presence of unusually loud noises, but these may be moderated in at least some individuals, if not most, by increased physiological calm and homeostasis, as well as cognitive and emotional control. This requires regulating unpleasant emotional states to optimize outcomes for the self and others as seen by prominent activation of the PFC, involved in self-regulation. SPS is characterized by a deep integration of information and intricate memory processing. These two neural signatures of SPS processing are facilitated when the organism remains calm in the presence of a stimulus while engaging other emotional, cognitive and sensory systems.

However, for ASD, PTSD and SZ, dysregulated responses in the hippocampus, insula and DMN are typical, disrupting memory and integration of information. Also in ASD, PTSD and SZ, decreased reward to positive stimuli plus a lack of empathy, calmness and self-control coincide with disruptions in social behaviours, as seemingly benign stimuli may be perceived as threats.

For ASD specifically, the reward, emotional and calming-inducing nature of social stimuli appear to be impaired, as manifested in diminished VTA, amygdala, hippocampal, hypothalamic and PAG activations. This results in lessened self-other processing and decreased empathy (deactivation of the IFG, FG and insula, and AG) that are cardinal features of ASD as confirmed by many studies. We suggest that these differences in response to social stimuli for ASD (compared with SPS) may also be due to the diminished calm and reward inducing elements that are typically evoked for social/affective events in neuro-typical individuals. This suggests perhaps that a key divergence for SPS and ASD may be the extent to which individuals find social/emotional stimuli rewarding and are able to physiologically/hormonally and behaviourally respond adaptively to both positive and negative social stimuli.

The present review highlights some of the principal features of SPS, ASD, SZ and PTSD; and provides some key neural patterns that may serve to distinguish SPS from clinical disorders with sensory symptoms. They also help to clarify practical issues around SPS and neurodiversity perspectives on ASD which otherwise have suggested that all sensory issues are clear indications of ASDs. It is important to note that ASD is a spectrum showing varying degrees of symptoms with some individuals having HFA or Asperger’s. However, the present review only included studies of diagnosed ASD, and excluded studies in which the majority of subjects were HFA.

With only four fMRI studies involved in SPS, it is clear that more research is needed on this topic. Although this review may seem preliminary, it seemed warranted to begin to clarify how SPS is distinct from disorders that may seem related due to symptoms and hyperarousal to stimuli. However, as shown by fMRI studies, SPS is clearly different with respect to empathy, emotional responsiveness, self-reflection, physiological calm and self-regulation. Thus, this review may serve as a basis for clarification of diagnoses, practical questions, and further research and developments.


Conclusion

SPS is distinct from seemingly related clinical disorders—such as ASD, PTSD and SZ—that have overlapping symptoms such as sensitivity to the environment and hyper- or hypo-responsiveness to stimuli. Consistent with research suggesting that SPS is associated with greater empathy and awareness in response to social, emotional and perceptual tasks, we found that SPS differentially engages brain regions involved in reward processing (for positive stimuli), memory, physiological homeostasis, self-other processing and awareness. We suggest that adaptive SPS strategies involving empathy, awareness, calmness and physiological and cognitive self-control may serve a species by facilitating deep integration and memory for environmental and social information, which may ultimately foster survival, well-being and cooperation.


Ethics

The articles reviewed provided approval statements for research with human subjects and informed consent.


Data accessibility

All data gathered for this review may be available upon request to the corresponding author.


Authors' contributions

B.A., PhD contributed to the conception and design of this review, making decisions about inclusion criteria for articles, interpretation of the data, drafting and revising the article, and final approval of the version to be published. E.A., PhD contributed to making decisions about the inclusion criteria and revising the article. S.P. contributed to gathering and organizing research articles for the review, drafting and organizing the tables, and revising the article. D.J. contributed to gathering and organizing research articles for the review, drafting and organizing the tables, and revising the article.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

All data gathered for this review may be available upon request to the corresponding author.


Facing up to the hard question of consciousness

Daniel C. Dennett — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2018. PMC6074080, CC BY 4.0.

The so-called hard problem of consciousness is a chimera, a distraction from the hard question of consciousness, which is once some content reaches consciousness, ‘then what happens?’. This question is seldom properly asked, for reasons good and bad, but when asked it opens up avenues of research that promise to dissolve the hard problem and secure a scientifically sound theory of how the human brain produces the (sometimes illusory) convictions that mislead us.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Perceptual consciousness and cognitive access'.


The hard question is not the hard problem

David Chalmers (‘Facing up to the hard problem of consciousness’) focused the attention of people researching consciousness by drawing a distinction between the ‘easy’ problems of consciousness, and what he memorably dubbed the hard problem.

The easy problems of consciousness include those of explaining the following phenomena: — the ability to discriminate, categorize and react to environmental stimuli;— the integration of information by a cognitive system;— the reportability of mental states;— the ability of a system to access its own internal states;— the focus of attention;— the deliberate control of behaviour;— the difference between wakefulness and sleep [p. 201].

The hard problem ‘is the problem of experience’ [p. 202], accounting for ‘what it is like’ or qualia. To many researchers, this seemed like a sensible divide-and-conquer research strategy: first, we tackle all the easy problems, and then we turn our attention to the hard problem. To others, the identification of the hard problem called for something like a scientific revolution, replacing the standard methods and assumptions of cognitive science (which are continuous with the standard methods and assumptions of biology, chemistry and physics) with a more radical perspective. The hard problem, they surmised, will only be addressed by a return to some form of dualism, or panpsychism, or some yet to be articulated overthrow of what might be considered normal science.

I have been arguing for decades that Chalmers was mis-focusing our attention, exaggerating an artefact of inquiry that I identified in 1991: the failure to ask, and answer, what I called the hard question: ‘And then what happens?’ [p. 255]. The question, more specifically, is: once some item or content ‘enters consciousness’, what does this cause or enable or modify? For several reasons, researchers have typically either postponed addressing this question or failed to recognize—and assert—that their research on the ‘easy problems’ can be seen as addressing and resolving aspects of the hard question, thereby indirectly dismantling the hard problem piece by piece, without need of any revolution in science. The causes of the misdirection can be uncovered by reminding ourselves of a few largely uncontentious but easily neglected discoveries of neuroscience: (i) There is no double transduction. The various peripheral and internal transducers—rods and cones, hair cells, olfactory epithelium cells, stretch-detectors in muscles, temperature-change detectors, nociceptors and others—are designed by evolution to take the occurrence of physically detectable properties as input and yield signals—axonal spike trains—as output. There is no central arena or depot where these spike trains become recipes for a second transduction that restores the properties transduced at the periphery, or translates them into some sort of counterpart properties of a privileged medium. Vision is not television, audition does not strike up the little band in the brain, olfactory perception does not waft aromas in any inner chamber. (Nor, one had better add, are there subjective counterpart properties, subjective colours-that-are-not-seen-with-eyes, inaudible-sounds, ghost-aromas that need no molecular vehicles, for us to enjoy and identify in some intimate but unimaginable way.) Colour vision is accomplished by a sophisticated system of information processing conducted entirely in spike trains, where colours are ‘represented’ by physical patterns of differences in spike trains that are not themselves colours. The key difference between the transmission of colour information by a DVD and the transmission of colour information by the various cortical regions is that the former is designed by engineers to be a recipe for recreating (via a transduction to another medium) the very properties that triggered the peripheral transducers that compose the megapixel screens behind the camera lens, while the latter is designed by evolution to deliver useful information about the affordances that matter to the organism in a form that is readily usable or consumable by the specialized circuits that modulate the behaviours of systems external and internal.(ii) So, there is no place in the system for qualia, if they are conceived of as intrinsic properties instantiated by (as contrasted with represented by) some activities in the nervous system.

I have discovered that it is useful to pause at this point and invite readers to consider whether or not they actually agree with these two basic points, because their implications are highly destructive of commonplace presumptions. In particular, the widespread conviction that qualia, thus conceived, must obviously exist if we are to make sense of our introspective access to them, is an illusion, not an optical illusion or auditory illusion, but a theorist's illusion, an artefact of bad theory, not observation. Richard Power nicely captures the source of this illusion.We know that our perceptions or imaginings of trees, faces, etc. are distinct from the objects themselves. They are internal representations, representations in our minds.We understand the concept of representation from external representations, such as pictures, or verbal descriptions. For these representations we can have direct experience of both a representer (e.g. portrait painting) and a representee (e.g. the person painted). Call these the medium and the content. Thus for the Mona Lisa, the medium is a painting that hangs in the Louvre; the content is an Italian woman who modelled for the artist centuries ago. Medium and content may have attributes in common, if the representation is iconic (as they say in Semiotics). Oval partly-brown patches in the painting resemble the oval brown eyes of the Italian lady. But usually medium and content are of different stuff: oil on canvas, in the case of the Mona Lisa, as against human flesh. And in many cases the representation is symbolic, so that medium and content share no features.This is the conceptual scheme that we bring to internal representations, because it is the only one we have. But there is a huge difference. For external representations we can experience both medium and content, oil on canvas as well as people, trees, or whatever. But for internal representations, we do not experience the medium AT ALL. Only the content, along with some contextual features such as the time when the percept or imagining occurred. The idea of a spiritual consciousness arises from the illusion that we DO experience the medium of our internal representations, and that it is iconic.…In short, we conceptualise the medium of our internal representations by abstracting some features from the content, and attributing them to some kind of spiritual or ghostly substance. That is the best we can do, because actually we cannot experience the medium at all and have to look for analogies in the external world. The idea that the medium is some state of the brain seems intuitively absurd, so powerful is the illusion that we are dealing with an iconic representation in a medium of spirit.Personal correspondence, 3 May 2017 (iii) Consciousness cannot be a ‘movie running in the head’. All the work (and play) done by the homunculus who sits in the Cartesian Theater, the imaginary control room in the centre of the brain, must be broken up into tasks that can be outsourced to lesser agents or agencies. All the comprehension, appreciation, delight, revulsion, recognition, amusement, etc. that human beings experience must be somehow composed by the activities of billions of neurons that are myopic in the extreme, cloistered in their networks of interacting brethren, oblivious to the larger perspective they are helping to create. But how? That is the hard question.


Why the hard question is seldom asked

One explanation for the neglect of the hard question is that science in this area proceeds from the peripheries towards the interior, analysing the operation of transducers and following their effects inwards. Start with the low hanging fruit; it is a matter of proximity, non-invasiveness and more reliable manipulability—we can measure and control the stimulation of the peripheral transducers with great precision. Research on the efferent periphery, the innervation of muscles and the organization of higher-level neural motor structures, can be done, but is more difficult for a related reason, which has more general implications: controlled experiments are designed to isolate, to the extent possible, one or a few of the variable sources of input to the phenomenon—clamping the system, in short—and then measuring the dependent variables of output. Accomplishing this requires either invasive techniques (e.g. stimulation in vivo of motor areas) or indirect manipulation of subjects' motivation (e.g. ‘press button A when you hear the tone; press button B when you hear the click; try not to move otherwise’). In the latter case, researchers just assume, plausibly, that conscious subjects will understand the briefing, and be motivated to cooperate, and avoid interfering activities, mental or skeletal, with the result that they will assist the researcher in setting up a transient virtual machine in the cortex that restricts input to their motor systems to quite specific commands.

Similarly, working on the afferent side of the mountain, researchers brief subjects to attend to specific aspects of their sensory manifold, and to perform readily understood simple tasks (usually, as quickly as possible), with many repetitions and variations, all counterbalanced and timed. The result, on both the afferent and efferent fronts, is that subjects are systematically constrained—for the sake of science—to a tiny subset of the things they can do with their consciousness. Contrast this with non-scientific investigation of consciousness: ‘A penny for your thoughts’, ‘What are you looking at now?’, ‘What's up?’

This is all obvious, but it has a non-obvious side effect on the science of consciousness: it deflects attention from what is perhaps the most wonderful feature of human consciousness: the general answer to the hard question, ‘And then what happens?’ is ‘Almost anything can happen!’ Our conscious minds are amazingly free-wheeling, open-ended, protean, untrammelled, unconstrained, variable, unpredictable, …. Omni-representational. Not only can we think about anything that can occur to us, and not only can almost anything (anything ‘imaginable’, anything ‘conceivable’) occur to us, but once something has occurred to us, we can respond to it in an apparently unlimited variety of ways, and then respond to those responses in another Vast [p. 109] variety of ways, and so forth, an expanding set of possibilities that outruns even the productivity of natural languages (words fail me). Of course, on any particular occasion, the momentary states of the various component neural systems constrain the ‘adjacent possible’ to a limited selection of ‘nearby’ contents, but this changes from moment to moment, and is not directly in anybody's control. It is this background of omnipotentiality that we take for granted, and cordon off accordingly in our experimental explorations. It is worth noting that we have scant reason to think that simpler nervous systems have a similar productivity. Most are likely to be ‘cognitively closed’ systems, lacking the representational wherewithal to imagine a century or a continent, or poetry, or democracy, … or God. The famous four Fs (feed, fight, flee and mate) may, with a few supplements (e.g. explore, sleep) and minor suboptions, exhaust the degrees of freedom of invertebrates.

Probably even our closest relatives, the chimpanzees and bonobos, have severely constricted repertoires of representation, compared with us. Here is a simple example: close your eyes right now and imagine, in whatever detail you like, putting a plastic wastebasket over your head and climbing hand-over-hand up a stout rope. Easy? Not difficult, even if you are not strong and agile enough—most of us are not—to actually perform the stunt yourself. Could a chimpanzee engage in the same ‘imagining’ or ‘mental time travel’ or ‘daydreaming’? I chose the action and the furnishings to be items deeply familiar to a captive chimp; there is no doubt such a chimp could recognize, manipulate, play with the basket, and swing or climb up the rope, but does its mind have the sort of self-manipulability to put together these familiar elements in novel ways? Maybe, but maybe not. The abilities of clever animals—primates, corvids, cephalopods, cetaceans—to come up with inventive solutions to problems have been vigorously studied recently, and this research sometimes suggests that they are capable of trying out their solutions ‘off line’ in their imaginations before venturing them in the cruel world, but we should not jump to the conclusion that their combinatorial freedom is as wide open as ours. For every ‘romantic’ finding, there are ‘killjoy’ findings in which clever species prove to be (apparently) quite stupid in the face of not so difficult challenges.

One of the recurrent difficulties of research in this area is that in order to conduct proper, controlled scientific experiments, the researchers typically have to impose severe restrictions on their animals' freedom of movement and exploration, and also submit them to regimes of training that may involve hundreds or even thousands of repetitions in order to ensure that they attend to the right stimuli at the right time and are motivated to respond in the right manner (the manner intended by the researcher). Human subjects, by contrast, can be uniformly briefed (in a language they all understand) and given a few practice trials, and then be reliably motivated to perform as requested for quite long periods of time. The tasks are as simple as possible, in order to be accurately measured, and the interference of ‘mind-wandering’ can be minimized by suitable motivations, intervals of relaxation, etc.

The effect, in both speaking human subjects and languageless animal subjects, is to minimize the degrees of freedom that are being exploited by the subjects, in order to get clean data. So, huge differences in the available degrees of freedom are systematically screened off, neither measured nor investigated.

This explains the relative paucity of empirical research on language production in contrast with language perception, on speaking in contrast with perceiving, parsing, comprehending. What are the inputs to a controlled experiment on speaking? It is easy to induce subjects to read passages aloud, of course, or answer ‘Yes’ and ‘No’ to questions displayed, but if the experimenter were to pose a task along the lines of ‘tell me something of interest about your life’ or ‘what do you think of Thai cuisine?’ or ‘say something funny’, the channel of possible responses is hopelessly broad for experimental purposes.

Amir et al. attempted to find an fMRI signature for humour in an experiment that showed subjects simple ‘Droodle’ drawings that could be simply described or given amusing interpretations.

This is either:Two smaller horizontal ellipses in a vertical ellipse, orCloseup of a pig looking at book titles in a library.

This is an ingenious example of restricting inputs and thereby getting interpretable regularities in the output variables (from fMRI). Compare it with a parallel project (untried, to my knowledge!) to extract useful data from a variation on the New Yorker's weekly contest to provide a funny caption for a cartoon. Subjects are all shown the same set of captionless drawings, and on some trials, subjects would be instructed to (try to) say something funny, and on other trials, simply to (try to) describe the picture. Even though different subjects would be given exactly the same visual stimuli on each trial, the variability of responses, both in the brain and in external behaviour, communicative and otherwise, would obviously defy statistical analysis. Thousands of entries are submitted every week and probably in most cases those entries have been eventually chosen from a variety of candidates that ‘occur’ to the competitor, and then honed and honed and honed. Treating the first ‘output’ as indicative of the general power of human consciousness, rather than merely a semi-reliable marker of its instantaneous imbalance, would be myopic.

We know, anecdotally, that people's volatility of experience is a fact of life. Any attempt to measure this volatility experimentally is all but impossible, and so, the goal of explaining it scientifically is postponed or, more often, utterly ignored.

Another reason why the hard question is seldom asked is related to Richard Power's point about our lack of access to the properties of the medium of conscious experience. Think of the ‘miracle’ of vision. For millennia, reflective people from the pre-Socratic philosophers and Aristotle to the dawn of modern science with Descartes in the seventeenth century were quite baffled by the familiar fact that they could see things. Did something emanate from the eyes to the front surfaces of objects? What entered the eye, and where did it go once it was inside? Over the past few centuries, our understanding of how vision is accomplished has grown magnificently, and one of the striking facts about what we have learned is that until scientists told us, we had no idea at all, no ‘privileged access’, to the complicated activities of the optic nerve, the occipital cortex and even the activities of our eyeballs. Saccades were a surprising discovery to most people, as was the dramatically reduced acuity of perifoveal resolution, the absence of peripheral colour vision, the multiple ‘retinotopic maps’ in the cortex and much more. Science could inform us about all these amazing complexities, but eventually, it seemed, these processes yielded their results to wherever we were, our private, familiar world where we each, individually, had access to our subjective experiences. ‘Thanks, science, for laying the groundwork, but you are now entering a region where we are the authorities, and we'll take over the task of explanation, if you don't mind. Here is our phenomenological theory … derived by introspection’.

The problem is that this has seemed to make sense to too many researchers. They have acquiesced in the overconfident declarations of authority, which they probably found easy to endorse in their own cases. (For a vivid case of this assertion of authority, see Thomas Nagel's comment, and my response, at the NYU conference on animal consciousness, 17–18 November 2017.) So they ceased, or postponed, or delegated the rest of the inquiry to the introspectors; their part of the job was complete: they had uncovered the unconscious and heretofore unimagined processes that deliver the goods ‘to consciousness’ and now it was somebody else's worry how to explain that. This is the setting, for example, in which some researchers conceive of their task as discovering the NCC, the neural correlates of consciousness, a process of systematic elimination until the necessary and sufficient conditions, the causes, of consciousness are pinned down in the brain while taking only sidelong glances at the typical effects of consciousness. This is an environment in which the theoretical illusion of Chalmers' hard problem can flourish.


Why the hard question is so hard

The fact is, the traditional claim that our conscious minds are immediately and maybe even perfectly known to each of us is wildly false. The psychologist Karl Lashley once suggested provocatively that ‘no activity of the mind is ever conscious’, by which he meant to draw our attention to the inaccessibility of the processing that we know must go on when we think. What ‘we’ do ‘have access to’ is the contents and apparent temporal order of those contents, but how these contents, these representations of properties, objects and events, manage to represent what they do, and how they are generated when they ‘appear’ to ‘us’ is completely off-limits to introspection. Lashley gave an example: if asked to think a thought in dactylic hexameter, those who know which rhythm that is can readily oblige. For instance:How in the world did this case of dactylic hexameter come to me?

We often know what we are trying to do, and why, because it is implicated by the context of the contents. When we hear a request to imagine a blue capital letter A against a black background, and accede, we are not surprised that we can do it, nor that we did it then, but we have no insight at all into how the ‘backstage’ neural machinery accomplished this. And when our minds are wandering, the succession of thoughts, images, melodies, pangs and thrills that occur to us arise from we know not where. How we do it, what goes on in us to produce such a thought, is something quite inaccessible to us. We can, however, reason plausibly about what must somehow be happening, beneath our notice. When we do this, we are not observing; we are theorizing. For instance, have you ever eaten a live frog? Have you ever strangled somebody to death with your bare hands? Your answers (I trust) are ‘instantaneous’, high-confidence and negative. How did you do it? You cannot tell by introspective observation; your convictions just ‘came to you’. But you can venture some canny theoretical hypotheses. Not by swiftly accessing your alphabetized and memorized list of Things I have never done (which has trillions of entries, of course). It must be—we reason—because we somehow (swiftly, without articulating it) recognize that if we had ever eaten a live frog or strangled somebody, we would not have forgotten it; it would now be flooding our conscious experience with garish details, and because nothing like that has arrived, we are quite sure it never happened. Contrast this with our inability to answer questions such as ‘Have you ever driven north for more than ten miles behind a Ford sedan?’ and ‘Have you ever had a day in the course of which you held a carving knife, two paperback novels, and a wool jacket?’ Our ability to answer some such questions and not others must depend, therefore, on our having a substantial self-knowledge that can somehow be tapped on the fly: ‘I'm the sort of person who would [not] forget that, if it ever happened’. Think how you would react to a new acquaintance who responded to the strangling question by mulling, scratching his chin and staring into the distance before answering!

Our self-knowledge is built up over a lifetime of experience, by processes we cannot observe, but we have learned that in many regards, we can trust it unreservedly. If it seems to us to be ‘knowledge by acquaintance’ and ‘immediate’, a special, well-nigh magical (or at any rate science-defying) kind of knowledge or authority, that is an illusion.

Another example of the sort of implicit and fallible reasoning that actually lies behind many of the overconfident declarations of person-first authority concerns the nature of colour experience, and more particularly, colour ‘qualia’. I have been denying the existence of qualia, as somehow directly apperceptible, intrinsic properties of conscious mental states for decades, and for all that time, many very thoughtful and well-informed people have scoffed dismissively. Imagine denying the existence of qualia! These wacky philosophers! No doubt, a good deal of the rejection of my position is due to my not having been able to replace their conception with a suitably persuasive alternative, but I can now say a little more—still not enough for some, I daresay—about what is there instead of qualia. (For an earlier attempt, see.) The imagination-stretcher I will use to present this alternative is owed, ironically, to Ned Block, one of the supreme defenders of qualia over the years.

Block argues for the existence of what he calls mental paint. The term, Block reminds us, was coined by Harman, and has been used by Block in defence of the view that there are properties of our conscious experience that are distinct from the properties (of things in the world) represented in our experience. In terms of Power's analogy, Block is insisting on properties of the medium, not the content of the medium at various times. Block ignores my derogatory term for the family of positions into which his falls. I spoke of views that posit figment. Several cognitive scientists have confessed to me that they are strongly tempted to believe in figment, in spite of my arguments, and Block can be seen in his series of papers to be enthusiastically championing that view. Block also does not mention Zenon Pylyshyn's earlier disparagement of what he called ‘mental clay’ as a magical material out of which to fashion internal surrogates whose causal properties automatically track the physics of their external counterparts.

If magical mental clay is a bad idea, how about non-magical virtual clay, made of software, or information-processing? In virtual clay, you add only those properties you need for some purpose and simply leave out the rest. The difference between a real hotel and a virtual hotel is that in a real hotel, you have to devote lots of R&D, money and materials to make the rooms relatively soundproof, while in a virtual hotel, you have to devote lots of R&D and computer cycles and data structures to make the room not soundproof. A virtual hotel room has within it only what you positively install, because it is something like an automated, dynamic representation of a hotel room.

One of my favourite examples is Donald Knuth's creation of virtual glue as an aid to creating the software typesetting system, TeX, one of the recognized masterpieces of software design. Virtual glue is a virtually elastic and virtually sticky substitute for the rigid space called up by the typewriter space bar. Putting a varying virtual dab between each pair of words, depending on their relative lengths, his formatting programme then virtually stretched the word-string or formula by virtually pulling on its virtual ends until it fitted perfectly between the left and right margins, apportioning just the right among of extra white space for each gap between words. TeX and its user-friendlier descendant LaTeX are the type-setting gold standard in scientific publication, where equations and other complex two-dimensional arrays of symbols are common, and now is used for many other page-design problems. Each word or symbol is put in a virtual box and, as one aficionado has put it,Glue attaches boxes together: it defines how the boxes will be joined (should they line up their centers? Should they be aligned by some guideline?), and it defines how big the space between them should be, and how much it can be stretched or compressed. Page layout is really just tension relaxation: find the arrangement of boxes which produces the smallest overall tension, within the constraints imposed by the glue.

Fortunately, Knuth did not also have to make his page-designing glue virtually shiny, tasty and smelly, but those are possible add-ons, if you have the time, the money and a good reason to do it. If we consider Block's mental paint to be virtual paint, his position becomes instantly more defensible, less of a fundamental challenge to cognitive science; it becomes a puzzle to be solved, not an impregnable mystery or an invitation to dualism. Block himself comes close to recognizing this:I am not assuming that if there is mental paint, it is non-relational (intrinsic) or has no representational aspect. Since I favor physicalism, I allow that mental paint may be a relational neural property. To avoid misunderstanding: I do not claim that there is anything red or round in the head when one veridically sees a red or round thing in the world as when red pigment in a painting represents a red barn. (fn2)

The virtue of virtual machines is that there is no point in imagining them unless you ask and answer the hard question. ‘OK, I'll give you virtual glue. And then what happens?’ Knuth's genius was seeing how he could create a dynamic data structure that could do something, could make a lot of hard work feasible by framing the problem in a certain way.

In general, one of the lessons of AI, or of computer science more generally, is that you never postulate a representation unless you postulate a representation-user whose ‘access to’ and ‘interpretation of’ the representation is definable, indeed implementable. This lesson has often been ignored in cognitive science and cognitive neuroscience, and for reasons that are not entirely disreputable. Almost everybody feels comfortable talking about representation in the nervous system these days, and about information being moved and processed and stored. The licence for this departure from the behaviourist strictures of yore is tacitly assumed to be that computer science has made it respectable to talk in these terms. And so it has, but until you can say just how (‘mechanistically’, in non-mentalistic, non-intentional terms) the information is interpreted, moved, stored and retrieved, you are taking out intelligence-loans that need to be repaid. Deficit spending can be a useful, indeed well-nigh obligatory, policy when a scientific inquiry is in its infancy, as long as a path is left open to pay back the loans. (And if you do not pay off your loans, your project has an appropriately dismissive label: not software but vaporware.)

There could be no clearer example of this deficit spending than Block's postulation of mental (or virtual) paint. OK, so there is representation of something rather like paint (not like glue, not like sounds) that plays a role in visual perception, and we can confirm its existence (Block thinks) by considering empirical findings about measurable differences in subjects' performances in controlled experiments. The fact that Block pursues the strategy of discussing empirical experiments in detail shows that he is not falling in the typical philosophers’ trap of thinking the existence of what he is now calling mental paint is just obvious, a ‘direct’ deliverance of ‘first-person access’; he is accepting my challenge to prove that there are qualia, and in one sense that means that he is agreeing with me and abandoning qualia in one traditional sense: they are not being considered by him to be introspectible realities, readily confirmable by simply attending to one's experience. Mental paint, if it exists, is a posit of theory, a discovery of third-person science, not first-person observation.

This is a tempting idea precisely because it is not a claim about the (real) properties of the medium of representation, but about what the system of representation can do, thanks to its format. There is no second transduction into a mysterious medium, but there may well be a translation into a format that is user-friendly from the point of view of the subpersonal consumers of the representations. In other words, instead of qualia, we can have virtual paint; it just has to do whatever it is we think qualia do. What do we think they do? That is the hard question that must be asked. Otherwise, one is left marvelling at the mystery of it all.

The hard question here is definitely hard, because the brain's way of implementing virtual machines is not all that much like the well-understood ways that existing computers can implement virtual machines. The architectures are profoundly different, as are the components—networks of semi-autonomous, unsynchronized non-identical neurons, for instance, in contrast with the lockstep perfect-clone flipflops organized into battalions of memory registers with fixed addresses. The layers of computation that Knuth composed to implement virtual glue have no obvious counterpart in any neural states of excitation, so all we have at this point is a very promising hunch to follow up on, supported by an impressive existence proof: there exist virtual machines that can uncannily imitate real machines without any instantiation of the physical properties of those real machines.


Degrees of freedom and the control of consciousness

We have seen how we can partially explain the occurrence of some of the contents of our consciousness by relying on the contexts set up by the contents themselves: I am conscious of asking myself what I had for breakfast, and presto!, a memory of breakfast, with many unasked-for details, pops into my head. If I had not tried to recover this information, its arrival now might be troubling, or at least disconcerting, a case of ‘random’ mind-wandering of unknown significance. Why am I thinking about this now? And, we have seen how unnoticed and unnoticeable inferences (of sorts) ground some of our conscious convictions, but probably only a tiny subset of the transitions that occur in our ‘streams of consciousness' are due to anything as presentable as an inference. Most of the arrivals, unless we are working hard to pursue a line of thought, and succeeding, strike us as utterly out of our control. Moreover, we are deeply familiar with the experience of putting well-practiced activities such as driving or washing the dishes or mowing the lawn ‘on autopilot’ while letting our conscious minds wander pleasantly in the large space between daydreaming or fantasy, casual review of recent events, and barely intentional efforts at problem-solving. What governs all these transitions? Not a master scheduler, nor a Boss Neuron, nor a homunculus or res cogitans. It must be a dynamical, somewhat competitive process of contents vying for fame, for cerebral celebrity or relative clout against the competition. What determines the winners? Something like micro-emotions, the strength of positive and negative valences that accompany, and control the destiny, of all contents, not just obviously emotionally salient events such as obsessive memories of suffering or embarrassment or lust, but the most esoteric and abstract theoretical reflections. Marcel Kinsbourne has argued (M. Kinsbourne 2011, personal communication; see also) that what makes any problem hard is that something false but attractive stands in its way. Solving hard problems takes more energy, more effort, more deliberate tactics of self-control, because tempting, easier, courses of action beckon. As I have often observed, my hard problem is finding more effective ways of showing people that Chalmers' hard problem is a chimera.

The general reason, I surmise, why thinking can be hard, and thinking about thinking can be even harder, is the omnipotentiality of content discussed in §2: the problem of control when there are millions of degrees of freedom. A hot-air balloon has only one readily controllable degree of freedom (up or down, by turning the heater on or off) out of which the experienced pilot can construct (from a very limited range of options) a desired trajectory through three-dimensional space by using knowledge of slight wind currents in relation to the terrain. Your vision has not just up–down, left–right, clockwise–counterclockwise (think of the pig reading the book title), but also vergence (close–far) and something like yaw (sideways motion of the head, to get parallax information about depth or distance). Any of these can be ‘clamped’, simplifying the control problem by removing one item that otherwise needs a ‘pilot’. When you succeed in concentrating on a problem, or just attending to your current task, you somehow block or damp down myriad alternative paths your mind could take you on. What informs and motivates the you that does this piloting? And how do you learn to be a reliable pilot? Again, not an inner homunculus, but a collaborative/competitive interaction between temporary coalitions of ‘interests’. And what emerges from this is the virtual governor. (Electrical engineers speak of a virtual governor as an emergent feature in a large system of generators linked together in parallel that maintains a more reliably constant frequency (e.g. 60 Hz) than any of the individual generators with their individual low-accuracy real, locatable governors. The virtual governor is not anywhere, but it seems to control the whole system.)

Every animal does an acceptable job of controlling its degrees of freedom under normal circumstances. Otherwise, it would be extinct. So, every human being does this as well, but in the human case, the task of governance is magnified by the essentially limitless numbers of degrees of freedom that can iterate and ramify and amplify effects. Taking care of this embarrassment of riches is—to oversimply—what consciousness is for. And its manner of action was succinctly expressed by Sarah McCarthy, the 4-year-old daughter of AI pioneer John McCarthy, when he asked her to do something. Her calm reply:I can, but I won't.

Which, John McCarthy observed, was the core, the essence of free will (J. McCarthy 2005 and S. McCarthy, 2017, personal communication; see also). The conscious recognition of (some of) one's many options combined with the competence to choose among them, for reasons good or bad, or for no reason at all, is the hallmark of responsible human agency. It is no mere coincidence that the philosophical problems of consciousness and free will are, together, the most intensely debated and (to some thinkers) ineluctably mysterious phenomena of all. As the author of five books on consciousness, two books on free will, and dozens of articles on both, I can attest to the generalization that you cannot explain consciousness without tackling free will, and vice versa. The key to a unified account lies, I now think, in the recognition (following Jablonka) that the open-endedness of the human brain's representational power is, like the unlimited heredity of evolution, both the problem and the solution to both mysteries. Free will, and consciousness, matter because we—and only we—must live in a world of our own creating that is orders of magnitude more complex and replete with opportunities (the degrees of freedom) than the lifeworld of any other living thing, and, with the help of evolution, both genetic and cultural, we have designed a system of higher-level cooperation that opens up modes of negotiation and mutually enforcible constraints, the civilization that makes life so worth living.


Forecasting Faces in the Cortex

Lucy S. Petro, Lars Muckli — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2018. PMC5774611, CC BY 4.0.

Although theories of predictive coding in the brain abound, we lack key pieces of neuronal data to support these theories. Recently, Schwiedrzik and Freiwald found neurophysiological evidence for predictive codes throughout the face-processing hierarchy in macaque cortex. We highlight how these data enhance our knowledge of cortical information processing, and the impact of this more broadly.

Despite having no direct access to the world, neuronal networks must ultimately represent useful information about the external environment. Fortunately, our prior experiences are stored as information in the brain. If the brain can use this stored information to generate a prediction that matches the current environment, then the neuronal microcircuit has represented something useful about the world. This hypothetical model of brain function is conceptualized by predictive coding.

Predictive coding theories state that neurons generate predictions higher up in the cortical hierarchy, and test these predictions against incoming sensory information in lower areas, producing an error signal if there is a mismatch between the prediction and current sensory information. This theory, whereby an internal testing mechanism flows down the cortical hierarchy, could support a range of brain functions including social cognition. Consider recognizing the face of a friend from a distance: your brain might predict that the face of the accompanying person is that of his or her partner. Such context-dependent expectations are essential for successful social behavior.

However, there was no prior neuronal evidence that prediction error signals generated in a lower area tested the prediction of a higher area – a hallmark stipulated by predictive coding. In a recent paper, Schwiedrzik and Freiwald revealed how prediction-generating and prediction-testing neurons in the macaque face network exchange codes until predictions match the input. The neuronal guessing-game starts with a template generated from memory that neuronal processes then test against sensory evidence lower in the cortical hierarchy. The macaque face network is an attractive system for scrutinizing prediction principles. Face-selective cortical patches form an interconnected hierarchical network but have different and specific functional preferences for faces. Therefore, we have a hypothesis about the prediction that each patch generates and to which patch it will communicate this prediction.

During a learning phase, the authors presented sequential face image pairs to monkeys, training them to expect a particular ‘successor’ image after seeing the first ‘predictor’ image. Images differed on dimensions to which face patches are tuned (head orientation or identity). The authors later manipulated the order of images, inducing an error response in neurons in the ‘ML’ (middle lateral) patch because the new face pairs violated the monkey’s expectation along dimensions of identity, viewpoint, or both. By comparing ML responses to the successor image under predictable and unpredictable conditions, the authors showed that prediction errors in ML reflect identity specificity and view invariance.

Importantly, the prediction error properties are not those that ML is tuned to – but are instead the properties of higher areas. This suggests that ML constructs the error from the comparison with top-down predictions, a mechanism by which a lower area inherits the features of higher areas. This contrasts with previous accounts of top-down feedback that conceptualize the recovery of high-resolution features by probing lower-hierarchy visual areas. The authors also confirm the behavioral relevance of this neuronal process. A separate, near-identical experiment revealed that humans detected faces faster in predictable versus unpredictable conditions.

This study provides evidence of predictive signaling in a brain system where information- processing determinants are well established. The data encourage the re-evaluation of cortical processing strategies. The currency which processing might trade in is the violation of a prediction, a signal that the cortex broadcasts upstream to higher areas until those areas generate a better hypothesis that matches the input. Thus, cortical communication might be well conceptualized as a recurrent negotiation loop attempting to resolve prediction error. This model fits well for perception in which higher-order representations are well constrained and predict precise sensory inputs; here we can estimate what an error-detecting neuron might be tuned to. However, we do not know whether or how prediction sustains processing for a sensory input that is not immediately available but will arrive in the future. This long-term mental forecasting, for example planning your route home, involves complex and abstract internal representations that unfold over longer durations than sensory signaling.

Another challenge is to understand the precise neuronal machinery for predictive processing. The current data suggest that cortical feedback carries predictions. Distal dendrites in upper layers of mammalian cortex are a target of feedback and could offer a means by which individual neurons test and compare feedforward and feedback signals, potentially resolving the error. It is a challenge, however, to decode the language of feedback, in contrast to feedforward responses that are driven directly by the stimulus. In as much as feedforward processing generalizes across viewpoints (e.g., when identifying a face), feedback projections might inherit viewpoint invariance through a quick succession of predictions of mirror-symmetric alternatives of the same identity. We also find this generalization of predicted features in feedback projections to primary sensory areas. A scene remains predicted by the top-down projection even if the spatial frequency band of the input changes. Complex top-down predictions may not only allow contextualization but also a rapid reduction of prediction errors. A neuron therefore signals not only the presence of a feature but also whether this feature was unexpected, and when this surprise is resolved. Interestingly, the current data also do not necessarily imply a complex translation of one type of representational format into another, but that predictions can be communicated on the backbone of straightforward wiring properties.

Schwiedrzik and Freiwald’s data are a striking demonstration that visual neurons perform predictive processing. Evidence of neural prediction marks a paradigm shift that engages theorists and empirical scientists in psychology, neuroscience, and philosophy. Philosophical themes being redefined using neurocomputational rules of prediction include conscious experience and embodied cognition. Algorithmic developments in artificial intelligence, brain-inspired computing, and robotics are rooted in neuronal prediction. Deficient predictive processing might contribute to psychotic symptoms and neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism. Proponents of predictive processing argue we can explain such data most parsimoniously in the framework of prediction. Others argue we have insufficient empirical evidence to substantiate predictive processing. Ultimately, theoretical frameworks will need to adjust to empirical data before we can model precisely how neurons predict or how prediction supports the full range of brain functions. Similar to the pioneering finding of Hubel and Wiesel of feature detectors in visual cortex, Schwiedrzik and Freiwald found prediction error-detection signals in the face-processing network. Such data are essential if prediction is to transform from a conceptual framework into a measurable and general mechanism of brain function.


Hierarchical Active Inference: A Theory of Motivated Control

Giovanni Pezzulo, Francesco Rigoli, Karl J Friston — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2018. PMC5870049, CC BY 4.0.

Motivated control refers to the coordination of behaviour to achieve affectively valenced outcomes or goals. The study of motivated control traditionally assumes a distinction between control and motivational processes, which map to distinct (dorsolateral versus ventromedial) brain systems. However, the respective roles and interactions between these processes remain controversial. We offer a novel perspective that casts control and motivational processes as complementary aspects − goal propagation and prioritization, respectively − of active inference and hierarchical goal processing under deep generative models. We propose that the control hierarchy propagates prior preferences or goals, but their precision is informed by the motivational context, inferred at different levels of the motivational hierarchy. The ensuing integration of control and motivational processes underwrites action and policy selection and, ultimately, motivated behaviour, by enabling deep inference to prioritize goals in a context-sensitive way.

Keywords: active inference, cognitive control, executive function, goal-directed decision making, hierarchical inference, motivated control


Motivated Control of Action

Motivated control, and the coordination of behaviour to achieve affectively meaningful outcomes or goals, poses a multidimensional drive-to-goal decision problem. It requires arbitration among multiple drives and goals that may be in play at the same (e.g., securing food versus water) or different levels of behavioural organization (e.g., indulging in a dessert versus dieting) – as well as the selection and control of appropriate action plans; for example, searching, reaching and consuming food,. Previous research has highlighted two dimensions of motivated control: one concerns the distinction between a control or ‘cold’ domain (e.g., choice probabilities, plans, action sequences or policies) and a motivational or ‘hot’ domain (e.g., homeostatic drives, incentive values, rewards), where both are essential for learning, planning and behaviour. The other dimension concerns the complexity of the decision problem. In relation to control, it differentiates sensorimotor control (choosing among current affordances) from cognitive or executive control (the temporal coordination of thoughts or actions related to internal goals). In terms of motivation, it distinguishes visceral drives (e.g., eating) from higher-order objectives (e.g., dieting).

From a neurophysiologic perspective, a distinction between dorsolateral areas – involved in control (or execution) – and ventromedial areas – involved in motivation (or value) – is generally accepted. However, previous treatments have not resolved fundamental questions about the interaction between control and motivation in the service of goal-directed choice. For example, the relative contribution of these systems to motivated control – whether they operate sequentially or in parallel, their representational content (e.g., value, uncertainty, errors in ventromedial areas), and what form – if any – the implicit hierarchy takes (e.g., abstractness, complexity).

Here, we address these questions by offering a formal treatment that casts motivated control in terms of active inference: a physiologically grounded theory of brain structure and function. Calling on early cybernetic models, the view that the brain uses control hierarchies has inspired many recent proposals, for example, hierarchical temporal structures, hierarchical reinforcement learning, hierarchical mixture of experts, distributed adaptive control, and hierarchical information processing. Hierarchical processing has also been advanced to explain the role of dorsolateral (dlPFC) and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) in control and motivation, respectively, see also,. Our proposal reconciles and extends this work by disclosing the intimate relationship between control and motivation.

On the active inference view, the multidimensional decision problem is cast in terms of hierarchical Bayesian inference using hierarchical (deep) models or goal hierarchies. Within these deep models, control and motivational processes implement separable functions, namely, identifying the appropriate means to achieve goals and establishing their contextual value, respectively. This separation affords a statistically efficient factorization of the original multidimensional decision problem that is both neuronally plausible and maps comfortably to the dorsolateral–ventromedial segregation. At the same time, control and motivation serve a unitary purpose of solving multidimensional drive-to-goal problems, and are both part of a unitary inferential mechanism that contextualizes goals at multiple levels of hierarchical and temporal abstraction. This theoretical proposal thereby explains both the functional segregation and integration that underwrite control and motivation. In short, it dissolves the dialectic between motivation and control to explain ‘controlled motivation’ or ‘motivated control’.


Multidimensional Drive-to-Goal Problems

We start by illustrating the key concepts with an example. Imagine you are in a restaurant and have to choose whether or not to have a dessert, and whether to take it from the desert trolley or ask a waiter. Obviously, the chosen action will depend on the context. This example illustrates two sorts of context. The former, control context, includes information that determines the action–outcome contingencies; in other words, the likelihood of each outcome given an action. For example, grasping your favourite dessert from the trolley may work at home but may be inappropriate in a restaurant (where ‘home’ versus ‘restaurant’ is the control context). The latter, motivational context, establishes the desirability of choice outcomes; for example, your physiology (e.g., hypoglycaemia may change your preference for a calorific dessert) and higher-order beliefs (e.g., ‘I can’t have cake because I’m dieting’).

In addition to the control/motivation dichotomy, a second distinction is based on the level of complexity of a contextual representation,. This contextual complexity (i.e., low intermediate and high) can be applied to both control and motivational domains. The low level is defined by contexts that elicit simple (and sometimes evolutionarily hard-wired) motor tendencies or motivational processes. In the control domain, these correspond to affordances, namely, sensory configurations that elicit natural responses (e.g., food may induce an automatic approach). In the motivational domain, low-level contexts reflect interoceptive signals conveying information about body states, which automatically incentivize specific outcomes (e.g., hunger incentivizes food). An intermediate level of complexity corresponds to semantic considerations, based on (subpersonal) beliefs about prevailing rules in an environment. An example – in the control domain – is being in a restaurant, where food is usually obtained by calling a waiter. An example in the motivation domain is the belief ‘I’m on a diet’, which is likely to devalue cakes in favour of apples. Finally, the most complex level of context corresponds to episodic (subjective) beliefs that depend on particular circumstances. In the control domain, the belief that today is ‘buffet day’ implies that food can be secured without an intervening waiter. In the motivational domain, the fact that today is my birthday may override the belief ‘I’m on a diet’, inducing a re-evaluation of cakes (especially birthday cakes).

The restaurant example highlights two key points. First, control and motivational domains are largely orthogonal: the preference for a goal-directed outcome can change irrespective of action–outcome contingencies, and vice versa. Second, conflict emerges when contextual information is available at different levels of abstraction: for example, ‘I’m on a diet’ (semantic) – ‘but it’s my birthday’ (episodic). Crucially, conflict can arise both within the control and the motivational domains – and we offer analogous mechanisms to explain both cases. Moreover, conflict can involve contexts within the same level (e.g., between two conflicting affordances) and at different hierarchical levels (e.g., affordance versus semantic context). As an example of the former, a range of different desserts that all elicit an approach tendency and affordance competition. The direct approach affordance may compete with the knowledge one needs to ask waiters to obtain food, an example of conflict between a lower (affordance) and a higher (semantic) level. A similar logic applies to the motivation domain, in which thirst and hunger may compete at a lower hierarchical level, and the belief ‘I’m on a diet’ may compete with hunger.

In summary, we have to deal with a hierarchy of contextual constraints (affordance, semantic and episodic), where each level can be parsed into two domains (control and motivational). In what follows, we outline an active inference solution to this complicated drive-to-goal problem that emerges from deep (hierarchical) Bayesian inference.


Deep Goal Hierarchies in Active Inference

Active inference views the brain as a statistical organ that forms internal generative models of the (hidden) states and contingencies in the world, and uses these models to continuously generate predictions in the service of perception and adaptive behaviour,. It proposes that choice is based on inverting a generative model to infer appropriate action sequences or policies that lead to preferred outcomes or goals. On this view, the incentive value of an outcome corresponds to its prior (log) probability, so that preferred outcomes (or goals) have high prior probability. Active inference therefore eludes a separate representation of incentive value, which is absorbed into (subpersonal) prior beliefs. Action selection proceeds by inferring which policy is most likely, given prior beliefs over future outcomes (analogous to their incentive value) and the degree to which future observations will resolve uncertainty (affecting the probability of obtaining the outcomes). A worked example is provided in and.


A Case Study in Cognitive Control

Active inference has been applied to cognitive control phenomena, such as the strategic decisions to execute, defer or stop an impending action or exploration–exploitation dynamics,. This box explains in more detail the computational study (waiting game) shown in, which addresses the importance of withholding prepotent responses (see, for simulations of exploration–exploitation). Response inhibition is often described as a race between two competing (go versus stop) processes. In the ‘waiting game’, the competition is at the level of policies, which activate or defer a ‘go’ action depending on their predicted outcomes. While the game is not explicitly hierarchical, it can be easily mapped into a competition between a (hierarchically lower) incentive to grab food and a (hierarchically higher) incentive to call the waiter – where the latter can inhibit or override impulsive behaviour. The simulation illustrates the fact that, in active inference, action selection requires forming beliefs about (the value of) policies that entail sequences of actions. In this example, the sequences correspond to waiting for an increasing number of offers and then accepting. This has three important consequences. First, motivated control is cast in terms of model-based planning. It depends on beliefs about hidden states of the world and action sequences (i.e., policies), and has to be inferred: it has to be specified in terms of objective functionals (i.e., function of a function) of beliefs about states of the world – as opposed to value functions of states as in reinforcement learning. In active inference, this objective function is an expected free energy that balances pragmatic value (how good are policies in achieving goals) and epistemic value (how good are policies in reducing uncertainty). In this setting, expected free energy plays the role of an expected value under a sequence of actions, where value has epistemic and pragmatic components. Crucially, adding these two components is equivalent to multiplying their associated probabilities. This means that the epistemic value of a particular course of action will only contribute to action selection if its pragmatic consequences are desirable. Second, it is necessary to have a generative model that plays out sequences of actions into the future to select the best policy. Technically, this uses Bayesian model selection based on the expected free energy. This mandates deep models that entertain states and policies in the future (and past), lending cognitive control both a prospective (or counterfactual) and postdictive (or mnemonic) aspect, see B,C. Third, the precision of policies is optimized as part of the free energy minimization. The precision may reflect an increased (B) or decreased (C) confidence that a valuable goal will be secured, and its dynamics during goal achievement may be key to understand cognitive–emotional interactions.

Alt-text: Box 1

Here, we extend active inference to characterize motivated control, by appealing to two kinds of factorization that underwrite variational or approximate Bayesian inference. The former, hierarchical factorization, is based on conditional independencies implied by a separation of temporal scales in the causal structure of our world: higher and lower hierarchical levels encode ‘states of affairs’ that unfold at slower or faster timescales, such as long- and short-term consequences of action, or distal versus proximal goals. This hierarchical factorization provides a rationale to distinguish affordance, semantic and episodic levels of complexity. The second is a factorization of (hidden) states of the world that are conditionally independent (e.g., ‘what’ and ‘where’ or ‘what’ and ‘when’). This factorization provides a rationale to distinguish control and motivational streams in terms of beliefs about policies and beliefs about (preferred) states of the world within the generative model. Taken together, the dual factorizations afford a statistically efficient belief propagation scheme (a mean field approximation) that alleviates the computational burden posed by multidimensional drive-to-goal problems. Hierarchical processing carves goal processing into different (affordance, semantic and episodic) levels, within which we can distinguish between control beliefs about ‘What I am doing/I am about to do?’ and the motivational context, that is, ‘What should I do?’. In what follows, we look at the functional anatomy of hierarchical processing within control and motivational streams, and then discuss their functional integration.


Deep Goal Hierarchies in the Brain

Deep goal hierarchies in the brain are characterized by the interaction between a control system and a motivational system, associated with a dorsolateral and a ventromedial cortico-subcortical hierarchy, see. The control hierarchy, associated with a posterior–anterior gradient in dlPFC, has been often characterized as having three levels: premotor cortex, caudal lPFC and rostral lPFC, corresponding to sensorimotor, semantic context (or task sets) and episodic context, respectively, see. These areas operate at different (shorter to longer) timescales and the interactions between them can be characterized in terms of top–down biases from higher to lower areas – which permit higher-level goals to bias sensorimotor (affordance) competition and to exert cognitive control. The motivational hierarchy is often characterized as having three levels, too. Lower layers include subcortical regions, such as the hypothalamus, the solitary nucleus, the amygdala and the insula, important in regulating basic vegetative, homeostatic and emotional processes – and that possibly encode set points related to interoceptive states (e.g., about food in the stomach), corresponding to predictions in active inference. Departures from these set points (e.g., an empty stomach) correspond to interoceptive prediction errors and elicit appropriate drives, which incentivize associated outcomes (e.g., for food). In addition, these regions, especially amygdala, process external stimuli and imbue these with value. The second level of the hierarchy includes the hippocampus and vmPFC, regions important in processing more general contextual information (e.g., contextual fear in the hippocampus; multiattribute evaluation in vmPFC). A third layer within the motivational hierarchy may include the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG): two regions that have been associated with effortful inhibition of instinctive and short-term drives in favour of abstract and long-term objectives (e.g., inhibition of craving) and strategic emotion regulation. Interestingly, the interactions between these cortical layers seem to follow the same logic of top–down biasing of control hierarchies. Supporting this hypothesis is the fact that extinction is mediated by inhibitory connections from vmPFC to amygdala, whereas engagement of IFG increases the connectivity between IFG and vmPFC. Finally, the anterior cingulate cortex is supposed to play integrative and modulatory roles across hierarchies, given its multidimensional sensitivity to errors and rewards and its linkage to the motivation of extended behaviours and action outcome predictions. See for a more detailed treatment of goal hierarchies that also includes subcortical structures.

Alt-text: Box 2


Control Processes

In terms of functional anatomy, a control hierarchy has been associated with a posterior–anterior gradient in dlPFC, with premotor cortex, caudal lPFC and rostral lPFC associated with sensorimotor (analogous to affordances), task sets (analogous to semantic context) and episodic contexts, respectively. The functioning of this system is often described in terms of progressively more sophisticated mappings between stimuli (or stimuli plus task sets) and responses, possibly learned through reinforcement,.

Active inference does not use a stimulus-based scheme but casts control problems in terms of a model-based inference about the best action plans (or policies). The selection of policies at lower, sensorimotor levels functions in a predictive way, by inferring policy-dependent outcomes (e.g., exteroceptive, proprioceptive and interoceptive signals associated with food) and selecting among them. Higher hierarchical levels contextualize this inference, finessing outcome prediction based on additional (semantic or episodic) information as well as on long-term action consequences and future affordances; for example, choosing a restaurant in anticipation of satiating hunger. In short, active inference is a dynamic process in which policies at a lower, sensorimotor level compete against each other and are continuously biased by (the results of competition at) higher levels.

In a control hierarchy, higher hierarchical levels regulate lower levels by setting their preferred or predicted outcomes (or set points), which lower levels realize. This idea dates back to control theory, and has been appealed to repeatedly for motor control (e.g., the equilibrium point hypothesis) and allostasis. For generative models of discrete states (as in), the desired ‘set point’ now becomes a trajectory or path through different states in the future that minimizes expected surprise (i.e., resolves the greatest uncertainty). In the restaurant example, the higher hierarchical level encoding semantic narratives influences affordance competition by setting a series of goals and subgoals at the lower (sensorimotor) level; for example, consulting the menu and calling the waiter, while the sensorimotor level selects policies that meet these goals. In other words, goals or prior preferences at one level translate into predictions about sequences of events that provide top–down (empirical) prior constraints on transitions at the level below. In turn, bottom–up messages from lower levels report the evidence for expectations of beliefs generating predictions, thus permitting the higher levels to accumulate evidence (e.g., about progresses towards the goal) to finesse plans.

This hierarchical scheme implies a separation of timescales between slower and faster inference at higher and lower hierarchical levels, respectively. This follows because an update of the higher level (e.g., ‘I’m dining in a restaurant’) entails multiple updates over lower levels, forming a trajectory of successive states (e.g., consult the menu, call the waiter and order food). This separation of timescales renders hierarchical inference tractable, because each hierarchical level operates independently and passes the results of its computations to the levels below (and above). Furthermore, it explains the differential informational demands of sensorimotor and cognitive stages of control. While at lower, sensorimotor stages the competition only considers simple and momentary (perceptual and proprioceptive) variables, at higher stages of control it necessarily considers (hidden) constructs beyond perception – such as the narrative of dining in a restaurant – and maintains them over extended periods, in the service of (long-term) prediction. This explains the involvement of higher (prefrontal) cortical areas in working memory, prospection and executive functions; for example, delay period activity and the top–down guidance of action to achieve distal goals. In other words, cognitive (or executive) functions can be considered as hierarchical contextualizations of sensorimotor decisions, affording more sophisticated forms of control; for example, self-regulation over extended time periods,.

Interestingly, this approach can help understand when it is adaptive to engage higher hierarchical levels to contextualize decisions. In some cases, policies can be selected using available affordances (e.g., consummatory behaviour). Hence, engaging extra hierarchical levels can be considered as a meta-decision, which follows cost–benefit computations. Engaging each additional level incurs a ‘cost of control’ and is equivalent to inference under a more complex model, or a model that includes more variables (e.g., semantic information plus affordances). Phenomenologically, this may correspond to increased cognitive effort and slower reaction time. However, the hierarchical contextualization has enormous benefits, such as an increased ability to generalize over different contexts and realize long-term preferences. In short, appealing to active inference allows one to treat the costs and benefits of hierarchical imperatives in terms of Bayesian model selection in statistics, in which more complex models are penalized but may also enjoy a bonus if they confer greater accuracy over extended periods of application.


Motivational Processes

Motivational processes are thought to play two roles within deep goal hierarchies. The first involves inferring the incentive value of outcomes and goals at various hierarchical levels, thus prioritizing them. This inference operates according to the same principles discussed for control hierarchies – requiring a learned model of outcome incentives – but within an anatomically distinct neural circuit. The core components of the motivational stream are ventromedial areas, which progressively integrate various kinds of interoceptive, exteroceptive and proprioceptive information with key behavioural significance. The salience spans from immediate sensory or interoceptive prediction errors – that report homeostatic or allostatic imbalance – to learned contingencies about the range of rewards available during an episode,. The neurophysiology of ventromedial motivational hierarchies recapitulates gradients of motivational, salience and reward information and can be decomposed into three levels, paralleling control hierarchies, see. In active inference, hierarchical processing allows the brain to infer which goals should be favoured and pursued within a given context, by resolving conflicts both within each hierarchical level (e.g., between thirst and hunger) and across multiple levels [e.g., deciding whether to prioritize eating a cake (a lower-level goal that rests on the incentives of immediate interoceptive and exteroceptive signals) or continue dieting (a higher-level goal that rests on episodic information and possibly social incentives or self-image)].

The second role of the motivational system is to convey motivational incentives to the control hierarchy, using the inferred goal values and incentives at each level to modulate and energize the corresponding level of the control hierarchy through their lateral interactions. This communication between motivation and control brings us to the next architectural principle, namely, functional integration.


Functional Integration

We propose that the inferred incentives, within the motivational hierarchy, determine the precision of top–down, goal setting messages that are passed down hierarchical levels of the control hierarchy. Generally, descending predictions of precision in hierarchical inference can be construed as a form of attentional selection. In the present setting, these predictions play the role of intentional or goal selection by, effectively, applying an attentional bias to prior preferences. This mechanism operationalizes the learned importance of incentives at appropriate hierarchical levels. For example, if the motivational hierarchy infers that the incentives for following a diet are more probable than bingeing on cakes, the control system will infer the next most likely state of affairs is abstinence. This state of abstinence will necessarily reduce the precision afforded to (prior preferences about) gustatory outcomes at the lower level – and increase the precision of preferences for outcomes in another modality that provides confirmatory evidence of abstinence; for example, ‘I’ve chosen the healthy option’.

Heuristically, increasing the precision of prior preferences over a particular outcome (or outcome modality) is like attending to that modality, when evaluating the consequences of behaviour, while decreasing precision is effectively ignoring (i.e., attending away from) those preferences. Therefore, precision modulation operated by the motivational system mediates the way preferences over future states will guide policy selection: preferences that enjoy high precision will ultimately motivate and energize goal-directed behaviour.

In turn, progress towards a goal increases its anticipated likelihood, thus raising the precision of beliefs about policies that achieve the goal,. Thus, when precision is itself inferred, successful goal-directed behaviour creates a form of positive feedback between control and motivational processes. This positive feedback may help explain the sociable phenomenology associated with goal selection – dominated by careful cost–benefit considerations in medial areas – versus goal engagement after a goal has been selected (possibly a form of curious behaviour) – when cost–benefit considerations are deemphasized. Intuitively, it is sometimes difficult to start a new task, but once progress has been made, it becomes difficult to give it up – even when the reward is small. A possible explanation is that, as goal proximity increases, its inferred achievability increases – with precision – hence placing a premium on the policy above and beyond of its pragmatic value.

More broadly, the reciprocal integration of control and motivational processes affords various cognitive–emotional interactions,. For example, the incentive value of goals influences which predictions are generated and which beliefs are afforded high precision, hence modulating perception, memory and attention,. Furthermore, when policies are afforded a high precision, they induce an optimism bias (i.e., the belief that preferred outcomes are being realized). This explains some facets of cognitive–emotional interaction without appealing to separate ‘emotional reasoning’ systems. Finally, goal prioritization in the motivational hierarchy necessarily considers other action-related dimensions in addition to achievability (e.g., action costs), some of which change dynamically as control plans unfold, creating other forms of circular causality between control and motivational streams,.

illustrates the functional integration of control and motivation within hierarchical active inference. The architecture presents a dual structure, namely, increasing hierarchical depth that represents generative processes of increasing temporal scale and an orthogonal segregation into cognitive (i.e., state and sequence) and motivational (i.e., salience and precision) belief updating. Importantly, each level of the model generates a context for a sequence of state transitions at the level below. More technically, the inferences and trajectories at one level are generally conditioned upon a single (discrete) state at the level above, which changes more slowly. This discrete state provides a top–down context for lower-level transitions, which can set the initial states, state transitions, prior preferences or the precision of the preferences

The top–down propagation of prior preferences – and their precision – is the key to understand the coordination of control and motivational processes. We propose that the control hierarchy propagates prior preferences, but their precision is informed by the motivational context inferred by the motivational hierarchy. In this scheme, (beliefs about) motivational incentives determine (beliefs about) the precision or confidence that can be placed in preferred outcomes at multiple hierarchical levels, thus contextualizing their relative contribution to (beliefs about) ‘what to do next’ or control policies. Accordingly, shows that the expected precision at every level is informed by higher levels and by the current motivational context, represented at a subcortical level for simplicity. Formally, we appeal to exactly the same (precision-based) mechanisms that are thought to underlie attention and figure-ground segregation,. However, in the present context, the precision in question affects beliefs about policies (i.e., ‘What am I doing’) as opposed to states of the world (i.e., ‘What am I seeing’). This means precision mediates intentional selection, as opposed to attentional selection. In the brain, the relative precision may be reflected in the activity of neuromodulators such as dopamine, whose main effect is regulating postsynaptic neural gain.

In summary, control and motivational processes may be two sides of the same coin that are necessary aspects of active inference: the brain has to infer how to achieve goals (control) and which goals are worth pursuing (motivation). These problems can be partially factorized by exploiting their conditional independencies, providing a rationale for anatomical distinctions (e.g., between dlPFC and vmPFC hierarchies). At the same time, control and motivational processes form a functionally integrated, deep goal hierarchy. The novel perspective offered here on their integration appeals to the joint optimization of policies and their precision within active inference. It is this integration that enables us to form beliefs about the consequences of behaviour, which can be more or less precise and that, ultimately, motivate the policies we select.


Concluding Remarks

We have introduced a novel account of motivated control of action within active inference, which addresses the ways goal-directed behaviour is selected at multiple timescales in a context-sensitive fashion. In this theory, a deep goal hierarchy integrates control and motivational streams, which conspire to propagate and prioritize goals, and to jointly optimize behavioural policies and their precision. The belief propagation scheme that underwrites active inference thus produces a circular dependency between motivational beliefs about (hidden) states of the world and subsequent control policies that solicit evidence for the motivational beliefs, offering a compelling metaphor for functional integration or neuronal message passing in prefrontal cortical and subcortical hierarchies.

Within active inference, motivated control operates to reducing exteroceptive, interoceptive and proprioceptive prediction errors, at all hierarchical levels,. A simple episode of motivated control may start with an interoceptive prediction error that reports a homeostatic imbalance (e.g., hunger). This entails hierarchical inference over possible incentives and costs associated with different ways of resolving the imbalance. The implicit goal selection process in the motivational stream interacts continuously with state estimation in the control stream – by raising the precision of goals and preferences over future states and the saliency of particular policies, ultimately steering a cascade of control processes (e.g., to go to a restaurant with friends) that resolve the initial (e.g., interoceptive) imbalance,.

Our proposal emphasizes the centrality of goals and goal directedness for motivated control,. The rationale for deep goal hierarchies is to generate, prioritize (i.e., raise the precision and incentive salience) and achieve goals at multiple levels of abstraction, not to trigger simpler-to-more-complex stimulus-response mappings. This goal-based approach resolves an intrinsic limitation of theories based on utility maximization: the fact that oftentimes agents have preferences over goals and not only their reward values – and they would not give up a goal for another outcome having the same (or sometimes higher) value.

This view may help understand the multifarious phenomenology of goal processing, such as the positive emotions associated with progress towards the goal (anticipation, enthusiasm) and the negative emotions associated with failures (disappointment, regret), in terms of increased (or decreased) confidence that the selected policy will achieve the desired goals,. Appealing to precision dynamics may also help explain some aspects of habitization and perseverative behaviour, in terms of a failure to contextualize low-level control patterns. When lower hierarchical levels are imbued with too much precision (e.g., due to overtraining), they can become insensitive to messages and biases from higher levels that have access to detailed motivational information, maintaining prevailing strategies even when contingencies change (e.g., when associated outcomes are devalued). This failure of contextualization may correspond to habitual behaviour, which may be adaptive or maladaptive; for example, obsessional and compulsive behaviour. Many other things can ‘go wrong’ in hierarchical inference, thus producing various psychiatric and psychopathological disorders. While the space of these disorders is too wide to cover here, appealing to a unitary framework may help identifying common mechanisms that transcend diverse conditions; for example, how aberrations of perception (e.g., hallucinations), control (e.g., Parkinson) and motivation (e.g., anhedonia) may all result from the failure to assign the appropriate salience (or precision) to the most relevant hierarchical processing level (see Outstanding Questions).

Are control and motivation two aspects of a unique overarching mechanism? And can this be described as a form of inference? How does this inferential scheme map to (or replace) the usual distinction between belief and desire in motivated control?

Can we identify, within control and motivational processes, a hierarchy of representations that guide inference?

Should the control hierarchy be described in terms of increasing informational, temporal or goal demands (or something else)?

Should the motivation hierarchy be described in terms of action–outcome predictions, state-outcome predictions or error representations (or something else)?

Can we explain top–down influences within control hierarchies in terms of setting goals or set points at a lower hierarchical level?

Can we interpret the multidimensional sensitivity of ventromedial streams to motivational signals, value, reward and error under the same computational principle of inferring incentives for goal-directed action?

How does the brain reconcile motivational incentives with the exigencies of control, to ensure that one does not pursue desired but unattainable goals, or does not give up too early?

Can we appeal to the notion of precision weighting of top–down messages to interpret the influence of a given motivational hierarchical level over a corresponding level within the control hierarchy?

Can we interpret cognitive control as a hierarchical contextualization of sensorimotor control, or are the two forms of control fundamentally different?

What are the neuronal and computational processes required to pass from a generic drive state (e.g., thirst) to a specific, sophisticated cognitive goal (e.g., having a glass of wine in my favourite canteen)?

Can the proposed inference scheme help in the design of artificial agents and robots that pursue hierarchical goals in a structured environment?

What is the relative importance of automatic versus deliberate (inferred) action patterns in motivated behaviour?


Interpreting and Utilising Intersubject Variability in Brain Function

Mohamed L Seghier, Cathy J Price — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2018. PMC5962820, CC BY 4.0.

We consider between-subject variance in brain function as data rather than noise. We describe variability as a natural output of a noisy plastic system (the brain) where each subject embodies a particular parameterisation of that system. In this context, variability becomes an opportunity to: (i) better characterise typical versus atypical brain functions; (ii) reveal the different cognitive strategies and processing networks that can sustain similar tasks; and (iii) predict recovery capacity after brain damage by taking into account both damaged and spared processing pathways. This has many ramifications for understanding individual learning preferences and explaining the wide differences in human abilities and disabilities. Understanding variability boosts the translational potential of neuroimaging findings, in particular in clinical and educational neuroscience.

Keywords: neuroimaging, functional variability, brain structure, cognitive strategies, individualised predictions, covariance


Celebrating Variability

No two human brains are identical, with variability in brain anatomy and function emerging from how each individual brain is genetically built and shaped by its intimate interaction with the environment. Most functional imaging studies discount this variability to establish how subjects typically execute a given task, with the assumption that brain activations are spatially and temporally similar across subjects. Methods for measuring intersubject variability have mainly focused on developing models of normal brain function (i.e., norms) that allow abnormality to be quantified in patient populations. This quantification of norms relies on a reductionist framework that aims to collapse the data across the subject dimension and focus on the significant common (i.e., overlapping) or mean effects. Such over-reliance on aggregate statistics in the pursuit of the norm can invalidate some of the conclusions drawn from group level analyses.


Variability along the Sixth Dimension

A typical functional neuroimaging experiment (e.g., fMRI) requires the analysis of multidimensional data. Each experiment can be defined as a 6D dataset: (i–iii) the three space dimensions, (iv) time, (v) an experimentally manipulated ‘task’, and (vi) ‘subject’, where the same experiment is repeated in multiple subjects. Other extra dimensions may include (vii) ‘session’ for longitudinal or repeated studies, and (viii) ‘group’ when subjects are drawn from different healthy or clinical populations. The focus here is about the sixth dimension ‘subject’.

In group studies, the information along the sixth dimension is typically treated as a ‘nuisance’ and is deliberately ‘compressed’ or ‘reduced’ to make group inferences. This approach hides other sources of variability. Different facets of variability can manifest in different dimensions, including (i) intertrial variability between events and items within the same run that might be linked to changes in strategy or learning; (ii) inter-regional variability (or spatial variability) in the neurovascular coupling or BOLD sensitivity; (iii) intrasubject (or intersession) variability related to the reliability and reproducibility of fMRI findings, in longitudinal or test–retest studies; (iv) interindividual variability, also known as intersubject, between-subject, or across-subject variability (focus of the current review); (v) intersite variability between different scanning environments, which is sometimes a concern for large databases that include scans from different laboratories; and (vi) variability in methodology: related to contextual or situational factors, for instance, differences in experimental design, acquisition sequences, and analysis methods.

We argue here that functional variability between subjects reflects the behaviour of the brain under parameterisation that is specific to the individual. Accordingly, the more two subjects differ in their parameterisation, the more their brain function will differ. The main structural and physiological parameters (measurable at the mesoscopic or macroscopic level) that govern such individual-specific parameterisation are: grey matter density; cortical thickness; morphological anatomy, cortical layers; white matter circuitry (tracts and pathways), myelination; callosal topography that influences the degree of functional lateralisation across subjects; functional connectivity and its association with variability in task-related brain activity, and its divergence from structural connectivity; brain oscillations and rhythms, metabolism and vasculature; and neurotransmitters and hormones,.

Alt-text: Box 1

The search for the mean group effect (i.e., central tendency), typically defined as the ultimate representative subject, implicitly treats variability that cannot be explained by any experimental manipulation as a nuisance, noise, or measurement error. This ignores many relevant sources of intersubject variability, including the use of different cognitive strategies for the same task, differences in learning or subjective judgment, and the inherent normal variance in ability and capacity. More critically, when meaningful information about the individual is treated as measurement error, the estimates from the group mean might not actually describe anyone well,. This is why there have been many appeals, for instance, in the field of psychology, to treat between-subject variance as data rather than noise,. However, the importance of treating variance as data rather than noise has not yet been widely embraced by the neuroimaging community and most of the widely used analysis software packages only provide estimates of group effects. This is in part because the characterisation of intersubject variability requires a large number of observations from a large number of individuals, but also because of the challenge of developing methodologies for analysing, interpreting, and using between-subject variance,.


Intersubject Variability in Cognitive Strategy

In typical multisubject neuroimaging studies, tasks are assumed to be performed in the same way or using a single strategy. However, many tasks are unconstrained, allowing subjects to adopt their own strategy. intuitively visualises the problem of averaging individual activation maps that differ in their features, when subjects adopt different strategies. The resulting average in this toy example depicts a hybrid image that differs to that encoded in each of the original images. This average image contains many false negatives (where features vary between images) and false positives (where feature combinations create new features).

A hypothetical example is a task that requires subjects to hold and manipulate many numbers when performing a serial addition of successive integers. Practically, inside the scanner, the subject is shown an Arabic digit (e.g., 8) and his/her task is to verbally say the exact sum of all numbers from 1 up to the presented digit (sum of 1 to 8). If researchers have a limited knowledge of the many ways (or strategies) by which the task can be executed, they will assume that all subjects will do the task in exactly in the same way. However, there are at least three known cognitive strategies to execute this task as illustrated in.

Obviously, each strategy involves specific cognitive processes, with distinct activation patterns. This yields high between-subject variability and weak effects when the analysis sums over strategy. In contrast, paying attention to the individual pattern may help to (i) understand that different strategies do exist, and (ii) potentially predict the strategy that the individual was using. For tasks in which the strategies are known a priori (e.g., reading), researchers can use clever experimental manipulations to push the participant (implicitly or explicitly) towards a particular strategy. For other tasks, strategies can be inferred by looking at structure or patterns in the across-subject dimension of the group data.

Perhaps more importantly, the different types of variability in brain parameters and cognitive strategies are intimately connected. For example, slow changes in structural parameters such as grey matter (density and volume), white matter connectivity, and vasculature underpin the faster, more dynamic changes in endogenous functional connectivity and brain rhythms, which in turn influence task-related brain activity and behaviour,. Conversely, individual differences in cognitive strategies, cognitive styles, expectation, and decisions modulate the underlying brain structure,.

Alt-text: Box 2

In this review, we (i) describe how the brain, as a noisy plastic biological system, generates individual differences; (ii) review evidence of the intimate relationship between variability in brain structure and functional activation; (iii) propose that a dominant source of intersubject variability arises from degeneracy when the same task can be performed in multiple different ways; (iv) highlight the importance of generating explanatory models of intersubject variability when characterising and interpreting atypical activation in clinical cohorts; and (v) consider the type of methodology that is needed to investigate intersubject variability in brain activation. In brief, we treat intersubject variability as an opportunity rather than a handicap, with the ultimate aim of supporting personalised investigations of brain function.


The Brain as a Noisy Plastic System

The human brain is governed by the same fundamental physical rules that posit noise in any system at non-zero temperature. Noise can convey information about microscopic processes that determine the macroscopic behaviour of the system. Indeed, many studies have described the behaviour of the human brain as a noisy dynamical system that generates variable responses, even in primary sensory regions,. The brain is also a plastic system that is subjected to continuous changes in its structure and function from the molecular to network levels,. This noisy plastic system is incessantly influenced by subject-specific endogenous (i.e., self-generated) and external (sensory) inputs, and it produces outputs at different space–time scales even during rest or sleep. Each individual brain is therefore intrinsically parameterised at microscopic, mesoscopic, and macroscopic levels,. By studying subject-specific functional imaging responses, we can investigate how the brain operates and behaves under parameterisation that is specific to the individual (Key Figure), and we can ultimately extract meaningful information about that individual,.

Meaningful intersubject variability in brain activation can be described as intrinsic, strategic, or contextual. Intrinsic variability arises from inherent factors rather than learned preference and is therefore time invariant in the normal brain. For example, although language processing is typically a left hemisphere function, it is lateralised to the right hemisphere in ∼7% of individuals, and this variability has primarily been attributed to intrinsic (genetic) factors that are unlikely to change over time. One way to minimise the expression of intrinsic variability is to match subjects for known demographic variables (e.g., age, gender, and handedness). In contrast to intrinsic variability, strategic (or learned) variability is constrained and shaped by prior learning. For instance, if subjects learned to execute a given task in one of many possible ways then they may adopt this initial learning strategy each time they repeat the task. Decoding variability that is consistent within an individual, can therefore give clues to differences in cognitive style and preferred cognitive strategy. The third type of variability is contextual, which is driven, for example, by familiarity with the scanning environment and mood states that affect cooperation, motivation, habituation, awareness, and stress. This tends to change more rapidly than either intrinsic or strategic variability. Its contribution can be minimised by treating each subject with identical scanning environment and task manipulations.

As mentioned above, strategic variability emerges when each individual can adopt a different strategy that best matches his/her expectations and prior knowledge. The exact sources of such individual differences in strategies are not fully understood, but may include complex interactions between genetic and environmental factors. From what we currently know, there is no single gene or environmental factor that taken alone would predict exactly which strategy an individual would adopt or how an individual would learn to perform a given task. It is more likely that the interaction of genetic and environmental factors leaves its signature on the individual’s brain, continually modifying and shaping its parameterisation,. These plastic changes, within a participant, contribute to more stable cross-sectional differences in brain structure that can be quantified and investigated, and may provide clues as to how genetic and environmental factors influence behaviour.


Variability in Brain Structure and Function

There has been an abundance of studies showing how interindividual variability in brain structure is intimately related to interindividual variability in brain activation,. For instance, the degree to which grey matter density is lateralised across individuals is proportional to the degree to which language activation is left or right lateralised, and between-subject differences in white matter integrity are proportional to task-related brain activity, functional dynamics, intrinsic functional connectivity, and behavioural responses,. It is therefore not surprising that generative models (simulations) of brain function are improved when structural variation is accounted for,.

Variability in structure–function relationships is governed by the large number of parameters that operate in the noisy plastic brain. However, not all parameters are independent,. For instance, several previous studies, reviewed in, have shown correlations between different structural parameters. Specifically, cortical thickness and surface area in one brain region influence the cortical thickness and surface area of other structurally connected regions. Structural parameters (e.g., grey matter density and white matter connectivity) also show a dependency with genetics and age, with the effect of age being consistent with what we know about developmental trajectories of structural changes. Understanding these relationships will ultimately help to reduce dimensionality in an informed way, with major implications for studies interested in the dynamics of the brain, and how alterations in these relationships can cause abnormal behaviour in neurological and psychiatric conditions,.


Degeneracy

An important source of normal variability in brain structure and function arises when the same task can be performed in multiple different ways. This is a type of degeneracy that is defined as ‘the ability of elements that are structurally different (e.g. brain regions, body parts, genetic codes etc.) to perform the same function or yield the same output,’. In cognitive science, a well-known example is the task of reading aloud familiar words that involves linking visual processing of text to motor processing of speech articulators, using either sublexical spelling to sound rules or whole-word recognition. The degree to which each strategy and its corresponding neural system are used will depend on how an individual is taught (‘look and say’ or ‘sound it out’), their potential for learning each strategy, the degree to which they have practiced, and the proficiency they have attained.

At the neural level, differences in cognitive strategy will be reflected in differences in task-related brain activity because different processing types will engage different brain regions and change the way the same set of regions interact with one another. Numerous neuroimaging studies have shown significant differences in brain activation between subjects who relied upon different cognitive strategies during the execution of the same task despite similar behavioural performances,. These findings have implications for how multisubject activation is interpreted.

If the structure–function relationship were the same for each individual, the set of brain regions activated could be used to predict (i.e., decode) which cognitive strategy an individual is using, their behavioural performance, or their practice-induced learning,. Having learnt these associations, we could reverse the inference to predict which brain regions will be engaged when we know which strategy an individual uses. However, functional anatomy is not consistent across all individuals because, as discussed above, there are known sources of intrinsic intersubject variability in functional anatomy, particularly in individuals that have atypical hemispheric lateralisation (e.g., for language or spatial processing). These variables are only thought to account for <30% of between-subject variance, but need to be taken into account when predicting structure from function or function from structure.


Clinical Implications for Patients

By investigating the most common types of intersubject variability in the neural systems that support a range of functions, we can better understand and explain why outcomes or symptoms can vary from patient to patient, even when they have seemingly similar lesion sites. To illustrate, let us assume a particular cognitive task is normally performed by either a set of regions [X] or a different set of regions [Y]. If [X] is damaged, the task can still be supported by [Y], and conversely if [Y] is damaged, the task can still be supported by [X]. However, if both [X] and [Y] are damaged, a deficit ensues because there are no available ways to perform the task. Data supporting this rationale have been demonstrated with fMRI and connectivity analyses that dissociated different neural processing pathways for reading highly familiar object names and lesion analyses that showed that damage to two pathways had a greater impact on reading than damage to one pathway had. These findings support the fact that the effect of brain damage is best understood in terms of the combination of brain areas that have been damaged rather than the lesion volume or the presence or absence of damage to one particular area; for a detailed discussion see.

Furthermore, the distinction between intrinsic and strategic variability that we made above can help to explain interpatient differences in the speed of recovery and in functional reorganisation after brain damage,. For example, if we know that healthy subjects can effortlessly switch back and forth between different neural systems/strategies when performing the same task (i.e., strategic variability), we can predict that patients should be able to compensate rapidly and efficiently for loss of one system by switching to another prelearnt system. Alternatively, if healthy subjects show a strong preference for one neural system but can, with practice, learn to use another strategy/neural system, we would expect that the speed of recovery, following loss of the preferred system, would depend on the time taken for the patient to learn to use a nonpreferred system. Intervention in this case could focus on therapies that help the patient to use the available system. If, however, there is no evidence that healthy subjects or patients can use more than one system for a given task, then between-subject variance might be intrinsic rather than strategic, and full recovery will be slower than when multiple systems are available within subjects. This kind of information can be helpful when it comes to integrating brain plasticity and learning systems into the context of diagnosis, rehabilitation, and single-patient predictions.

In summary, intersubject differences in normal function provide a robust system for explaining how the brain supports recovery after focal brain damage. In this context, it is reasonable to derive the likelihood of recovery on the basis of how much variability the typical normal population shows in functional activation. Critically, however, intersubject variability needs to be assessed in a wide range of neurologically healthy and brain damaged individuals before it can be used to predict outcomes in new patients.


Methods for Investigating and Interpreting Intersubject Variability

Although carefully designed paradigms can be used to guide task execution with instructions to use specific strategies, the type of strategy each subject is using can only be inferred from behavioural data such as accuracy, response times, error types, learning rates, or from postscan debriefing questionnaires. When different strategies result in similar behavioural responses, statistical structure in between-subject variance in brain activation can be investigated, with the goal of dissociating neural systems that may each support a different (equally efficient) strategy for the same task (see hypothetical example in). If these dissociations are meaningful, they may show a relationship with independently observed variability in demographic information (age, gender, handedness, and education), out of scanner behaviour (e.g., accuracy and response times on a range of tasks that are independent of the scanner assessments), brain structure (grey matter density, regional cortical volume, and white matter tracts), or prior knowledge of the strategies used by subjects when performing the task. Such relationships between variables would typically be masked by standard averaging approaches in group analyses. The characterisation of intersubject variability can therefore complement standard group analyses and enrich the conclusions that can be drawn beyond simple mean (central) effects (see discussion in).


Sampling and Making the Most of Intersubject Variability

A general statistical framework for decoding unknown biological variability involves repeated sampling. In the hypothetical example illustrated here, a naïve observer wants to characterise human dexterity with no prior knowledge. He/she does this by recruiting as many humans as possible and asking them to move a ping-pong ball over a table. After observing many subjects, he/she concludes that subjects (i) always use one of their hands but (ii) differ in which hand they use (right or left). By observing many subjects successfully executing the same task, our naïve observer discovers the different ways that human dexterity is typically supported, with no prior anatomical models about the function of each body part. However, our observer cannot rule out other strategies for this task unless atypical subjects who lost both their hands are recruited. If the task can only be performed by the hands, those without hands will not be able to perform the task. If other strategies are possible, the observer will identify what these are (e.g., using the elbows or feet). The results can then be used to predict how a new individual will perform the task, with or without hands.

Modelling normal and atypical intersubject variability can help researchers to make the most of intersubject variability in brain function. This has potentially many implications in different fields including: (i) neurological and psychiatric studies to help explain variance in lesion–symptoms associations, improve predictions about the likelihood of recovery at the individual patient level, and enhance diagnostic power in identifying subjects at risk; (ii) educational neuroscience to understand typical and atypical developmental processes, and to develop teaching methods from knowledge of intersubject variability in brain function, particularly in learning capacity, memory, motivation, and attention; (iii) brain (mind) reading and in decoding cognitive states; (iv) genetic studies of normal behaviour and disease risk; for instance, by correlating molecular genetic variations with interindividual differences in brain functions; (v) databasing and data mining of heterogeneous populations, and (vi) neuroergonomics that uses knowledge of brain function and human performance to design technologies and work environments for more efficient operation.

Modelling variability can benefit from the development of new methods, including the possibility of using multimodal imaging to map the biological pathways that mediate individual differences in behaviour,.

Alt-text: Box 3

Several approaches have been used to model or find structure in between-subject variability,. The approach illustrated in defines each subject’s activation map as a sum of two but unknown quantities: the mean population effect plus a subject-specific effect defined as a deviation from the mean at each brain voxel. The deviations can then be characterised according to their size or covariance across subjects that can be used to segregate functional networks. Moreover, the interpretation of intersubject variability, has been facilitated by the fact that intrasubject (i.e., intersession) variability is smaller than intersubject variability, making subject-specific activation maps relatively stable over many repetitions. For instance, it has been shown that fMRI signal variation at different parts of the brain can be predicted by individual differences in visual short-term memory capacity, motivational state, performance changes after practice, learning aptitude, attention shifting efficiency, cognitive flexibility, and inhibitory efficiency during executive functions. These results clearly demonstrate that meaningful signal exists in the between-subject variance, and highlights the possibility that there might be multiple alternative neural systems that can each support the task (i.e., degeneracy).

One way to dissociate alternative neural systems for a given task is to model between subject variance in activation (across a set of voxels) as a mixture of different subgroups, with the goal of maximising similarity within groups at the same time as maximising differences between groups. This rationale has previously been adopted when studying intersubject variability in healthy subjects, and patients. For instance, using a probabilistic classification method on fMRI activation maps from neurologically normal individuals, it was possible to segregate four subgroups of subjects who used different neural systems to read aloud the same set of regularly spelled English words. Post hoc comparison of demographics and behavioural data showed that the four different groups differed in subject age and reading strategy, suggesting that intersubject variability may have been driven by these variables.

Insight into between-subject variability in functional activation, when the task is held constant, can also be gained by analysing how activation in different regions covary with one another. This draws a parallel with the field of correlational psychology that looks at associations between behavioural variables: if two tasks A and B are determined by the same construct, then a subject’s performance of task A should predict his/her performance of task B; if no correlation exists, a potential dissociation is suggested. When looking at brain imaging data, we can reverse the inference by holding the task constant and looking at (de)associations between regional brain activations in the across-subject dimension. In this context, covariance is used to decode meaningful variability in the patterns of activation between subjects based on the assumption that regions belonging to the same network will have comparable variations from subject to subject,. The underlying assumption is that subjects engage many functional networks when performing the task, but, because the networks are functionally segregated (and spatially distinct), the level of activation in one network is not necessarily correlated, across subjects, with the level of activation in the other networks. The different processing networks can then be segregated by classifying brain voxels or regions according to their similarity in activation across subjects. For instance, using an unsupervised data-driven clustering algorithm across 39 healthy subjects, it was possible to segregate different networks involved in semantic categorisation, including other hidden networks that were not identified by standard cognitive subtraction approaches.

Covariance analyses can also be conducted in a hypothesis-driven way to segregate networks of regions associated with different strategies. This is particularly useful when a given brain region is known to be associated with a particular cognitive strategy. That region can then serve as a seed region in a search over the whole brain for regions where activation covaries similarly across subjects with that in the seed region,. Regions that strongly correlate across subjects with the seed region can then be hypothesised to be part of the same subsystem and thus associated with the same cognitive strategy as the seed region,. For instance, hypothesis-driven covariance analysis shows how brain activation as well as lateralisation in different subregions of the occipito-temporal cortex covary with different frontal regions during word processing in skilled adult readers.

In summary, examining structure in the across-subject covariance can be used to group subjects together according to similarity in their activation patterns (within group) and dissimilarity (between groups). It can also be used to group regions of the same network together in order to identify how brain activation covaries during the recruitment of different strategies. Covariance can therefore be used to characterise normal and abnormal variability, which has important applications for studying neurological or psychiatric conditions,.


Concluding Remarks

Variability in brain function is more than noise. The time has come for new developments in algorithmic and data processing that can answer questions beyond central tendency measures. These new methods should be an important complement to standard group inferences. Understanding between-subject variance holds the key to a better understanding of function–structure–behaviour associations (see Outstanding Questions). It will help to dissociate alternative (degenerate) available pathways that can sustain a given cognitive skill. We have highlighted the potential implications of this endeavour for clinical applications, particularly for prognoses purposes. Namely, by segregating the different processing neural systems, for a given skill, it may lead to accurate predictions about recovery after brain damage depending on whether all or a subset of systems were damaged or spared. Last but not least, as hundreds of functional neuroimaging studies are conducted every year, collaborative databasing initiatives are needed, with a particular emphasis on data mining in the across-subject dimension.

What are the factors that impact upon the strategy selected by subjects to perform a given task?

How is switching between different cognitive strategies governed by top-down and bottom-up processing?

How does the size of between-subject variability in clinical populations compare to that in typical populations?

How can this knowledge be used to optimise the definition of cut-off scores for diagnostic use of neuroimaging data?

How does functional and structural variability between humans compare to that seen in animals?

What are the links between variability in functional connectivity and behaviour?

How can variability be modelled in a way that could increase the reliability of group inferences?

What will high spatial resolution data (e.g., layer-specific fMRI) tell us about intersubject variability?

How can information about intersubject variability in brain function be used to benefit the analysis of data from other modalities (e.g., the inverse problem in electroencephalography)?


Contributor Information

Mohamed L. Seghier, Email: mseghier@gmail.com, mohamed.seghier@ecae.ac.ae.

Cathy J. Price, Email: c.j.price@ucl.ac.uk.


Memory Control: A Fundamental Mechanism of Emotion Regulation

Haakon G Engen, Michael C Anderson — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2018. PMC6198111, CC BY 4.0.

Memories play a ubiquitous role in our emotional lives, both causing vivid emotional experiences in their own right and imbuing perception of the external world with emotional significance. Controlling the emotional impact of memories therefore poses a major emotion-regulation challenge, suggesting that there might be a hitherto unexplored link between the neurocognitive mechanisms underlying memory control (MC) and emotion regulation. We present here a theoretical account of how the mechanisms of MC constitute core component processes of cognitive emotion regulation (CER), and how this observation may help to understand its basic mechanisms and their disruption in psychiatric disorders.

Keywords: emotion regulation, memory control, inhibition, direct suppression, thought substitution


Memory Is Central to Affective Experience

Affective science has often sought to explain how external stimuli cause emotional reactions. Following from this, research on emotion regulation has emphasized (with notable exceptions) the mechanisms that enable us to pursue our goals in the face of external emotional stressors. Understanding how people regulate exogenously elicited emotions is, and should be, a fundamental goal of emotion regulation research. However, research on emotion regulation would benefit from a mechanistic understanding of an equally great – perhaps even greater – source of emotional states in our daily lives: memory. Outside the immediate experience of emotional events, any later impact – adaptive or maladaptive – that they have on our lives is mediated by memory. Like Proust’s madeleines, the triggers for this are often stimuli that most people would consider innocuous, but that by virtue of evoking an episodic memory in the individual have the power to elicit neural, physiological, and subjective reactions mimicking those of the original experience,. Thus, people can ruminate on past emotionally significant events, frequently leading to the reinstatement and perpetuation of (mostly negative) emotions from their past. Similarly, when people worry about their futures, they engage episodic prospection processes that can engender endogenous emotional reactions even though the eliciting events have not occurred. Such self-generated emotional states can be a major source of stress and are thought to play a central role in the etiology of psychopathology,. Indeed, this is likely the case even for disorders primarily characterized by aberrant reactions to stimuli, because even exogenously elicited emotions are robustly influenced by memory: emotional experiences are not mere reactions to the environment but are caused by both the properties of the stimulus and the context in which it occurs,. This context consists not only of physical factors (e.g., whether one encounters a snake in a terrarium or on a forest path) but also one’s history with a stimulus and the expectations thus engendered; expectations that are rooted in internal predictive models, which are themselves grounded in memories. Consequently, if it were possible to modulate the accessibility of memories, one could change either exogenously or endogenously generated emotional responses – in effect, regulating emotion,. Despite these illustrations of the important role of memories in shaping our emotional lives, how we regulate emotions by downregulating the memory traces that contribute to them has attracted comparatively little attention in research on emotion regulation.


Memory Control Is Fundamental to Cognitive Emotion Regulation

In this Opinion article we outline a view of the mechanisms supporting the regulation of mnemonic emotional material building on emerging findings from research on memory control (MC). Our starting point is the observation that, because our emotions are frequently driven by memories, controlling the accessibility of such memories to awareness should be an effective way of regulating one’s emotional reactions. Nevertheless, various factors have contributed to the view that attempts to voluntarily suppress thoughts and memories are unhelpful, and are perhaps harmful. Contrary to this, we claim that controlling the occurrence and/or constitution of an upsetting memory – in short, MC – is the ultimate objective of successful emotion regulation of endogenous materials.


Differentiating Direct Retrieval Suppression from Other Suppressive Phenomena

A potential source of confusion about our argument is the tendency to equate DS with other, often counterproductive, suppressive phenomena. For example, in emotion regulation research ‘suppression’ usually refers to expressive suppression (ES), which involves inhibiting the behavioral expressions associated with emotional states (e.g., adopting a poker face to hide emotions). Owing to its small or even paradoxical effects on subjective emotion, and because the trait tendency to use ES is associated with poor mental health outcomes, ES is often considered to be a maladaptive emotion-regulation strategy. However, DS clearly differs from ES in that it directly acts on the representation of the unwanted memory, rendering it less accessible. As such, DS is a fully cognitive strategy, involving different regulatory mechanisms.

Another related line of research is thought suppression, as explored through the ‘white bear effect’. In this research participants are instructed to not think of a specific item (e.g., a white bear) over a period of 5 minutes, and report when it comes to mind. Research using this paradigm has shown that participants have difficulty avoiding thinking about the item, and this has been taken to show the inefficacy and counterproductive nature of thought suppression,. While DS conceptually resembles the ‘white bear’ variety of thought suppression, the experimental procedure used to investigate the latter has characteristics that make suppression inherently unlikely to succeed. Specifically, the white bear task makes explicit reference to a specific forbidden thought to be suppressed. However, achieving this stated goal is effectively impossible because simply remembering the purpose of the task requires that participants violate the task goal. This contrasts with the DS task, which does not integrate the specific memory/thought to be avoided as part of the task goal, rendering retrieval suppression possible. This ‘goal-integration theory’ may account for the apparent discrepancy between work on MC and the Wegner thought-suppression paradigm, and suggests that the white bear task might fail to capture the true utility of suppressive processes measured in work on MC. Consistent with this, a meta-analysis of 33 studies of psychopathology using the white bear task found no differences in suppression success or in rebound effects across patients and controls, raising concerns about whether this the task captures the mechanistic deficits that lead to intrusions in real life.

Researchers have also investigated the relationship between thought suppression and psychopathology via the white bear suppression inventory (WBSI). Such work has contributed to the widely repeated conclusion that suppression, as a coping strategy, is associated with increased risk of psychopathology. Although the WBSI was intended to measure tendency to suppress thoughts, large-scale studies have now repeatedly found that the scale measures both the tendency to suppress thoughts and the degree to which they fail at doing so,. Importantly, failure at, but not tendency to, suppress thoughts predicts psychopathology. Indeed, when successful thought-control ability is separately quantified it robustly predicts reduced symptoms of anxiety, depression, and other conditions characterized by intrusive symptomatology. These findings are consistent with the possibility that, in normative samples, thought suppression may play an important beneficial role in mental health.

Alt-text: Box 1

More controversially perhaps, we further propose that MC mechanisms underlie the benefits of many of the volitional cognitive emotion regulation (CER) phenomena that have been identified, even when regulation is targeted at exogenously driven emotional reactions. Specifically, we claim that CER strategies can be classified by whether they employ two core mechanisms of MC that reduce access to memory traces that contribute to emotional responses. Importantly, we propose that the mechanisms of MC offer a novel account of how emotion regulation is implemented, that may help to understand its normal functioning and also psychopathological syndromes. This proposal is motivated by growing evidence that instructed MC abilities are related to beneficial outcomes (reviewed below) and the belief that similar mechanisms may support spontaneous MC, and therefore spontaneous CER, although further research will be necessary to test this assumption. As such, we propose that MC is crucial to regulating both mnemonically and exogenously elicited emotional states, and should be considered to be a fundamental process of volitional emotion regulation.


Memory Control Enables Regulation of Contents of Thought

MC can be defined as the capacity to volitionally influence the contents of thought in a goal-directed fashion by reducing the accessibility of memories. MC is often exerted reactively, in response to reminders that trigger the automatic retrieval of an unwanted memory or thought. Two mechanisms have been identified that enable MC when someone confronts an unwelcome reminder: (i) direct suppression (DS), involving the stopping or cancellation of the episodic retrieval process initiated by the cue, and the inhibition of the unwanted trace, and (ii) thought substitution (TS), involving the engagement of episodic retrieval, but instead being redirected towards alternative memories to occupy the limited focus of awareness, and to inhibit the to-be-avoided memory. Both of these mechanisms can be voluntarily deployed, and both induce forgetting of unwanted memories, enabling motivated forgetting of both neutral and affectively charged memories,. Crucially, because these processes allow a person to avoid awareness of memories, they are sometimes mistakenly equated with other forms of cognitive avoidance that are often associated with poor psychological outcomes. The capacity to induce forgetting sets these mechanisms apart from conventional cognitive or behavioral avoidance: MC involves not simply avoiding reminders that trigger unwanted thoughts or memories but instead involves directly confronting those reminders and actively altering our cognitive response to them, and reducing the accessibility of the associated memory trace.


Direct Suppression of Retrieval

DS of retrieval should not be confused with other forms of suppression that are often discussed in research on emotion regulation, and which have been argued to be ineffective and maladaptive. Extensive evidence shows that suppressing retrieval in response to reminders is possible, and that doing so has persisting effects on the accessibility of suppressed traces,. DS begins when one encounters a reminder to an unwelcome memory or a thought. Such reminders are believed to trigger (owing to the affective qualities of the reminder, or of the unwelcome memory) inhibitory control to countermand the retrieval of the associated event, in a manner analogous to the way that control processes countermand motor processes to stop physical actions. Evidence indicates that repeated DS over multiple encounters with a reminder weakens the associated memory until it no longer intrudes, ultimately impairing voluntary retrieval of the memory, consistent with an active memory-inhibition mechanism. Of course, memories vary in how amenable they are to suppression, and individuals vary in their ability to implement such suppression. Importantly, impaired DS is related to both subclinical traits associated with affective psychopathology (e.g., rumination and worry), as well as pathology itself (e.g., post-traumatic stress disorder, PTSD, and depression). Crucially, DS of aversive images can reduce one’s affective evaluation of those images at a later time. Interestingly, similar long-term effects arise for the CER strategy of reappraisal, raising the possibility that reappraisal engages regulatory mechanisms similarly to DS.


Thought Substitution

One can also prevent recall of unwanted memories by diverting the retrieval process and recalling a substitute memory instead, preferably one that is innocuous or even positive,. Such TS may be especially useful when reminders are sufficiently powerful to make DS difficult, such as with traumatic memories or ruminative topics. Compared to DS, there has been less research on TS, but evidence suggests it is at least as effective as DS at causing voluntary forgetting,. Interestingly, TS appears to cause forgetting even for individuals with impaired DS, such as those suffering from major depression, suggesting that they are supported by distinct mechanisms. In the context of CER, there is a conceptual resemblance between TS and the CER strategy of distraction,. Although distraction can involve TS, distraction is a more general strategy that involves any reorienting of attention away from emotional stimuli to occupy awareness with non-emotional materials,. Although TS has a similar goal, it specifically involves the retrieval of alternative memories in response to the unwelcome reminders rather than merely a reorienting of attention. This generation process not only encodes an alternative path for retrieval, to follow in the future when that reminder is encountered, but also can inhibit the original memory, possibly by the mechanisms of retrieval-induced forgetting,. Thus, TS trains access to non-dominant associations for a given stimulus, in addition to occupying immediate awareness with distraction. For instance, if, upon seeing one’s ex-partner, one is reminded of upsetting memories about one’s lost love, one might instead recall the good times with the person, or even generate associations to new thoughts of a current, hopefully happier, love interest, thereby transforming one’s emotional reactions to the person,. As we shall see later, this is also reminiscent of the cognitive operations supporting the CER strategy of reappraisal which, like TS, often entails the generation of an alternative representation of an unwanted percept or memory.


Neural Architectures of Direct Suppression and Thought Substitution

DS and TS achieve forgetting of unwanted memories by distinct although partially overlapping neural mechanisms (for detailed discussion). DS engages what may be a domain-general inhibitory control mechanism supported by the (primarily right) dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), that, in the context of retrieval suppression, dynamically interacts with the hippocampus to suppress its activity and disrupt retrieval, (A). This suppressive effect is especially pronounced when memories involuntarily intrude into awareness and need to be purged,. The pathway by which hippocampal activity is suppressed by prefrontal regions is presently unclear, although primate neuroanatomy suggests that it could involve anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) circuits central to top-down regulation. Whatever the pathway may be, evidence indicates that the concentration of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the hippocampus predicts individual differences in how effectively one forgets via DS, suggesting that GABAergic interneurons implement the proximate mechanism that suppresses activity in the hippocampus, and, by extension, supports DS. Interestingly, this suppressive mechanism appears to have a widespread effect on the retention of all recent events that depend on hippocampal activity for stabilization, inducing an amnesic shadow for events in the period before and after suppression. TS, by contrast, does not cause this shadow, again suggesting that its mechanisms are distinct. Because suppression reduces intrusions over repeated encounters with reminders, the need for prefrontal control declines adaptively, and more so for individuals who are better at suppression.

Suppressing intrusive thoughts is not solely about modulating hippocampal activity and explicit memory, however. An important feature of DS is that it also suppresses regions outside the hippocampus that are involved in representing the specific content of a given memory, including, for example, fusiform cortex and parahippocampal cortex for objects and places, respectively. Correspondingly, DS disrupts implicit expressions of memory such as perceptual priming that are believed to rely on these neocortical representations,. The need for inhibitory control to target both the hippocampus and neocortical regions is thought to arise because the unwelcome reminder elicits pattern completion of a memory in the hippocampus, in turn triggering re-entrant activation of cortical regions representing mnemonic content,. Suppressing awareness, consequently, entails parallel targeting of inhibition in neocortical regions expressing this onset of activity. This reinstatement principle extends to emotional memories: during memory intrusions, DS of aversive scenes reduces activity in the amygdala and vmPFC – structures that are closely associated with the generation of subjective affect,. Importantly, DS of memories of aversive scenes attenuates negative emotional judgments about those scenes when they are later encountered. This suggests that MC mechanisms, first identified outside the context of emotion regulation using purely neutral stimuli, can be deployed both to suppress mnemonic traces of stimuli as well as to directly suppress the affective connotations of the stimuli themselves. Indeed, this suggests that endogenously focused CER can be seen as a special case of the general reinstatement principle introduced above, such that suppression of affective connotations is a direct consequence of stopping the retrieval and neural reinstatement of affective mnemonic traces. If this account is correct, DS of affective material will, in effect, be an act of emotion regulation.

In contrast to the strong right-lateralized activations observed for DS, TS is predominantly left-lateralized, centered on caudal prefrontal (cPFC) and ventrolateral prefrontal (vlPFC) cortex. The vlPFC supports selective retrieval, especially under conditions of high retrieval competition, and coupling between cPFC and vlPFC predicts the amount of forgetting elicited by TS. Whereas the functional significance of this coupling remains unknown, one plausible interpretation is that cPFC entrains vlPFC to drive retrieval of alternative memories associated with the cue to supplant the dominant, to-be-avoided, memory. Supporting this, TS does not reduce hippocampal activity but can even increase it, especially under conditions of high competition, suggesting that the vlPFC interacts with the hippocampus to facilitate retrieval of the non-dominant memory. The pathway underlying this prefrontal–hippocampal interaction during TS has not been established, but related data suggest that it may take place via the uncinate fasciculus, which has been shown in humans and non-human primates to link these regions to the anterior hippocampus and to be related to controlled semantic retrieval,.

Taken together, these findings indicate that TS and DS constitute distinct routes to achieving MC, supported by distinct cortical networks, that exert opposing influences on hippocampal activity and different functional aftereffects. Importantly, the fact that they appear to be supported by separable mechanisms suggests that it may be possible to exert superior control over memories by using DS and TS in conjunction. In the following section we argue that this may be what occurs when people engage in CER using the ‘gold-standard’ emotion-regulation strategy of reappraisal.


Direct Suppression and Thought Substitution for Reappraisal

Reappraisal is by far the most-studied CER technique, and has been shown to be effective at both reducing negative and increasing positive emotion. Reappraisal involves an effort to re-evaluate a stimulus to alter its emotional impact, most commonly by changing the narrative associated with a stimulus,. For instance, when confronted with blood and gore evoking strong visceral reactions of disgust, one can remind oneself that one is in a movie theatre watching a horror film, implying that the distressing images are almost certainly fake. Alternatively, if one happens to want the full horror-film experience, one might suppress thoughts of being in a cinema and instead focus on the narrative portrayal that led to the carnage, which would likely amplify one’s emotional reactions. Thus, by accessing different aspects of the information about an emotional event, one can alter its interpretation, reducing or increasing its emotional impact. Notably, while most frequently studied in the context of exogenous emotional reactions, reappraisal can be used to regulate both stimulus-based and memory-based emotional reactions, meaning that it has a similar remit to MC.

Mechanistically, reappraisal is best viewed as a complex process supported by multiple cognitive functions. Although there are many reasons why reappraisal might succeed in regulating emotional responses, we suggest that a key reason is that it relies upon the two MC mechanisms discussed above to reduce the current and future likelihood of retrieving representations of distressing interpretations. Specifically, we suggest that, as the reappraisal process unfolds, it involves (i) the initial DS of the representation of the primary affective narrative, and (ii) the generation of a substitute narrative in response to the stimulus, constituting a clear case of TS. Importantly, we suggest that this underlies not only simple reappraisals that may interfere with retrieval of primary emotional narrative but also more elaborate reappraisals that transform the meaning of the emotional event itself. Thus, for instance, in the preceding example in which emotional reactions to a horror movie were regulated, reappraisal plausibly involves (i) suppressing the primary emotional narrative of the external stimuli. and (ii) focusing on details of the scene or context that enable search of memory for an alternative interpretation (e.g., the blood is only ketchup) that can then substitute the primary narrative. Both of these are MC operations, and together they should reduce awareness of the immediate aversive interpretation and orient affective responses towards a more innocuous narrative as reappraisal takes place.

A key finding distinguishing reappraisal from other forms of CER is that it has lasting effects on subjective responses to affective stimuli. This is explained by the current account because TS associates novel information generated during the reinterpretation process with the stimulus or memory. Thus, subsequent presentations of the stimulus should also evoke retrieval of the alternative interpretation, in the same way as substitute thoughts block the retrieval of unwanted memories in studies of MC. We argue, therefore, that the lasting effects of reappraisal on affective responses to stimuli or to memories can be properly regarded as motivated forgetting achieved via MC, possibly leveraging fundamental affective memory updating phenomena such as reconsolidation.


Reconsolidation, Emotion Regulation, and Memory Control

A phenomenon that has received increasing attention as a way to enact memory-based emotion regulation is reconsolidation,. Research on reconsolidation suggests that, when both emotional and non-emotional memories are retrieved, they exhibit increased lability, leaving the memory trace vulnerable to interference. This retrieval-induced plasticity is thought to be important for enabling old memories to be updated by new information, but comes at the cost that retrieved memories require restabilization or reconsolidation to be available for retrieval at a later date. By interfering with this reconsolidation process using behavioral or psychopharmacological interventions, evidence suggests that it is possible to erase memory traces, including emotional threat memories in humans. Moreover, in the lability period it is also possible to update or alter memories. For example, a negative memory may be changed to be less negative by integrating new information, as is seen in extinction, a process that has been argued to be central to reappraisal, and arguably to CER efforts in general, to the degree that they have lasting changes on the affective reactions subsequently elicited by a memory.

The conditions leading to forgetting in research on MC resemble those thought to be crucial for reconsolidation phenomena. For instance, like reconsolidation interference, MC also involves altering the retrieval process, with both phenomena eliciting forgetting. Inhibitory control may act like an endogenous ‘amnestic agent’ that disrupts reconsolidation. Interestingly, suppression-induced forgetting (SIF) arising via DS has been linked to actively inhibiting the memory from awareness when it intrudes, indicating that the memory has already been (at least partially) retrieved. This suggests that SIF could involve interfering with the reconsolidation of memory traces. Similarly, SIF produced by TS (at least as we propose it to be employed during reappraisal) might involve reconsolidation mechanisms to ‘overwrite’ a primary emotional narrative. In line with this, it has been shown that reappraisal, but not distraction, has durable effects on neural reactions to emotional stimuli, albeit in the context of what is effectively consolidation of emotional memories following initial presentation and regulation of reactions to emotional stimuli. Because memory disruption effects are observed immediately, it is clear that mechanisms other than reconsolidation are also at play in memory inhibition phenomena. Nevertheless, for CER of endogenous emotional reactions, it is plausible that reconsolidation interference and updating also play a role, although specific research to explore this topic is needed.

Alt-text: Box 2


Component Process Architecture of Reappraisal and Memory Control

If our MC hypothesis of reappraisal is correct, reappraisal should recruit the neural systems supporting DS and TS. summarizes evidence on the neural bases of DS, TS, and reappraisal,. Crucially, the neural correlates of DS and TS were identified via simple paradigms involving MC of neutral stimuli, often simple word pairs. These methods were designed to isolate the fundamental mechanisms that enable a person to stop or redirect episodic retrieval. As such, overlap with reappraisal can be interpreted parsimoniously as the latter process engaging fundamental MC mechanisms. C illustrates the overlap between the neural systems involved in reappraisal and DS (blue outline), TS (green outline), or both DS and TS (black outline), demonstrating that the brain regions engaged during these processes overlap considerably, with all major nodes of the reappraisal network being part of the MC networks. Notably, left lateral nodes of the reappraisal network are predominantly associated with TS, with the exception of inferior frontal/anterior insula, as well as the parietal nodes, which are also associated with DS. In the right hemisphere, there is extensive overlap between TS and DS, as well as with reappraisal nodes. This could indicate a hitherto unexplored involvement of DS processes in TS, plausibly related to an initial suppression of recall to better implement TS, similar to the role we propose for DS in reappraisal. Taken together, these observations are consistent with the proposal that the mechanisms supporting DS and TS constitute distinct component processes of reappraisal. It must be made clear, however, that this is a reverse inference; future work will need to experimentally manipulate the putative involvement of TS and DS in reappraisal and relate these findings to TS and DS abilities in more conventional MC tasks. If our account is correct, one would expect DS ability to be associated with the capacity to use reappraisal to inhibit emotional reactions, but not necessarily to the capacity to supplant them with alternative interpretations (as in e.g., positive reappraisal), which should instead be correlated with TS performance.


CER Deficiencies: A Problem of MC?

Beyond its role in reappraisal, a link between MC and CER more broadly is suggested by the strong association between perseverative cognition and affective psychopathologies. Although psychopathologies cannot be reduced to single-factor explanations, they are frequently related to difficulties regulating emotional states elicited by memories or thoughts. The clearest examples of this come from anxiety disorders – that tend to be characterized either by worry about the future, or, as in the case of PTSD, by overwhelming emotional memories of past events. Indeed, both anxious worry and PTSD have been associated with MC deficits. Moreover, it has been shown that suppressing future worries engages MC networks to reduce activation in the hippocampus, amygdala, and vmPFC, presumably to interrupt episodic prospection. Importantly, the capacity to reduce apprehensiveness about feared events via suppression was modulated by trait levels of anxiety, supporting the notion that MC deficits play a part in anxious symptomatology. Similarly, depression is associated with elevated rumination, a problem of persisting recurring thoughts or memories that occur in a context-inappropriate fashion. Rumination is thought to be caused by an inability to disengage from endogenously generated negative autobiographical memories, raising the possibility that depression is associated with MC difficulties. As this observation suggests, depression is associated with both neural and behavioral abnormalities in MC, and the evidence also indicates that training MC might be an effective (adjunct) treatment for managing depression,. Conversely, good trait MC may impart resilience to emotional stressors, as seen in a recent study showing that behavioral and electrophysiological metrics of DS predict the number of intrusions experienced by participants in the week following viewing of a strongly negative film. Similarly, the ability to engage in motivated forgetting using DS is related to the ability to forgive others for their transgressions. Experience of contending with intrusive memories may also improve MC and future resilience: in healthy samples, retrieval suppression ability increases with the degree of adversity someone has experienced. Thus, at least for DS, the evidence suggests a broader link between MC abilities and the capacity to limit the impact of negative events on one's affective constitution, which could be conducive both to CER and to resilience.


Viewing Cognitive Emotion Regulation as Memory Control Suggests Novel Mechanisms

Adopting a MC perspective may improve our understanding of the neurocognitive mechanisms supporting CER in general. Although a strong case can be made for thinking of reappraisal as a MC phenomenon, generalizing this proposal to CER strategies more broadly is difficult owing to lack of data on other regulation strategies. For example, a recent meta-analysis found that fivefold more neuroimaging experiments had studied reappraisal versus all the other strategies combined. This problem is compounded by the wide variety of CER strategies proposed, with little agreement on protocols for studying them, much less for comparing their mechanisms of action.

One approach to exploiting what is known about the architecture of MC would be to characterize CER strategies according to the involvement of MC mechanisms. In we offer an initial conjecture on how MC might play a role in a range of common emotion-regulation strategies (adapted from), suggesting potential contributions of DS and TS to each. This list is not intended to be exhaustive, but instead aims to provide some initial testable hypotheses: if, as we suggest, MC processes contribute to emotion regulation, individual differences in DS and TS ability should predict the capacity and/or preference for deploying different CER techniques. At present, it is unknown how strongly correlated DS and TS abilities are, but, given the partially dissociable neural systems underlying each, and given the fact that TS may be easier for people deficient in inhibitory control, the ability to wield these mechanisms may be at least partially distinct. Individual differences in DS and TS should predict differing engagement of their respective brain networks during reappraisal. Thus, by investigating reappraisal implementations and other forms of CER that could engage MC processes, the proposed role of the MC architecture could be tested. Moreover, as discussed above, efficacy at implementing DS or TS should predict the specific implementations of reappraisal that people spontaneously adopt: people with strong DS abilities may find it easier to dismiss their appraisals, whereas those lacking DS ability may fall back on TS, preferring to seek new appraisal frames. Assessment of MC abilities could therefore serve to guide targeted interventions aimed at either (i) improving deficient CER abilities, perhaps via training, or instead (ii) tailoring interventions to capitalize on the existing strengths of each individual.

Aside from understanding the broad component processes of CER strategies, the MC literature offers novel hypotheses about the neural machinery of emotion regulation. For example, research on MC suggests that CER research should investigate prefrontal influences on the medial temporal lobe (MTL) more broadly, and not simply on the amygdala. If the initial suppression of an appraisal engages DS, for example, hippocampal activity may be suppressed, contributing to successfully reorienting to and encoding a novel appraisal. Similarly, the evidence discussed above that DS efficacy is related to differences in local inhibitory circuits within the hippocampus, suggests that there could be a connection between hippocampal GABA and the ability to implement CER techniques that rely on suppression of emotional memories. Parallel GABAergic mechanisms might be important in forms of CER that emphasize amygdala inhibition and the suppression of negative affective states, but might be less important for CER focused on enhancing positive emotion.


Concluding Remarks

Emotion regulation is the ability interrupt or alter the generation of emotional states. Because many emotions we experience in daily life stem from recall of emotionally charged memories, the capacity to control whether and when such recall occurs must be a central emotion-regulation mechanism. In this article we have explored how this mechanism might be employed and support different forms of CER. Although we hope to have offered a convincing argument in support of this perspective, there remains a great deal of work to be done (see Outstanding Questions) to map out how MC supports emotion regulation. For instance, while we believe that MC capacities play a central role in CER, there are several other factors (e.g., working memory capacity, emotional constitution, and executive control abilities aside from inhibition, to name but a few) that influence the capacity to engage in CER. An important topic for future research will be to map out how such factors and MC abilities for both emotional and non-emotional memories interact in determining individual strengths and weaknesses in CER. Importantly, however, we predict that MC will emerge as a key factor because of the central role of memory in emotional processing. Ultimately, therefore, we believe that an understanding of the human ability to surmount the compulsions of our past must be grounded in a mechanistic account of how our memories of that past are controlled.

To what degree are the psychological and neural mechanisms supporting affective control coextensive with those supporting general MC?

Can the emotion associated with an event be inhibited without affecting its mnemonic content? Does inhibiting an emotion fundamentally require inhibition of the thoughts and memories that precipitated it?

Do differing approaches to MC vary in whether the forgetting they produce leaves emotional responses intact and free to influence behavior?

Do emotional or high arousal stimuli/memories require special regulatory mechanisms to control, or are they on a continuum with other non-emotional thought contents?

Do MC abilities predict preferences for, and the efficacy of, different emotion-regulation strategies?

Does training someone on MC improve their emotion-regulation ability?

Does reappraisal induce forgetting of stimulus or event details that are not consistent with the new narrative generated?

Are MC abilities similarly important for explicit and implicit forms of emotion regulation?


Multifaceted roles of microRNAs: From motor neuron generation in embryos to degeneration in spinal muscular atrophy

Tai-Heng Chen, Jun-An Chen, Marianne E Bronner — eLife, 2019. PMC6861003, CC BY 4.0.

Two crucial questions in neuroscience are how neurons establish individual identity in the developing nervous system and why only specific neuron subtypes are vulnerable to neurodegenerative diseases. In the central nervous system, spinal motor neurons serve as one of the best-characterized cell types for addressing these two questions. In this review, we dissect these questions by evaluating the emerging role of regulatory microRNAs in motor neuron generation in developing embryos and their potential contributions to neurodegenerative diseases such as spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). Given recent promising results from novel microRNA-based medicines, we discuss the potential applications of microRNAs for clinical assessments of SMA disease progression and treatment.


Introduction

How neurons establish individual identity in the developing nervous system and why only specific neuron subtypes are susceptible to degeneration in neurodegenerative disease are two challenging unanswered questions in neuroscience. Answers to these questions are crucial to establishing the patterns of connectivity between neuronal types and their selective targets. Deciphering neuronal subtype is relatively straightforward in Caenorhabditis elegans, as each neuronal lineage and its position, pattern of connectivity, molecular profile, and function have all been well characterized (Hobert, 2008). However, the complex array of neurons in the vertebrate nervous system (e.g., 1011 in the human brain) renders it rather more challenging to define a neuronal type. Thus, a clear neuronal taxonomy that completely reconciles morphological, physiological, molecular, and perhaps other criteria (e.g., position, connectivity) is essential. Neuronal diversity in the central nervous system (CNS) was vividly described by Sir Roger Penrose: “If you look at the entire physical cosmos, our brains are a tiny, tiny part of it. But they're the most perfectly organized part. Compared to the complexity of a brain, a galaxy is just an inert lump’.

The mechanisms leading to neuronal diversity in the CNS is arguably best characterized by spinal motor neurons (MNs). Within the vertebrate spinal cord, the cell bodies of MNs innervating specific muscle targets are topographically organized within columnar, divisional, and pool subtypes (Lance-Jones and Landmesser, 1981; Landmesser, 1978a; Landmesser, 1978b). Spinal MNs are diversified into hundreds of subtypes along the rostrocaudal (RC) axis (Catela et al., 2015). Spinal MNs are located in the ventral horn of the spinal cord and transmit signals from the brain to innervated muscle targets in the periphery to control all muscle movements. The human body contains more than 300 bilateral pairs of muscles and ~100 million muscle fibers. The control of muscular contractions for different motor behaviors relies on MN diversity (Catela et al., 2015; Kanning et al., 2010). Stereotypic axonal projection by MNs suggests the existence of MN subtype identities, which would facilitate selectivity in innervation patterns of different muscle targets. MNs can find their original targets even if they have been displaced to another segment of the spinal cord before axonal extension, which indicates that most MNs are programmed with an intrinsic identity that encodes information on their targeting preference (Lance-Jones and Landmesser, 1980). Moreover, MN subtypes exhibit differential vulnerability in MN-related degenerative diseases that cause progressive muscle weakness and paralysis, such as adult-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and childhood spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), further support an intrinsic susceptibility to degeneration amongst MN subtypes. Thus, a comprehensive understanding of the underlying mechanisms for MN diversification will likely shed light on MN target selectivity, subtype survival and differential vulnerability to MN-related diseases.

Spinal MNs are delineated according to the combinatorial actions of three homeodomain-containing transcription factors (TFs) – Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1 and Irx3 – that confine the generation of motor neuron progenitors (pMNs) to the appropriate region of the neural tube (Balaskas et al., 2012; Briscoe et al., 2000). Nkx2.2 and Irx3 initially ensure that pMNs are induced in the ventral spinal cord. Once pMNs have been defined, Nkx6.1 activity promotes the pMN-restricted induction of downstream factors, such as the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factor Olig2 (Novitch et al., 2001). Olig2 has a dual role in coordinating the acquisition of pan-neuronal properties and subtype characteristics of differentiating MNs. Forced expression of Olig2 in the dorsal region is sufficient to repress Irx3. Recent studies have further revealed the gene-regulatory network (GRN) of these progenitor TFs responsible for establishing cell identities in the developing spinal cord, with progenitor domains being determined by a network of transcriptional repressors that repress all inappropriate and alternative cell fates to elicit a single definitive identity (Kutejova et al., 2016). Additionally, progenitor domain-specific master TFs also directly repress ‘effector’ genes expressed in other progenitor domains. For example, pMN-master regulator Olig2 directly represses alternative interneuron domain TFs such as Pax6, Irx3, and Nkx2.2. In Olig2 mutants, Pax6 and Nkx2.2 are ectopically expanded into pMNs, supporting the concept of cross-repressive TF-mediated GRN in the pMNs (Balaskas et al., 2012; Zhou and Anderson, 2002).

After pMNs have been defined within the neural tube, both cell proliferation and cell cycle exit are patterned in time and space to regulate MN subtypes (Kicheva et al., 2014). In anamniotes, maintenance of pMNs also requires an MN-specific Cyclin Dx (Ccndx). Inhibition of Ccndx results in specific loss of differentiated MNs (Chen et al., 2007; Lien et al., 2016). Given that overexpression of D-type cyclin in amniotes appears insufficient to alter the cell-fate decision and timing of neuronal differentiation in the spinal cord, it is not clear if higher vertebrates need specific cyclins to replenish pMNs to generate the diverse subtypes of MNs and oligodendrocytes (Lobjois et al., 2008). In mouse embryos, spinal MNs acquire generic MN identity after cell cycle exit (i.e., at about embryonic day 9.5), and express a common set of TFs – Mnx1 (Hb9), Lhx3, Isl1 and Isl2 (Novitch et al., 2001; Thaler et al., 1999; Tsuchida et al., 1994). These MNs project axons outside the spinal cord to peripherals and release acetylcholine as a neurotransmitter. Generic spinal MN identity is established by cooperative binding of the LIM complex comprising Isl1 and Lhx3 to MN-specific enhancers, thereby inducing the expression of a battery of MN genes that induce functional hallmarks of MNs, while suppressing key interneuron genes. Furthermore, the Isl1-Lhx3 complex amplifies its own expression through a potent autoregulatory feedback loop and simultaneously enhances the transcription of Lmo4 to promote MN differentiation and maturation (Erb et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2012).

As embryonic development progresses, MNs diversify to exhibit subtype identities. Establishment of MN subtype is mediated by mutually exclusive expression of Hox TFs, which is programmed according to body segment along the RC axis. For example, segmental identity of MNs is defined by the mutually exclusive expression of Hox6, Hox9 and Hox10 (Dasen et al., 2003; Lacombe et al., 2013). In particular, a single Hox gene, Hoxc9, required for the generation of thoracic MN subtypes, is essential for organizing the MN topographic map, and acts as a key repressor of the forelimb-level Hox network (Jung et al., 2010). In each segment, MNs are grouped into different columns according to their innervating targets. For instance, within the brachial segment hosting Hox6 expression, MNs are further grouped into axial muscle-projecting MNs (Lhx3on, MMC) and forelimb-innervating MNs (Foxp1on, LMC)(Dasen et al., 2008). Within Hoxc6on MNs, expression of another set of mutually exclusive Hox proteins, such as Hox5 and Hox8 in Foxp1on LMC, controls the rostral and caudal motor pool identity, which directs motor pools to either innervate proximal or distal muscles in the forelimb (Catela et al., 2015). Although a mutually exclusive expressed Hoxa5-Hoxc8 sharp boundary is manifested within the Hoxc6on MNs, unlike progenitor-TFs that display mutual inhibitions, only Hoxc8 represses Hoxa5 unilaterally at protein level (Dasen et al., 2005; Li et al., 2017). It is therefore expected that additional Hox-mediated GRNs might be needed to consolidate the robust boundary within the brachial LMC-MNs.

LMC is the most extensively studied motor column, and this motor column is further classified into divisional identities targeting flexor and extensor limb muscles (Kania and Jessell, 2003; Sockanathan and Jessell, 1998). Further heterogeneity in spinal MNs can be revealed by retrograde labeling of each muscle group, with labeled MNs occupying distinct and stereotyped positions in the spinal cord (Hollyday, 1980a; Hollyday, 1980b; Landmesser, 1978a; Landmesser, 1978b; McHanwell and Biscoe, 1981; Romanes, 1964; Sürmeli et al., 2011; Vanderhorst and Holstege, 1997). Therefore, MN subtypes can be further assigned into pool identity according to innervated muscle targets. It is believed that one of the physiological functions of MN pool diversification during development is to enable precise target selection. However, it remains unclear how each MN subtype establishes its selectivity to target distinct muscle fibers. Many studies have revealed that a number of proteins – including LIM-HD, bHLH, Hox and ETS-TFs – play major roles in establishing MN subtype identity and connectivity during development (Dasen et al., 2005; Kania and Jessell, 2003; Tsuchida et al., 1994; Vermot et al., 2005). For example, Nkx6.1 and Nkx6.2 are expressed in subpopulations of MNs and loss-of-function studies of these proteins have resulted in target innervation and arborization defects in adductor and gracilis muscles (De Marco Garcia and Jessell, 2008; Ghosh and Kolodkin, 1998; Livet et al., 2002). In addition, extrinsic cues are also indispensable for precisely defining MN subtype diversification and axon targeting. For example, expression of the ETS-TF Etv4 (Pea3) in MNs innervating cutaneous maximus and latissimus dorsi muscles in the forelimb requires GDNF signal activation from the periphery (Haase et al., 2002). Recently, Jessell and colleagues revealed that Cpne4/Fign markers and evasion of non-canonical retinoic acid signaling label the MN subtype innervating digit muscles, providing insights into the emergence of a divergent molecular program during evolution (Mendelsohn et al., 2017). Even though 60 motor pools are thought to exist in either the brachial or lumbar LMC-MNs innervating mouse limb muscles, a complete subtype-specific gene profile for each motor pool is still lacking, not to mention for the other less well-profiled motor columns (D’Elia and Dasen, 2018; Fetcho, 1987).

Above all, spinal MN diversity is initiated by differential distribution of extrinsic morphogen signals, which elicit a set of cardinal TFs to abut each other and consolidate the cell fate of pMNs along the dorsoventral (DV) axis. Consequently, MN subtypes are distributed topographically along the RC axis in the spinal cord to align innervating muscle targets during development. Although the morphogen-mediated GRN can explain most of the principles leading to MN diversity, it is still not adequate to establish how cells at the boundaries exposed to similar morphogen thresholds adopt an ‘all or none’ choice. Furthermore, TF-mediated cell fate determination is insufficient for generating a finer resolution of MN subtypes within a particular segment, so other regulatory pathways must be employed.


MicroRNAs during motor neuron development

The patterning of the developing CNS relies on precise control of spatial and temporal expression of transcriptional regulators that progressively restrict cell potential to define ultimate neuronal identity and connectivity. In particular, establishment of sharp spatial boundaries and temporal transitions in gene expression is critical for correct neural patterning. Recently, it has been suggested that small non-coding RNAs termed microRNAs (miRNAs), which are generated by cytoplasmic RNaseIII Dicer, might play an important role in sharpening and consolidating these transitions through their ability to inhibit mRNA translation (Bartel, 2018; Wolter et al., 2017). It has been proposed that more than one-third of the genes in the human genome might be regulated by miRNAs (Lewis et al., 2005). Interestingly, only a few examples of miRNA involvement in embryonic patterning and development have been reported thus far (Rajman and Schratt, 2017). This scenario might be due to two constraints: 1) many miRNAs belong to large families, with individual members functioning redundantly; and 2) since miRNAs might function primarily to sharpen developmental transitions, their deficiency may not lead to overt deficits or phenotypic transformation but instead to more subtle defects affecting subsets of cells found at developmental boundaries.

The developing spinal cord is an ideal system to uncover such subtle defects, as both the spatial and temporal boundaries that control cell specification in the ventral spinal cord, including for its spinal MNs, are well characterized. Therefore, miRNAs have been shown to play critical roles in the spinal cord, from neuronal progenitor patterning to cell fate specification and survival (Amin et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2011; Chen and Wichterle, 2012; Haramati et al., 2010; Hoye et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Thiebes et al., 2015; Tung et al., 2015). During DV patterning in the ventral spinal cord, the bistable switches of transcriptional cross-repressive genetic loops are particularly critical for resolving cell identity at progenitor domain boundaries (Balaskas et al., 2012; Jukam and Desplan, 2010). Interestingly, lineage tracing experiments in which Cre recombinase was knocked into the domain-specific patterning genes Olig1, Olig2 or Dbx1 (Chen et al., 2011; Dessaud et al., 2010; Dessaud et al., 2007; Wu et al., 2006) revealed that each of these factors is transiently expressed in a broad ventral spinal region spanning three or more neighboring progenitor domains. Thus, somewhat different to the transitional view of the static cross-repressive loop mentioned above, the state of the cross-repressive genetic loops has to be malleable at the early developmental stage, and the initial broad expression of domain-specific determinants is then refined during development. Repression of Olig2 in non-motor neuron progenitors appears to be partly achieved by temporal adaptation of spinal cells to Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signal. Clearance of Olig2 from the p3 domain (the most ventral neuronal progenitor domain) depends on induction of the repressor Nkx2.2 in response to sustained Shh signaling, whereas more passive loss of Olig2 expression in the p3 domain is proposed to be due to developmental de-sensitization of progenitors to the Shh signal (Dessaud et al., 2010; Dessaud et al., 2007; Wu et al., 2006). In contrast, the p2 domain (the third neuronal progenitor domain from dorsal to ventral) utilizes a TF-miRNA loop to consolidate its plastic state. By disrupting miRNA biogenesis during simulated DV patterning of differentiating ES cells both in cellulo and in vivo, it was revealed that miR-17–3p, a member of the miR-17 ~92 cluster, is required to silence transient Olig2 expression in p2 progenitors (Chen et al., 2011). Thus, miRNA-mediated regulation of transcriptional programs might play a more general role in the refinement and positioning of spatial boundaries in developing neural tissue.

In addition to DV patterning in the neural tube, miRNAs also regulate the expression of TFs to fine-tune RC pattering of the spinal cord. Initial RC patterning of the neural tube leads to differential expression of Hox genes that contribute to the specification of MN subtype identity. Hox genes are clustered in genome loci that also contain miRNAs, including miR-10 and miR-196. Intriguingly, Hox cluster-embedded miRNAs preferentially target Hox mRNAs (Yekta et al., 2008). Moreover, the Hox-cluster miRNAs are predominantly targeted to 3′ Hox (Hox 1 ~ 6) genes to ensure ‘posterior prevalence’ (Yekta et al., 2008). In the developing spinal cord of chick embryos, specific timing of miR-196 expression is required for proper MN differentiation, which is mediated by downregulation of Hoxb8. Failure to clear Hoxb8 in a spatial and temporal manner abolishes MN generation (Asli and Kessel, 2010). This result highlights that both the spatial distribution and timing of Hox expression are pivotal for MN subtype diversification. Coincidentally, although several Hox mRNAs, including Hoxa5 and Hoxc6, are expressed in MN progenitors in a ‘noisy’ manner, the respective Hox proteins are not expressed in these progenitors and only become detectable in postmitotic MNs (Dasen et al., 2005; Li et al., 2017). In conditional neural Dicer mutants (Sox1-Cre; Dicerfloxed, Dicer NeuralΔ) in which all mature miRNA production is abrogated in the CNS, Hoxa5 protein is precociously expressed at progenitors and the Hox5/8 boundary is expanded caudally, both in cellulo and in vivo (Li et al., 2017). Using in silico simulation, two feed-forward Hox-miRNA loops have been uncovered that account for the precocious and noisy Hoxa5 expression, as well as the ill-defined boundary phenotype of Dicer mutants. In this scenario, miR-27 appears to be a major regulator coordinating the temporal delay and spatial boundary of Hox protein expression. This Hox-miRNA circuit filters transcription noise and controls the timing of protein expression to confer robust individual MN identity. Thus, a miRNA-mediated mechanism regulating DV and RC patterning of the spinal cord provides two additional functional tuning mechanisms for establishing cell fate in MNs: 1) the coherent TF-miRNA feed-forward loop defines plastic cell fate at the early patterning stage to allow precise cell fate determination later (i.e., the Olig2/Irx3/miR-17–3p and Hoxc8/Hoxa5/miR-27 loops); and 2) the retinoic acid-miRNA feed-forward loop is important for inhibiting fluctuations in Hox miRNA expression in the progenitors, as precocious protein expression at this stage may amplify stochastic effects, leading to noisy protein levels. This combined model represents a powerful strategy for achieving the precision and robustness of morphogen-mediated pattern formation.

In addition to the role of miRNAs during neural progenitor patterning, miRNAs also play critical functions in postmitotic MNs. In the developing spinal cord, expression of miR-218 is directly upregulated by the Isl1-Lhx3 complex to drive MN fate. Loss of miR-218 function leads to impaired generation of generic MNs, suggesting that this miRNA plays a crucial role in MN differentiation (Amin et al., 2015; Thiebes et al., 2015). Furthermore, mutant mice lacking miR-218 die neonatally and exhibit neuromuscular junction defects, MN hyperexcitability, and progressive MN degeneration, recapitulating traits of motor neuron disease (Amin et al., 2015). These two studies highlight the predominant role of miR-218 in mature MNs. However, miR-218 does not seem to exert its functions by targeting a few specific genes. Instead, it appears to repress an array of transcripts in the alternative neighboring interneuron genes to maintain postmitotic MN cell fate and robust neuromuscular functions (Amin et al., 2015; Thiebes et al., 2015). Interestingly, miR-218 is encoded by an intron of the extracellular matrix Slit2 and Slit3 genes and it inhibits expression of neural cell adhesion molecules Robo1 and Robo2 and multiple components of the heparan sulfate biosynthetic pathway responsible for normal vascularization of the retina (Small et al., 2010). Given that recent evidence indicates that the function of the Slit-Robo regulatory axis is also important for proper positioning of MNs and their exit points (Kim et al., 2019), it would be interesting to investigate if the miR-218-Slit-Robo autoregulatory loop is also important for MN axon pathfinding and targeting.

Do miRNAs also play a role in postmitotic MN subtype diversification? Postmitotic MNs are diversified along the RC axis of the spinal cord to innervate corresponding target muscles. This process primarily relies on a regulatory network of Hox-TFs that translate neuronal identity into patterns of connectivity. Foxp1 is a crucial determinant of MN diversification and connectivity, interpreting the Hox regulatory network to control the formation of a topographic neural map. Although Hox/Foxp1 TFs have been recognized as principal regulators of subtype specification, a role for posttranscriptional regulation is also recognized. For instance, miR-9 is transiently expressed in Foxp1on LMC regions. Overexpression or knockdown of miR-9 alters MN subtypes, switches columnar identities, and changes axonal innervations in developing chick spinal cords. miR-9 modifies spinal columnar organization by specifically regulating Foxp1 protein levels, which in turn determine distinct MN subtypes (Otaegi et al., 2011). Additionally, deletion of the enzyme Dicer from all MNs using Olig2-Cre (Dicer MNΔ) revealed a preferential loss of many limb- and sympathetic ganglia-innervating spinal MNs (Chen and Wichterle, 2012). Furthermore, this disruption also led to defects in motor pool identity specification, yet the miRNA candidates to maintain motor pool identity have yet to be unveiled. These results indicate that miRNAs are an integral part of the genetic program controlling MN survival and acquisition of subtype-specific properties. Subsequent study uncovered that the miR-17 ~92 cluster is highly enriched in LMC-MNs. Furthermore, conditional MN miR-17 ~92 deletion (mi-17 ~92 MNΔ) resulted in selective cell death of LMC-MNs. Mechanistically, mir-17 ~92 not only suppresses PTEN expression, but also independently attenuates accumulation of nuclear PTEN, with this latter being a more potent apoptosis stimulator (Tung et al., 2015). Tellingly, reduced miR-17 ~92 is accompanied by elevated nuclear PTEN in the spinal MNs of presymptomatic SOD1G93A mice, that is the most common mouse strain used as an ALS disease model. Selective dysregulation of the miR-17 ~92/nuclear PTEN axis in degenerating SOD1G93A LMC-MNs has been demonstrated in a double-transgenic embryonic stem cell system and, moreover, was recapitulated in human SOD1+/L144F induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived MNs. Furthermore, overexpression of miR-17 ~92 significantly rescues human SOD1+/L144F MNs, and intrathecal delivery of scAAV9 [self-complementary adeno-associated viral serotype 9]-miR-17 ~ 92 improves motor deficits and survival in SOD1G93A mice (Tung et al., 2019). Therefore, miR-17 ~92 either controls LMC-MN survival during embryonic development or confers MN subtype differential resistance to ALS-associated degeneration. Thus, similar to TFs, miRNAs contribute to neuronal progenitor patterning, cell fate specification, and long-term survival during MN differentiation.


MicroRNAs during motor neuron degeneration in SMA

Given by the versatile roles of miRNAs in regulating MN differentiation mentioned above, it is not surprising that miRNA dysregulation has been increasingly linked to MN-associated degeneration diseases, such as ALS and SMA. ALS-linked miRNAs have been intensively studied and elegantly reviewed elsewhere (Eitan and Hornstein, 2016; Emde et al., 2015). However, the role of miRNAs in SMA is just beginning to emerge. A detailed list of miRNAs implicated in SMA has been reviewed recently (Magri et al., 2018), which we summarize in. Here, we focus our discussion on some of the most recent studies linking specific miRNAs (i.e., miR-2, miR-146a, and miR-23a) to SMA pathogenesis and the potential of miRNAs as biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

SMA is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease characterized by devastating muscular atrophy attributable to progressive spinal MN degeneration. Although SMA is a relatively rare disease, with an estimated worldwide incidence of one in 6,000 ~ 10,000 newborns, it is notable that SMA is the second most common autosomal recessive disease after cystic fibrosis and is the most common monogenic defect leading to infant mortality (Lunn and Wang, 2008). SMA is caused by reduced levels of the 38 kDa Survival Motor Neuron (SMN) protein due to deletion or mutation of the Survival of Motor Neuron 1 (SMN1) gene. In humans, SMN protein is actually encoded by two genes: SMN1 and highly homologous SMN2, which essentially differs by one nucleotide (C→T) in exon 7. This critical difference results in preferential exclusion of exon seven from most SMN2 transcripts, termed SMN△7. As a consequence, SMN2 generates ~10% of full-length (FL) SMN mRNAs and their product-functional SMN proteins (Burghes and Beattie, 2009). As these FL-SMN2 transcripts can partially compensate for loss of SMN1, it is reasoned that the FL-SMN2 transcript copy number may determine phenotypic severity in SMA patients. Therefore, SMA is caused by loss of the SMN1 gene and disease manifestation is partially reflected by the degree of SMN2 gene compensation (Burghes and Beattie, 2009). However, recent studies have indicated that additional modifiers might also be involved in modulating SMA clinical severity (Crawford et al., 2012).

SMN is ubiquitously expressed in almost all kinds of somatic cells, with a distribution in both the cytoplasm and nucleus (Burghes and Beattie, 2009). Notably, the most appreciated canonical role of SMN is to serve as an essential ribonucleoprotein (RNP) for mRNA splicing. SMN protein is embedded in a complex with seven Gemins and UNR-interacting protein (UNRIP) that loads Sm protein onto nascent uridine-rich noncoding RNAs (U-snRNAs) upon their export to the cytoplasm, thereby creating small nuclear RNPs (snRNPs) that form spliceosomes in the nucleus (Burghes and Beattie, 2009; Dostie et al., 2003). In addition to facilitating snRNP assembly, the SMN complex has a role in assisting arginine methylation of some splicing-related proteins that are involved in pre-mRNA splicing (Meister and Fischer, 2002; Pellizzoni et al., 2002). Studies on SMA animal models have also revealed a direct correlation between the ability to assemble snRNPs and SMA phenotypes, and delivery of mature snRNPs even without the SMN component is sufficient to rescue SMA phenotypes (Gabanella et al., 2007; Winkler et al., 2005; Workman et al., 2009). This outcome implies that SMN protein levels might affect splicing of SMN pre-mRNA to include exon seven through an autoregulatory loop, thereby influencing a general process of snRNP biogenesis (Jodelka et al., 2010). In addition to the canonical role of SMN protein in the splicing machinery, some studies have also highlighted the multilayer functions of SMN. For example, assembly of SMN protein is also involved in a number of essential cellular pathways, including DNA repair and protein/mRNA transportation along MN axons (Donlin-Asp et al., 2016; Fallini et al., 2012; Murray et al., 2015; Tu et al., 2017). Collectively, studies to date support that loss of SMN-RNP complex assembly and its activity results in a series of different cellular pathways that lead to SMA. However, it is still unclear if SMA pathology is due to a particularly vulnerable pathway or a combination of dysregulated effects. In addition, it is still unclear how a deficiency in ubiquitously expressed SMN can result in selective MN degeneration.

Deletion of the miRNA biogenesis enzyme Dicer in MNs either using Olig2-Cre or ChAT-Cre results in MN degeneration that mimics certain hallmarks of SMA and ALS (Chen and Wichterle, 2012; Haramati et al., 2010; Tung et al., 2019). Large-scale miRNA profiling platforms have identified miRNAs that are significantly dysregulated in MN disease. Dysregulated MN-specific miRNAs are potential culprits in spinal MN mortality. In this scenario, some important developmentally-regulated (i.e. miR-9 and miR-133) and MN-enriched miRNAs (i.e. miR-218 and miR-17 ~92) have been implicated as being important for SMA and/or ALS onset or progression (Amin et al., 2015; Hoye et al., 2017; Kye and Gonçalves, 2014; Tung et al., 2015; Tung et al., 2019). Furthermore, other neuronal-enriched miRNAs also seem to be involved in spinal diseases, such as miR-21/miR-431/miR-138 for axonal regeneration of sensory neurons or miR-196a in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) (Liu et al., 2013; Miyazaki et al., 2012; Strickland et al., 2011; Wu and Murashov, 2013). These findings raise the possibility that miRNAs might serve as: 1) important regulators of SMN-mediated pathways; and 2) potential markers reflecting SMA pathology.

Despite this evidence of a role for miRNAs in SMA disease progression, it remains unclear if dysregulated miRNAs are the direct pathogenic cause or a consequence of SMA progression. Given that SMN protein per se does not contain known RNA- or miRNA-binding domains (Bertrandy et al., 1999; Ravanidis et al., 2018), the SMN protein complex might instead interact with the miRNA biogenesis pathway to regulate miRNA production (Ravanidis et al., 2018). For example, Gemin3 and Gemin4 of the SMN complex can assemble with a number of miRNAs to form a miRNA-binding RNP (miRNP) (Dostie et al., 2003; Mourelatos et al., 2002). This miRNP complex can further bind to Argonaute 2 (AGO2) that functions as a core protein in the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) mediating miRNA biogenesis as well as mRNA posttranscriptional regulation (Cauchi, 2010). Yet SMN does not seem to bind to miRNP directly, if the miRNP is functionally important in SMA pathology still needs to be further investigated. Interestingly, in addition to the role of SMN in RNA processing, recent studies have uncovered unexpected interactions of SMN with miRNA biogenesis proteins including fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), KH‐type splicing regulatory protein (KSRP) and fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma (FUS/TLS) (Piazzon et al., 2008; Sun et al., 2015; Tadesse et al., 2008; Yamazaki et al., 2012). Thus, SMN is engaged in miRNA–RBP complexes and likely regulates miRNA biogenesis and metabolism. Deficiency of SMN may alter MN-specific miRNAs or miRNPs, resulting in MN death (Cauchi, 2010; Nelson et al., 2004). In, we list SMN-associated RBPs and their roles in miRNA biogenesis and functions. In, we illustrate potential mechanisms by which SMN interacts with various RBPs to regulate miRNA biogenesis and function. In summary, the proposed mechanisms by which SMN-associated RBPs might be involved in miRNA biogenesis include: (1) facilitating recruitment of Drosha to specific miRNAs; (2) binding to components of the Drosha and Dicer complexes; (3) acting as regulators to RISC complex (Fallini et al., 2014; Gonçalves et al., 2018; Ravanidis et al., 2018). Consequently, alteration of the SMN-RBP complex caused by SMN deficiency in the SMA pathological background might lead to dysregulated processing of miRNAs and pre-mRNA splicing. Identification of SMN-associated RBPs involved in transport and processing of different miRNAs could help explain SMA pathogenesis and reveal novel therapeutic targets.

A series of studies has shown dysregulation of specific miRNAs in SMA, and several of these studies have proposed potential links between aberrant miRNA expression and SMA pathophysiology in a diverse array of SMA animal models and patient samples, including neurons from nematodes, neurons and muscles from mice, as well as fibroblasts and serum from human patients. Furthermore, transcriptome profiling has uncovered a number of miRNAs associated with MN survival, synapse formation, ER stress, and ribosomal RNA binding in models of SMA (Kye and Gonçalves, 2014; Vanderweyde et al., 2013; Viswambharan et al., 2017). It remains under debate if dysregulated miRNAs and the corresponding miRNA-mediated target responses are cell-context dependent (i.e., specifically in MNs or in all neurons of the spinal cord), given that SMN is expressed ubiquitously and compromised expression of SMN may selectively affect miRNA homeostasis in different tissues (Magri et al., 2018). In this regard, a very recent study aimed to identify miRNAs that are differentially regulated in SMA from iPSC-derived MNs (Kaifer et al., 2019). In that study, Kaifer et al. only identified a subset of 16 miRNAs whose expression is significantly reduced more than 2-fold in SMA MNs when compared to control MNs. However, using a scAAV9 viral vector to reintroduce mir-23a into the Smn2B/- SMA mouse model increased MN size, reduced neuromuscular junction (NMJ) pathology, and extended survival. Although the detailed mechanisms underlying how miR-23a-mediated target pathways lead to SMA pathology have yet to be characterized, these findings suggest that only a cohort of miRNAs might cause the MN vulnerability in SMA and identification of those miRNA culprits and their targets could provide a new treatment strategy for SMA.

In addition to MNs, evidence for roles for miRNAs in muscle and glial cells that contribute to SMA is also emerging. By using both mouse and nematode models of SMA, O' Hern et al. showed that reduced SMN activity specifically affects miR-2 expression, which in turn causes MNs to produce more m2R, a receptor for acetylcholine (O'Hern et al., 2017). This result also indicates that reduced SMN levels might lead to NMJ dysfunction in MNs and suggests that dysregulation of neurotransmission could be another critical causative factor for SMA pathology. Interestingly, it was recently shown that SMN protein levels in astrocytes affect both directly and indirectly altered expression levels of miR-146a (Sison et al., 2017). The proposed mechanism for that astrocyte-mediated SMA pathology was linked to increased levels of miR-146a in the SMNΔ7 mouse spinal cord. Although the precise targets of miR-146a have not yet been identified, treating iPSC-derived MNs with synthesized miR-146a molecules was sufficient to induce significant MN loss. This outcome indicates that SMA astrocyte-secreted miR-146a might lead to non-cell-autonomous loss of MNs. In the future, it is tantalizing to test gene therapy using miRNA cocktails from astrocytes and/or muscles cells, together with MN-intrinsic miRNAs to mitigate the SMA symptom.


MicroRNAs as SMA biomarkers

Since SMA is a monogenetic disease, designing treatment strategies that restore SMN function in patients is a rational approach. Two undergoing SMA treatment trials either use antisense oligonucleotides or virus-mediated gene therapy exhibited promising outcomes (Finkel et al., 2017; Mendell et al., 2017). These therapeutic approaches both aim to increase SMN protein production in the spinal cord to restore motor function and survival. Mendell et al. used single intravenous administration of nonreplicating scAAV9 adenovirus vector carrying a human wild type SMN1 sequence. In contrast, Finkel et al. applied an antisense approach that was designed to enhance inclusion of exon seven in SMN2, which involved repetitive intrathecal administration of the antisense oligonucleotide drug Nusinersen. While there is cautious optimism regarding progress in developing SMA therapies, several new critical questions have arisen, particularly with regard to identifying measures of reliable outcomes in preclinical and clinical trials, given that: 1) intrathecal delivery is relatively invasive; 2) treatments remain prohibitively expensive; and 3) it remains unclear whether patients’ responsive or non-responsive reactions to treatments reflects SMA heterogeneity. Accordingly, researchers have been prompted to identify more authentic biomarkers of SMA to facilitate patient classification, to follow disease progression, and to better monitor responses to therapeutic approaches using minimally invasive procedures. Reliable biomarkers would not only help categorize heterogeneous clinical types of SMA patients into homogeneous prognostic groups, but would also improve statistical power of clinical trials, reduce trial durations and costs, and reveal therapeutic effects in specific types of SMA patients (De Paola et al., 2019; Viswambharan et al., 2017).

Currently, the efficacy of SMA treatments is largely measured by clinical outcomes, including motor function, electrophysiological tests, and dependency on mechanical ventilation (Finkel et al., 2017; Mendell et al., 2017; Mercuri et al., 2018). However, fluctuating inter-rater or intra-rater variabilities of motor function measurement is problematic and are usually confounded by diverse care regimens and age groups. It is conceivable that molecular biomarkers may represent more objective measures of treatment efficacy. Quantification of SMN mRNA or protein levels has served as the most commonly used molecular biomarker of SMA, but it does not necessarily correlate with disease severity and may not reliably reflect disease progression (Sumner et al., 2006; Wadman et al., 2016). MiRNAs have gained attention as an easily accessible biomarker due to their characteristic of being clinically detectable in many biofluids - such as cerebrospinal fluid, serum/plasma, saliva, and urine - using noninvasive methods (Viswambharan et al., 2017). Indeed, miRNAs are now being used as novel clinical biomarkers for the prognosis of several diseases, including colorectal cancer, acute leukemia, coronary artery diseases, as well as neurodegenerative disorders (Xu, 2012). Furthermore, miRNAs have also been proposed as potential biomarkers in several clinical trials for neuromuscular disorders (Alexander and Kunkel, 2015; Toivonen et al., 2014). Altered miRNA expression has been reported for spinal cord, brain, iPSCs, muscle, blood and cerebrospinal fluid of ALS patients (Hawley et al., 2017; Tung et al., 2019). As SMN is known to be involved in miRNA expression, circulating miRNAs may be used as diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers to reflect SMA pathology or therapeutic effects. As summarized in, miR-9, miR-132, miR-206, miR-183 and miR-375 have been proposed as potentially reliable SMA biomarkers (Israeli et al., 2016; Perry and Muntoni, 2016; Viswambharan et al., 2017). However, it remains to be tested if any of these markers could serve as appropriate indicators of the efficacy of the aforementioned antisense oligonucleotide- or scAAV9-mediated treatments. Answering this question is imperative, as early identification of good patient responders by means of multiple sensitive outcome measures can decrease the cost of innovative therapeutics (Kolb et al., 2016; Taga and Maragakis, 2018). Notably, a recent phase 3 study of an antisense oligonucleotide treatment for severe infantile SMA revealed quite distinct responses among patients (Finkel et al., 2017). In that study, the only factor identified as influencing treatment response was the time between recording the first symptoms in type I SMA patients and initial delivery of the antisense oligonucleotide. However, this factor would not seem to satisfactorily explain the wide variation in patient outcomes. Identification of a set of reliable miRNA markers from serum/cerebrospinal fluid that can be correlated with the Hammersmith Functional Motor Scale, a commonly used clinical parameter in SMA trials, might help stratify the variability among patients (Catapano et al., 2016; Gidaro and Servais, 2019).


Conclusion and future perspective

The relevance of miRNAs to development and disease contexts has been gaining increasing attention over the past two decades. Many miRNA knockout mouse lines have been shown to manifest significant neural development phenotypes (Bartel, 2018), and miRNAs were shown to be sufficient to facilitate reprogramming of fibroblasts into neurons, including into spinal MNs (Abernathy et al., 2017). In this review, we summarize the reported functions of miRNAs in the development and degeneration of spinal MNs. Although ~5 miRNAs are highly or specifically expressed in MNs, only two mouse knockout lines (i.e., miR-17 ~92MNΔ and a miR-218 double knockout) have been characterized in detail. Thus, it would be prudent to further verify the proposed roles of miR-196 and miR-9 in the regulation of Hoxb8 and Foxp1 by examining their respective knockout mouse lines (Shibata et al., 2011; Wong et al., 2015). It is relatively tedious to generate miRNA knockout mice as many miRNAs have evolved duplicated paralogs in mammals (Park et al., 2012), hindering functional studies of miRNAs in mouse models. Fortunately, this hurdle can now be circumvented by CRISPR-Cas9 technology. Accordingly, we envision that further mechanistic insights into the miRNA-TF network of cell fate specification and maintenance during spinal MN development will be revealed by mouse genetic approaches in the near future.

Despite miRNAs reportedly serving as potential biomarkers for cancer prognosis and progression (Hayes et al., 2014), their potential applications in neurodegenerative disease remain to be fully validated. In the case of SMA discussed here, emerging evidence indicates that SMN deficiency can impact non-neuronal organ systems, which may be reflected by altered levels of specific miRNAs in serum (Hamilton and Gillingwater, 2013; Hua et al., 2015). However, critical challenges remain, such as unraveling inconsistencies due to human subject variability and technical issues related to the relative fragility of miRNAs (Basak et al., 2016; Viswambharan et al., 2017). Although SMA-iPSCs might overcome some of these difficulties, it will be critical to recruit a large cohort of patients to validate the authenticity of miRNA biomarkers and further promote their utility.

Finally, twenty years after the breakthrough discovery illustrating how RNA interference can be used to silence certain genes, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has approved the first drug utilizing this method for adult clinical treatment of a rare disease (i.e., hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis). However, as for antisense oligonucleotide treatment in SMA, the cost is prohibitive. Other significant challenges that must be overcome before routine utilization of miRNA-based therapy in neurodegenerative diseases include establishing the best route of delivery and ensuring miRNA therapeutics can cross the blood-brain barrier. In addition, given that miRNAs often act through multiple pathways, the risk of off-target effects must be addressed, especially since they are frequently cited as a side-effect of molecular therapies. Lastly, the timing of miRNA regulation according to cellular developmental status must also be taken into consideration, with miRNA levels being manipulated at a precise time-point with an optimal dosage.

In conclusion, miRNAs are just as critical as TFs for MN development, and miRNA dysregulation likely plays an important role in SMA pathogenesis and in determining the selective vulnerability of MNs. Considering the rapid pace of our expanding knowledge on non-coding RNAs and the introduction of cutting-edge single-cell RNA/ATAC sequencing technology (Delile et al., 2019), research into the role of miRNAs in neural development and degeneration has just begun.


Funding Statement

The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.


Contributor Information

Tai-Heng Chen, Email: taihen@kmu.edu.tw.

Jun-An Chen, Email: jachen@imb.sinica.edu.tw.

Marianne E Bronner, California Institute of Technology, United States.


Funding Information

This paper was supported by the following grants:

Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan 108-2311-B-001-011 to Jun-An Chen.

Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan 106-2314-B-037-086 to Tai-Heng Chen.

National Health Research Institutes NHRI-EX108-10831NI to Jun-An Chen.

Academia Sinica CDA-107-L05 to Jun-An Chen.

Kaohsiung Medical University KMUH104-4M52 to Tai-Heng Chen.

Kaohsiung Medical University KMUH105-5M49 to Tai-Heng Chen.


A critique of pure learning and what artificial neural networks can learn from animal brains

Anthony M. Zador — Nature Communications, 2019. PMC6704116, CC BY 4.0.

Artificial neural networks (ANNs) have undergone a revolution, catalyzed by better supervised learning algorithms. However, in stark contrast to young animals (including humans), training such networks requires enormous numbers of labeled examples, leading to the belief that animals must rely instead mainly on unsupervised learning. Here we argue that most animal behavior is not the result of clever learning algorithms—supervised or unsupervised—but is encoded in the genome. Specifically, animals are born with highly structured brain connectivity, which enables them to learn very rapidly. Because the wiring diagram is far too complex to be specified explicitly in the genome, it must be compressed through a “genomic bottleneck”. The genomic bottleneck suggests a path toward ANNs capable of rapid learning.


Introduction

Not long after the invention of computers in the 1940s, expectations were high. Many believed that computers would soon achieve or surpass human-level intelligence. Herbert Simon, a pioneer of artificial intelligence (AI), famously predicted in 1965 that “machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do”—to achieve general AI. Of course, these predictions turned out to be wildly off the mark.

In the tech world today, optimism is high again. Much of this renewed optimism stems from the impressive recent advances in artificial neural networks (ANNs) and machine learning, particularly “deep learning”. Applications of these techniques—to machine vision, speech recognition, autonomous vehicles, machine translation and many other domains—are coming so quickly that many predict we are nearing the “technological singularity,” the moment at which artificial superintelligence triggers runaway growth and transform human civilization. In this scenario, as computers increase in power, it will become possible to build a machine that is more intelligent than the builders. This superintelligent machine will build an even more intelligent machine, and eventually this recursive process will accelerate until intelligence hits the limits imposed by physics or computer science.

But in spite of this progress, ANNs remain far from approaching human intelligence. ANNs can crush human opponents in games such as chess and Go, but along most dimensions—language, reasoning, common sense—they cannot approach the cognitive capabilities of a four-year old. Perhaps more striking is that ANNs remain even further from approaching the abilities of simple animals. Many of the most basic behaviors—behaviors that seem effortless to even simple animals—turn out to be deceptively challenging and out of reach for AI. In the words of one of the pioneers of AI, Hans Moravec:

“Encoded in the large, highly evolved sensory and motor portions of the human brain is a billion years of experience about the nature of the world and how to survive in it. The deliberate process we call reasoning is, I believe, the thinnest veneer of human thought, effective only because it is supported by this much older and much more powerful, though usually unconscious, sensorimotor knowledge. We are all prodigious Olympians in perceptual and motor areas, so good that we make the difficult look easy. Abstract thought, though, is a new trick, perhaps less than 100 thousand years old. We have not yet mastered it. It is not all that intrinsically difficult; it just seems so when we do it.”

We cannot build a machine capable of building a nest, or stalking prey, or loading a dishwasher. In many ways, AI is far from achieving the intelligence of a dog or a mouse, or even of a spider, and it does not appear that merely scaling up current approaches will achieve these goals.

The good news is that, if we do ever manage to achieve even mouse-level intelligence, human intelligence may be only a small step away. Our vertebrate ancestors, who emerged about 500 million years ago, may have had roughly the intellectual capacity of a shark. A major leap in the evolution of our intelligence was the emergence of the neocortex, the basic organization of which was already established when the first placental mammals arose about 100 million years ago; much of human intelligence seems to derive from an elaboration of the neocortex. Modern humans (Homo sapiens) evolved only a few hundred thousand years ago—a blink in evolutionary time—suggesting that those qualities such as language and reason which we think of as uniquely human may actually be relatively easy to achieve, provided that the neural foundation is solid. Although there are genes and perhaps cell types unique to humans—just as there are for any species—there is no evidence that the human brain makes use of any fundamentally new neurobiological principles not already present in a mouse (or any other mammal), so the gap between mouse and human intelligence might be much smaller than that between than that between current AI and the mouse. This suggests that even if our eventual goal is to match (or even exceed) human intelligence, a reasonable proximal goal for AI would be to match the intelligence of a mouse.

As the name implies, ANNs were invented in an attempt to build artificial systems based on computational principles used by the nervous system. In what follows, we suggest that additional principles from neuroscience might accelerate the goal of achieving artificial mouse, and eventually human, intelligence. We argue that in contrast to ANNs, animals rely heavily on a combination of both learned and innate mechanisms. These innate processes arise through evolution, are encoded in the genome, and take the form of rules for wiring up the brain. Specifically, we introduce the notion of the “genomic bottleneck”—the compression into the genome of whatever innate processes are captured by evolution—as a regularizing constraint on the rules for wiring up a brain. We discuss the implications of these observations for generating next-generation machine algorithms.

At its core, stressing the importance of innate mechanisms is just a recent manifestation of the ancient “nature vs. nurture” debate, which has raged since at least the time of the ancient Greeks (with Plato on Team Nature, and Aristotle on Team Nurture). Historically, much of this debate has centered on the acquisition of characteristics, such as intelligence and morality, traditionally thought to be specifically human, as suggested by the title of John Locke’s 1689 “Essay on Human Understanding”; the term “blank slate,” coined by Locke, has become shorthand for the importance of nurture. A century later, Immanuel Kant argued in favor of Nature in his influential “Critique of Pure Reason”, the title of which inspired that of the present essay. More recently, the debate has played out in disciplines such as cognitive psychology and linguistics. For perhaps historical reasons, the neural network community has, with notable exceptions, mainly aligned itself with Team Nurture by focusing on tabula rasa networks, and conceiving of all changes in network parameters as the result of “learning” (although in practice, the community has adopted a more agnostic “whatever-works-best” engineering approach).


Learning by ANNs

In the earliest days of AI, there was a competition between two approaches: symbolic AI and ANNs. In the symbolic “good old fashion AI” approach championed by Marvin Minsky and others, it is the responsibility of the programmer to explicitly program the algorithm by which the system operates. In the ANN approach, by contrast, the system “learns” from data. Symbolic AI can be seen as the psychologist’s approach—it draws inspiration from the human cognitive processing, without attempting to crack open the black box—whereas ANNs, which use neuron-like elements, take their inspiration from neuroscience. Symbolic AI was the dominant approach from the 1960s to 1980s, but since then it has been eclipsed by ANN approaches inspired by neuroscience.

Modern ANNs are very similar to their ancestors three decades ago. Much of the progress can be attributed to increases in raw computer power: Simply because of Moore’s law, computers today are several orders of magnitude faster than they were a generation ago, and the application of graphics processors (GPUs) to ANNs has sped them up even more. The availability of large data sets is a second factor: Collecting the massive labeled image sets used for training would have been very challenging before the era of Google. Finally, a third reason that modern ANNs are more useful than their predecessors is that they require even less human intervention. Modern ANNs—specifically “deep networks”—learn the appropriate low-level representations (such as visual features) from data, rather than relying on hand-wiring to explicitly program them in.

In ANN research, the term “learning” has a technical usage that is different from its usage in neuroscience and psychology. In ANNs, learning refers to the process of extracting structure—statistical regularities—from input data, and encoding that structure into the parameters of the network. These network parameters contain all the information needed to specify the network. For example, a fully connected network with $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$N$$\end{document}$ neurons might have one parameter (e.g., a threshold) associated with each neuron, and an additional $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${N}^{2}$$\end{document}$ parameters specifying the strengths of synaptic connections, for a total of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$N+{N}^{2}$$\end{document}$ free parameters. Of course, as the number of neurons $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$N$$\end{document}$ becomes large, the total parameter count in a fully connected ANN is dominated by the $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${N}^{2}$$\end{document}$ synaptic parameters.

There are three classic paradigms for extracting structure from data, and encoding that structure into network parameters (i.e., weights and thresholds). In supervised learning, the data consist of pairs—an input item (e.g., an image) and its label (e.g., the word “giraffe”)—and the goal is to find network parameters that generate the correct label for novel pairs. In unsupervised learning, the data have no labels; the goal is to discover statistical regularities in the data without explicit guidance about what kind of regularities to look for. For example, one could imagine that with enough examples of giraffes and elephants, one might eventually infer the existence of two classes of animals, without the need to have them explicitly labeled. Finally, in reinforcement learning, data are used to drive actions, and the success of those actions is evaluated based on a “reward” signal.

Much of the progress in ANNs has been in developing better tools for supervised learning. A central consideration in supervised learning is “generalization.” As the number of parameters increases, so too does that “expressive power” of the network—the complexity of the input-output mappings that the network can handle. A network with enough free parameters can fit any function, but the amount of data required to train a network without overfitting generally also scales with the number of parameters. If a network has too many free parameters, the network risks “overfitting” data, i.e. it will generate the correct responses on the training set of labeled examples, but will fail to generalize to novel examples. In ANN research, this tension between the flexibility of a network (which scales with the number of neurons and connections) and the amount of data needed to train the network (more neurons and connections generally require more data) is called the “bias-variance tradeoff” (Fig.). A network with more flexibility is more powerful, but without sufficient training data the predictions that network makes on novel test examples might be wildly incorrect—far worse than the predictions of a simpler, less powerful network. To paraphrase “Spiderman”: With great power comes great responsibility (to obtain enough labeled training data). The bias-variance tradeoff explains why large networks require large amounts of labeled training data.


Learning by animals

The term “learning” in neuroscience (and in psychology) refers to a long-lasting change in behavior that is the result of experience. Learning in this context encompasses animal paradigms such as classical and operant conditioning, as well as an array of other paradigms such as learning by observation or by instruction. Although there is some overlap between the neuroscience and ANN usage of the term learning, in some cases the terms differ enough to lead to confusion.

Perhaps the greatest divergence in usage is the application of the term “supervised learning.” Supervised learning is central to the many successful recent applications of ANNs to real-world problems of interest. For example, supervised learning is the paradigm that allows ANNs to categorize images accurately. However, to ensure generalization, training such networks requires enormous data sets; one visual query system was trained on more than $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$1{0}^{7}$$\end{document}$ “labeled” examples (question-answer pairs). Although the final result of this training is an ANN with a capability that, superficially at least, mimics the human ability to categorize images, the process by which the artificial system learns bears little resemblance to that by which a newborn learns. There are only $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$\ 1{0}^{7}$$\end{document}$ s in a year, so a child would need to ask one question every second of her life to receive a comparable volume of labeled data; and of course, most images encountered by a child are not labeled. There is, thus, a mismatch between the available pool of labeled data and how quickly children learn. Clearly, children do not rely mainly on supervised algorithms to learn to categorize objects.

Considerations such as these have motivated the search in the machine learning community for more powerful learning algorithms, for the “secret sauce” posited to enable children to learn how to navigate the world within a few years. Many in the ANN community, including pioneers such as Yann Lecun and Geoff Hinton (https://www.reddit.com/r/MachineLearning/comments/2lmo0l/ama_geoffrey_hinton), posit that instead of supervised paradigms, we rely instead primarily on unsupervised paradigms to construct representations of the world. In the words of Yann Lecun (https://medium.com/syncedreview/yann-lecun-cake-analogy-2-0-a361da560dae):

“If intelligence is a cake, the bulk of the cake is unsupervised learning, the icing on the cake is supervised learning, and the cherry on the cake is reinforcement learning.”

Because unsupervised algorithms do not require labeled data, they could potentially exploit the tremendous amount of raw (unlabeled) sensory data we receive. Indeed, there are several unsupervised algorithms which generate representations reminiscent of those found in the visual system–. Although at present these unsupervised algorithms are not able to generate visual representations as efficiently as supervised algorithms, there is no known theoretical principle or bound that precludes the existence of such an algorithm (although the No-Free-Lunch theorem for learning algorithms states that no completely general-purpose learning algorithm can exist, in the sense that for every learning model there is a data distribution on which it will fare poorly). Every learning model must contain implicit or explicit restrictions on the class of functions that it can learn. Thus, while the number of labeled images a child encounters during her first $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$1{0}^{7}$$\end{document}$ s of life might be small, the total sensory input received during that time is quite large; perhaps Nature has evolved a powerful unsupervised algorithm to exploit this large pool of data. Discovering such an unsupervised algorithm—if it exists—would lay the foundation for a next generation of ANNs.


Learned and innate behavior in animals

A central question, then, is how animals function so well so soon after birth, without the benefit of massive supervised training data sets. It is conceivable that unsupervised learning, exploiting algorithms more powerful than any yet discovered, may play a role establishing sensory representations and driving behavior. But even such a hypothetical unsupervised learning algorithm is unlikely to be the whole story. Indeed, the challenge faced by this hypothetical algorithm is even greater than it appears. Humans are an outlier: We spend more time learning than perhaps any other animal, in the sense that we have an extended period of immaturity. Many animals function effectively after $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$1{0}^{6}$$\end{document}$, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$1{0}^{5}$$\end{document}$, or even fewer seconds of life: A squirrel can jump from tree to tree within months of birth, a colt can walk within hours, and spiders are born ready to hunt. Examples like these suggest that the challenge may exceed the capacities of even the cleverest unsupervised algorithms.

So if unsupervised mechanisms alone cannot explain how animals function so effectively at (or soon after) birth, what is the alternative? The answer is that much of our sensory representations and behavior are largely innate. For example, many olfactory stimuli are innately attractive or appetitive (blood for a shark or aversive (fox urine for a rat). Responses to visual stimuli can also be innate. For example, mice respond defensively to looming stimuli, which may allow for the rapid detection and avoidance of aerial predators. But the role of innate mechanisms goes beyond simply establishing responses to sensory representations. Indeed, most of the behavioral repertoire of insects and other short-lived animals is innate. There are also many examples of complex innate behaviors in vertebrates, for example in courtship rituals. A striking example of a complex innate behavior in mammals is burrowing: Closely related species of deer mice differ dramatically in the burrows they build with respect to the length and complexity of the tunnels,. These innate tendencies are independent of parenting: Mice of one species reared by foster mothers of the other species build burrows like those of their biological parents. Thus, it appears that a large component of an animal’s behavioral repertoire is not the result of clever learning algorithms—supervised or unsupervised—but rather of behavior programs already present at birth.

From an evolutionary point of view, it is clear why innate behaviors are advantageous. The survival of an animal requires that it solve the so-called “four Fs”—feeding, fighting, fleeing, and mating—repeatedly, with perhaps only minor tweaks. Each individual is born, and has a very limited time—from a few days to a few years—to figure out how to solve these four problems. If it succeeds, it passes along part of its solution (i.e., half its genome) to the next generation. Consider a species X that achieves at $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$98 \%$$\end{document}$ of its mature performance at birth, and its competitor Y that functions only at $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$50 \%$$\end{document}$ at birth, requiring a month of learning to achieve mature performance. (Performance here is taken as some measure of fitness, i.e., ability of an individual to survive and propagate). All other things being equal (e.g., assuming that mature performance level is the same for the two species), species X will outcompete species Y, because of shorter generation times and because a larger fraction of individuals survive the first month to reproduce.

In general, however, all other things may not be equal. The mature performance achievable via purely innate mechanisms might not be the same as that achievable with additional learning. If an environment is changing rapidly—e.g., on the timescale of a single individual—innate behavioral strategies might not provide a path to as high a level of mature performance as a mixed strategy that relies in part on learning. For example, a fruit-eating animal might evolve an innate tendency to look for trees; but the locations of the fruit groves in its specific environment must be learned by each individual. There is, thus, pressure to evolve an appropriate tradeoff between innate and learned behavioral strategies, reminiscent of the bias-variance tradeoff in supervised learning.


Innate and learned behaviors are synergistic

The line between innate and learned behaviors is, of course, not sharp. Innate and learned behaviors and representations interact, often synergistically. For example, rodents and other animals form a representation of space—a “cognitive map”—in the hippocampus. This representation consists of place cells, which become active when the animal enters a particular place in its environment known as a “place field.” A given place cell typically has only one (or a few) place fields in a particular environment. The propensity to form place fields is innate: A map of space emerges when young rat pups explore an open environment outside the nest for the very first time. However, the content of place fields is learned; indeed, it is highly labile, since new place fields form whenever the animal enters a new environment. Thus, the scaffolding for the cognitive map is innate, but the specific maps constructed on this scaffolding are learned.

This form of synergy between innateness and learning is common. For example, human infants can discriminate faces soon after birth, and monkeys raised with no exposure to faces show a preference for faces upon first exposure, reflecting the contribution of innate mechanisms to face salience and perception. In human and non-human primates there exists a specific cortical area, the FFA (fusiform face area), which is selectively engaged in the perception of faces; patients with focal loss of the FFA suffer a permanent deficit in face processing. However, the specific faces recognized by each individual are learned during the course of that individual’s lifetime. Thus, as with place cells in the hippocampus, the innate circuitry for processing faces may provide the scaffolding, but the specific faces that populate this scaffolding are learned. Similar synergy may accelerate the acquisition of language by children: The innate circuitry in areas like Wernicke’s and Broca’s may provide the scaffolding, enabling the specific syntax and vocabulary of any specific language to be learned rapidly,. This synergy between innate and learned behavior could arise from evolutionary pressure of the sort depicted in Fig. b.


Genomes specify rules for brain wiring

We have argued that the main reason that animals function so well so soon after birth is that they rely heavily on innate mechanisms. Innate mechanisms, rather than heretofore undiscovered unsupervised learning algorithms, provide the base for Nature’s secret sauce. These innate mechanisms are encoded in the genome. Specifically, the genome encodes blueprints for wiring up their nervous system, where by wiring we refer to both the specification of which neurons are connected, as well as to the strengths of those connections. These blueprints have been selected by evolution over hundreds of millions of years, operating on countless quadrillions of individuals. The circuits specified by these blueprints provide the scaffolding for innate behaviors, as well as for any learning that occurs during an animal’s lifetime.

If the secret sauce is in our genomes, then we must ask what exactly our genomes specify about wiring. In some simple organisms, genomes have the capacity to specify every connection between every neuron, to the minutest detail. The simple worm c. elegans, for example, has 302 neurons and about 7000 synapses; in each individual of an inbred strain, the wiring pattern is largely the same. So, at one extreme, the genome can encode a lookup table, which is then transformed by developmental processes into a circuit with precise and largely stereotyped connections.

But in larger brains, such as those of mammals, synaptic connections cannot be specified so precisely; the genome simply does not have sufficient capacity to specify every connection explicitly. The human genome has about $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$3\times 1{0}^{9}$$\end{document}$ nucleotides, so it can encode no more than about 1 GB of information—an hour or so of streaming video. But the human brain has about $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$1{0}^{11}$$\end{document}$ neurons, and more than $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$1{0}^{3}$$\end{document}$ synapses per neuron. Since specifying a connection target requires about $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${\mathrm{log}}_{2}1{0}^{11}=37\ {\rm{bits}}/{\rm{synapse}}$$\end{document}$, it would take about $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$3.7\times 1{0}^{15}\ {\rm{bits}}$$\end{document}$ to specify all $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$1{0}^{14}$$\end{document}$ connections. (This may represent an underestimate because it considers only the presence or absence of a connection; a few extra bits/synapse would be required to specify graded synaptic strengths. But because of synaptic noise and for other reasons, synaptic strength may not be specified very precisely. So, in large and sparsely connected brains, most of the information is probably needed to specify the locations the nonzero elements of the connection matrix rather than their precise value.). Thus, even if every nucleotide of the human genome were devoted to efficiently specifying brain connections, the information capacity would still be at least six orders of magnitude too small.

These fundamental considerations explain why in most brains, the genome cannot specify the explicit wiring diagram, but must instead specify a set of rules for wiring up the brain during development. Even a short set of rules can readily specify the wiring of a very large number of neurons; in the limit, a nervous system wired up like a grid would require only the single rule that each neuron connect to its four nearest neighbors (although such a nervous system would probably not be very interesting). Another simple rule, but which yields a much more interesting result, is: Given the rules of the game, find the network that plays Go as well as possible. In practice, the circuits found in animal brains often seem to rely on repeating modules. There has long been speculation that the neocortex consists of many copies of a basic “canonical” microcircuit, which are wired together to form the entire cortex.


Supervised learning or supervised evolution?

As noted above, the term “learning” is used differently in ANNs and neuroscience. At the most abstract level, learning can be defined as the process of encoding statistical regularities from the outside world into the parameters (mostly connection weights) of the network. But in the context of animal learning, the source of the input data for learning is limited only to the animal’s “experience,” i.e., to those events that occur during the animal’s lifetime. Wiring rules encoded in the genome that do not depend on experience, such as those used to wire up the retina, are not usually termed “learning.” Because the terms “lifetime” and “experience” are not well defined when applied to an ANN, reconciling the two definitions of learning in ANNs vs. neuroscience poses a challenge.

If, as we have argued above, much of an animal’s behavior is innate, then an animal’s life experiences represent only a small fraction of the data that contribute to its fitness; another potentially much larger pool of data contributes to its innate behaviors and representations. These innate behaviors and representations arise through evolution by natural selection. Thus evolution, like learning, can also be viewed as a mechanism for extracting statistical regularities, albeit on a much longer time scale than learning. Evolution can be thought of as a kind of reinforcement algorithm, operating on the timescale of generations, where the reinforcement signal consists of the number of progeny an individual generates. ANNs are engaged in an optimization process that must mimic both what is learned during evolution and the process of learning within a lifetime, whereas for animals learning only refers to within lifetime changes.

In this view, supervised learning in ANNs should not be viewed as the analog of learning in animals. Instead, since most of the data that contribute an animal’s fitness are encoded by evolution into the genome, it would perhaps be just as accurate (or inaccurate) to rename it “supervised evolution.” Such a renaming would emphasize that “supervised learning” in ANNs is really recapitulating the extraction of statistical regularities that occurs in animals by both evolution and learning. In animals, there are two nested optimization processes: an outer “evolution” loop acting on a generational timescale, and an inner “learning” loop, which acts on the lifetime of a single individual. Supervised (artificial) evolution may be much faster than natural evolution, which succeeds only because it can benefit from the enormous amount of data represented by the life experiences of quadrillions of individuals over hundreds of millions of years.

Although there are parallels between learning and evolution, there are also important differences. Notably, whereas learning can act directly on synaptic weights through Hebbian and other mechanisms, evolution acts on brain wiring only indirectly, through the genome. The genome doesn’t encode representations or behaviors directly; it encodes wiring rules and connection motifs. The limited capacity of the mammalian genome—orders of magnitude smaller than would be needed to specify all connections explicitly—may act as a regularizer or an information bottleneck, shifting the balance from variance to bias. In this regard, it is interesting to note that the size of the genome itself is not a fixed constraint, but is itself highly variable across species. The size of the human genome is about average for mammals, but dwarfed in size by that of many fish and amphibians; the lungfish of the marbled genome is more than 40 times larger than that of humans. The fact that the human genome could potentially have been much larger suggests that the regularizing effect imposed by the limited capacity of the genome might represent a feature rather than a bug.


Implications for ANNs

We have argued that animals are able to function well so soon after birth because they are born with highly structured brain connectivity. This connectivity provides a scaffolding upon which rapid learning can occur. Innate mechanisms thus work synergistically with learning. We suggest that analogous approaches might inspire new approaches to accelerate progress in ANNs.

The first observation from neuroscience is that much of animal behavior is innate, and does not arise from learning. Animal brains are not the blank slates, equipped with a general-purpose learning algorithm ready to learn anything, as envisioned by some AI researchers; there is strong selection pressure for animals to restrict their learning to just what is needed for their survival (Fig.. The idea that animals are predisposed to learn certain things rapidly is related to “meta-learning” and “inductive biases” in AI research and cognitive science,–. In this formulation, there is an outer loop (e.g., evolution) which optimizes learning mechanisms to have inductive biases that allow us to learn very specific things very quickly.

The importance of innate mechanisms suggests that an ANN solving a new problem should attempt as much as possible to build on the solutions to previous related problems. Indeed, this idea is related to an active area of research in ANNs, “transfer learning,” in which connections pre-trained in the solution to one task are transferred to accelerate learning on a related task,. For example, a network trained to classify objects such as elephants and giraffes might be used as a starting point for a network that distinguishes trees or cars. However, transfer learning differs from the innate mechanisms used in brains in an important way. Whereas in transfer learning the ANN’s entire connection matrix (or a significant fraction of it) is typically used as a starting point, in animal brains the amount of information “transferred” from generation to generation is smaller, because it must pass through the bottleneck of the genome. Passing the information through the genomic bottleneck may select for wiring and plasticity rules which are more generic, and which therefore are more likely to generalize well. For example, the wiring of the visual cortex is quite similar to that of the auditory cortex (although each area has idiosyncrasies. This suggests that the hypothesized canonical cortical circuit provides, with perhaps only minor variations, a foundation for the wide variety of tasks that mammals perform. Neuroscience suggests that there may exist more powerful mechanisms—a kind of generalization of transfer learning—which operate not only within a single sensory modality like vision, but across sensory modalities and even beyond.

A second observation from neuroscience follows from the fact that the genome doesn’t encode representations or behaviors directly or optimization principles directly. The genome encodes wiring rules and patterns, which then must instantiate behaviors and representations. It is these wiring rules that are the target of evolution. This suggests wiring topology and network architecture as a target for optimization in artificial systems. Classical ANNs largely ignored the details of network architecture, guided perhaps by theoretical results on the universality of fully connected three-layer networks,. But of course, one of the major advances in the modern era of ANNs has been convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which use highly constrained wiring to exploit the fact that the visual world is translation invariant,. The inspiration for this revolutionary technology was in part the structure of visual receptive fields. This is the kind of innate constraint that in animals would be expected to arise through evolution; there might be many others yet to be discovered. Other constraints on wiring and learning rules are sometimes imposed in ANNs through hyperparameters, and there is an extensive literature on hyperparameter optimization. At present, however, ANNs exploit only a tiny fraction of possible network architectures, raising the possibility that more powerful, cortically-inspired architectures remain to be discovered.

In principle, the circuits underlying neural processing could be discovered by experimental neuroscience. Traditionally, neural representations and wiring were inferred indirectly, through recordings of activity. More recently, tools have been developed that raise the possibility of determining wiring motifs and circuitry directly. Local circuitry can be determined with serial electron microscopy; there is now an ambitious project to determine every synapse within a $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$1\ {{\rm{mm}}}^{3}$$\end{document}$ cube of mouse visual cortex. Long-range projections can be determined in a high-throughput manner using MAPseq or by other methods. Thus the details of cortical wiring may soon be available, and provide an experimental basis for ANNs.


Conclusions

The notion that the brain provides insights for AI is at the very foundation of ANN research. ANNs represented an attempt to capture some key aspects of the nervous system: many simple units, connected by synapses, operating in parallel. Several subsequent advances also arose from neuroscience. For example, the reinforcement learning algorithms underlying recent successes such as AlphaGo Zero draw their inspiration from the study of animal learning. Similarly, CNNs were inspired by the structure of the visual cortex.

But it remains controversial whether further progress in AI will benefit from the study of animal brains. Perhaps we have learned all that we need to from animal brains. Just as airplanes are very different from birds, so one could imagine that an intelligent machine would operate by very different principles from those of a biological organism. We argue that this is unlikely because what we demand from an intelligent machine—what is sometimes misleadingly called “artificial general intelligence”—is not general at all; it is highly constrained to match human capacities so tightly that only a machine structured similarly to a brain can achieve it. An airplane is by some measures vastly superior to a bird: It can fly much faster, at greater altitude, for longer distances, with vastly greater capacity for cargo. But a plane cannot dive into the water to catch a fish, or swoop silently from a tree to catch a mouse. In the same way, modern computers have already by some measures vastly exceeded human computational abilities (e.g., chess), but cannot match humans on the decidedly specialized set of tasks defined as general intelligence. If we want to design a system that can do what we do, we will need to build it according to the same design principles.


Multi-method brain imaging reveals impaired representations of number as well as altered connectivity in adults with dyscalculia

Jessica Bulthé, Jellina Prinsen, Jolijn Vanderauwera, Stefanie Duyck, Nicky Daniels, Céline R Gillebert, Dante Mantini, Hans P Op de Beeck et al. — Neuroimage, 2019. PMC6494208, CC BY 4.0.

Two hypotheses have been proposed about the etiology of neurodevelopmental learning disorders, such as dyslexia and dyscalculia: representation impairments and disrupted access to representations. We implemented a multi-method brain imaging approach to directly investigate these representation and access hypotheses in dyscalculia, a highly prevalent but understudied neurodevelopmental disorder in learning to calculate. We combined several magnetic resonance imaging methods and analyses, including univariate and multivariate analyses, functional and structural connectivity. Our sample comprised 24 adults with dyscalculia and 24 carefully matched controls. Results showed a clear deficit in the non-symbolic magnitude representations in parietal, temporal and frontal regions, as well as hyper-connectivity in visual brain regions in adults with dyscalculia. Dyscalculia in adults was thereby related to both impaired number representations and altered connectivity in the brain. We conclude that dyscalculia is related to impaired number representations as well as altered access to these representations.


Introduction

In neuroscience, hypotheses about the neural basis of disorders often fall into two categories: dysfunction in specific brain regions and cognitive representations versus disrupted connectivity and impaired access to these representations. This distinction has been present in the history of neuroscience and started when the localized function approach in language disorders was upended by the concept of disconnection syndromes, as introduced by Wernicke (Spreen et al., 1995). A similar distinction has been suggested for the etiology of neurodevelopmental learning disorders, such as dyslexia (Boets et al., 2013) and dyscalculia (Price and Ansari, 2013).

Recently, a multi-method brain imaging approach was used in adults with dyslexia to directly compare the representation versus access hypotheses and this approach combined measures of the quality of neural representations with measures of connectivity (Boets et al., 2013). The present study applied the same approach to another neurodevelopmental learning disorder, i.e. dyscalculia, which is a disorder in learning to calculate. We used a similar multi-method brain imaging approach as in Boets et al. (2013) to investigate whether impaired representations, impaired access or both (the representation and access hypotheses are not mutually exclusive) explain the origin of dyscalculia.

Dyscalculia is far less frequently investigated compared with dyslexia or autism spectrum disorder (Bishop, 2010), yet it is as prevalent as these disorders (Butterworth et al., 2011; Elsabbagh et al., 2012) and it affects about 5–6% individuals of the population (Rubinsten and Henik, 2009). Dyscalculia is thought to originate from impaired numerical magnitude processing (De Smedt et al., 2013). However, to date no study investigated whether the neural magnitude representations and the access to these representations are impaired in adults with dyscalculia in one sample with the same task. The investigation of the origin of these impairments is also of practical relevance, because lower levels of numerical abilities have been associated with lower income (Estrada-Mejia et al., 2016) and socio-economic status (Ritchie and Bates, 2013), poorer medical decision making (Reyna et al., 2009), and even greater likelihood of mortgage default (Gerardi et al., 2013).

The available neuroimaging studies on dyscalculia, which mainly comprised studies with children, mainly considered the overall activation level in cortical regions associated with number processing and restricted their focus to the intraparietal sulcus (IPS). These studies have yielded mixed results and, depending upon task requirements, hypo-activation (Ashkenazi et al., 2012; Mussolin et al., 2010b; Price et al., 2007) as well as hyper-activation (Rosenberg-Lee et al., 2015; Simos et al., 2008) in the IPS in children with dyscalculia compared with matched controls have been reported. These differences in brain activity suggest an altered task-modulation of the IPS during number processing, but they do not directly provide any information about the quality of the involved representations. The present study applied multivariate fMRI analyses to compare the quality of the number representations between adults with and without dyscalculia. We therefore can directly investigate whether the impaired neural number representations hypothesis holds in adults with dyscalculia (b).

It also has been suggested that the number representations themselves are not impaired in dyscalculia, but that these representations are difficult to access (Noël and Rousselle, 2011) (a). This is supported by behavioral studies showing that children with dyscalculia were only impaired in the processing symbolic but not non-symbolic magnitudes (De Smedt and Gilmore, 2011; Rousselle and Noël, 2007). At the neural level, there is some evidence for impaired access and altered connectivity. More specifically, children with dyscalculia have reduced white matter volume in right temporal-parietal cortex (Rykhlevskaia et al., 2009; see also Matejko and Ansari, 2015), and hyper-connectivity between the IPS and lateral fronto-parietal regions (Rosenberg-Lee et al., 2015), and between the IPS and areas of the default mode network (Jolles et al., 2016) has been reported in dyscalculia.

The current study is the first to directly test and compare both the hypothesis of impaired neural magnitude representations in dyscalculia and the hypothesis of impaired access to these neural representations. As a first step, we applied univariate fMRI analyses to investigate differences in activation levels between adults with and without dyscalculia. This allowed us to compare our data with previous fMRI studies of dyscalculia, which only used univariate analyses (b). We then extended the spectrum of activation related analyses by additionally including subject classification methods. Subject classification methods allowed us to directly verify the functional differences between the two groups that were strong enough to identify individuals with dyscalculia based on their brain activity only. As a second step, multivariate fMRI analyses were performed to directly test the hypothesis of impaired number representations (b). Third, connectivity analyses were ran to test the hypothesis of access impairments in dyscalculia (c). We used the same regions of interest (ROIs) in both the multivariate fMRI analyses and in the functional connectivity analyses. It should be noted that the impaired number representations hypothesis and impaired access to number representations hypothesis are not mutually exclusive. Both hypotheses could be either correct or incorrect.


Methods


Participants

Participants were 54 adults, who took part in this study as paid volunteers. Due to technical issues with the MR scanner, useful data were only acquired for 48 participants (all females, aged between 18 and 27, three left-handed participants with dyscalculia, and two left-handed participants in the control group). This resulted in a final sample of 24 participants with dyscalculia and 24 control participants with normal mathematics achievement. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and they all reported no neurological or psychiatric history. Prior to participating in the study, each participant was interviewed to confirm that the participants with dyscalculia, and none of the control participants, met the DSM-V criteria for “Specific Learning Disorder with Impairment in Mathematics”. These criteria comprised: (a) difficulties in mastering number sense, number facts, or calculation for at least 6 months (b) difficulties with mathematical reasoning (i.e. difficulties in applying mathematical concepts, facts or procedures to solve quantitative problems); for at least 6 months; (c) affected academic skills that were substantially and quantifiably below those expected for the individual's chronological age, and that caused significant interference with academic performance or with activities of daily living; (d) a documented history of learning difficulties in mathematics during the school-age years; and (e) the learning difficulties were not better accounted for by intellectual disabilities, uncorrected visual or auditory acuity, other mental or neurological disorders, psychosocial adversity, lack of proficiency in the language of academic instruction, or inadequate education instruction (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 67).

All participants provided two written informed consents, one before the behavioral session and one prior to scanning. The study was approved by the medical ethics committee of UZ/KU Leuven. None of the participants participated in previous neuroimaging studies of our research group (Bulthé et al., 2015, 2014a).


Matching the dyscalculia and control groups

All participants successfully completed secondary school and they all were enrolled in higher education. The two groups were pairwise individually matched for their education in secondary school and college/university, sex, and age. We evaluated their arithmetic and reading skills, motor speed, and intelligence to match the two groups for all measures, except for arithmetic. Statistical analyses for all the behavioral measures were done in Matlab (The MathWorks, Natrick, MA, version 8.3.0.532 (R2014a)).

Mathematical abilities were assessed by three tests. The Tempo Test Calculation (De Vos, 1992) and French Kit (French et al., 1963) are two standardized paper-and-pencil tests for single- and multi-digit calculation (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) under time pressure. The arithmetic subtest of the WAIS (Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale III), which involves the solution of verbally presented word problems without time pressure, was additionally administered. Reading abilities were assessed by reading as many real words (Brus, 1999) and pseudo-words (Van den Bos et al., 1994) as possible in 1 min. These two standardized reading tests were done to verify the absence of comorbidity with dyslexia. Verbal and non-verbal intelligence were investigated with the Vocabulary and Matrix Reasoning subtests of the WAIS, respectively. To verify whether any group differences in reaction time for behavioral mathematics tests or number processing tasks in the scanner were not due to group differences in processing speed, participants performed a motor speed reaction time task on a computer. During this task participants had to decide, in a rapid but accurate manner, at which side of the screen a white colored stimulus was presented, by pressing the corresponding key (De Smedt and Boets, 2010).


fMRI data acquisition and analyses


Stimuli

The stimuli and design in this experiment were the same as in a previous study by Bulthé, De Smedt and Op de Beeck, 2014a. Stimuli in the experimental runs consisted of the numerical magnitudes 2, 4, 6 or 8, displayed as either symbolic numbers or collections of white dots on a black background (non-symbolic numbers). Similar to previously used methods (Dehaene et al., 2005), stimuli within each condition were varied in intensive (individual item size and inter-item spacing) and extensive (total luminance and total area spanned by the non-symbolic numbers) confounding parameters, and in addition we varied the position of the stimuli randomly across the displays. The adaptation of the symbolic numbers was minimized by varying their position and size across trials. Stimuli were presented with Psychtoolbox 3 (Brainard, 1997) in Matlab and projected via a NEC projector onto a screen located approximately 46 cm from participants' eyes.


Design

The experimental runs had a short-block design with variable block duration and this design was the same as in Bulthé et al. (2014a). Short blocks (4, 5 or 6s) were used to prevent the loss of attention and to minimize potential adaptation effects during a single condition. Each run consisted of 48 experimental blocks (each condition was presented in 6 blocks) and 7 fixation blocks (baseline). Two fixation blocks were presented for 8 s at the beginning and at the end of each run. The remaining five fixation blocks lasted 4, 5 or 6 s and they were presented after each 8th experimental block. In one experimental block, the same numerosity was repeated in sequences of 4, 5 or 6 trials in the same format. Participants had to perform a number comparison task in the experimental runs. We selected this task because it allowed us to explicitly access the numerical magnitude representations (Piazza et al., 2004; Pinel et al., 2004; Zorzi et al., 2011). Participants were instructed to evaluate whether the presented number was smaller (response with left index finger) or larger (response with right index finger) than five whenever the displayed format or numerosity changed.

Statistical analyses for accuracy and reaction time of the number comparison task in the scanner were done in Matlab. Each trial lasted for 1000 ms, during which a random example of the number was shown for 200 ms, followed by a fixation cross for 800 ms. One run lasted for 280 s and 8 to 12 experimental runs were acquired per participant. There was no significant difference in number of experimental runs acquired in the dyscalculia group (M = 11.83) and the control group (M = 11.95) (t46 = 0.69, p = 0.50).

The localizer runs consisted of the same localizer task as in Bulthé et al. (2015, 2014a). Participants had to subtract two numbers that ranged between 1 and 20 and they had to indicate whether the solution was even or odd. Answers were given via left or right keypresses and these were counterbalanced within each run. In each trial the subtraction problem was presented for 1700 ms, followed by a fixation cross for 300 ms. Two localizer runs were obtained per participant.


fMRI data acquisition

FMRI data were acquired in a 3T Philips Ingenia CX Scanner with a 32-channel head coil using a T2*-weighted echo-planar (EPI) pulse sequence (50 slices, 2.10 × 2.15 mm in plane acquisition voxel size, slice thickness 2 mm, interslice gap 0.2 mm, repetition time (TR) = 3000 ms, echo time (TE) = 30 ms, flip angle = 90, 100 × 97 acquisition matrix). For each participant, a T1-weighted anatomical volume was collected (182 slices, resolution 0.98 × 0.98 × 1.2 mm, TR = 9.6 ms, TE = 4.6 ms, 256 × 256 acquisition matrix).


fMRI preprocessing

The data were processed with the Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM 12, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London) in Matlab. Anatomical images were normalized to the standard brain template defined by the Montreal Neurological 152-brains average. Functional images were corrected for slice timing differences. Realignment between images was performed to correct for motion across and within sessions and this resulted in a set of motion parameters that were used as confounds when modelling the BOLD response via a general linear model. None of the collected experimental runs had to be excluded for extensive motion (based on the criterion of movement in any direction of more than one voxel size). Co-registration of the functional data and the anatomical image was performed. During normalization, functional images were resampled to a voxel size of 2 × 2 × 2 mm. Additionally, functional images were spatially smoothed to suppress high-frequency noise. The images were convolved with a Gaussian kernel of 4 mm full-width at half maximum (FWHM) for subsequent multivariate voxel pattern analyses (see Op de Beeck, 2010), while 8 mm FWHM was used for subsequent second-level univariate analyses.


Statistical analysis

For each voxel, the experimental effect in a block was estimated by applying a general linear model. This resulted in beta-values for each condition (including the fixation condition) and six motion parameters per run (the x, y, and z values for both rotation and translation). T-statistics (resulting from conditions vs. baseline) were estimated and used as input for subsequent multivariate analysis. This was done because t-statistics take both the mean and the variance of the activations into account (Misaki et al., 2010).


ROIs

We selected ROIs that were activated during number comparison tasks in previous studies (Bulthé et al., 2015, 2014a; Holloway et al., 2013; Lyons and Ansari, 2009; Piazza et al., 2007). We also included ROIs in the occipital and temporal cortex that are often studied in other relevant research domains (e.g., visual perception and reading), but that are not specifically associated with numerical processing (Burr and Ross, 2008; Saygin et al., 2016; Walther et al., 2009).

The 17 ROIs were tested in a hierarchical order as introduced in Bulthé et al. (2014a). This approach combines the strength of global large-scale volumes to pick up highly distributed effects with the strength of smaller local ROIs to pick up more focal differences (Bulthé et al., 2014b). Four spatial scales were introduced: whole cerebral cortex (“All Regions ROI”), lobes, regions, and sub-regions. At the first level, (I) All Regions (all grey matter voxels with significantly increased activity in the task vs. baseline contrast in the localizer task in a participant), we investigated group differences across all grey matter voxels. If (and only if) there was a significant group difference at a higher level, the group comparison was tested at the lower level. P-values were FDR corrected across that level. Next (II), the 4 lobes were examined: frontal cortex, parietal cortex, temporal cortex, occipital cortex, and then (III), the Specific regions: fusiform gyrus (FG), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), superior frontal gyrus (SFG), inferior occipital cortex (IOC), superior occipital gyrus, primary visual cortex (PVC), supramarginal gyrus, angular gyrus, inferior parietal lobule (IPL), superior parietal lobule (SPL), IPS. Finally, (IV) sub-regions within the IPS were tested: left anterior IPS (IPSLA), right anterior IPS (IPSRA), left posterior IPS (IPSLP), and right posterior IPS (IPSRP), were investigated.

All ROIs were created at the individual level, based on functional activity in the localizer scan, because this approach avoids the inclusion of voxels without any modulation by task or stimuli. From this point of view, this functional criterion serves as a feature selection, which is very often done in one way or another in multi-voxel decoding studies (Norman et al., 2006). For the ROIs for which an anatomical mask was available in the WFU PickAtlas Toolbox (Wake Forrest University PickAtlas, fmri. wfubmc.edu/cms/software), we selected those voxels from the anatomical mask that also showed increased activity (task minus fixation) during the independent localizer scans at an uncorrected threshold of p < 0.001. The full list of the ROIs made by the overlap between the anatomical mask and localizer data were as follows: Occipital Cortex, Temporal Cortex, Frontal Cortex, Parietal Cortex, Primary Visual Cortex, Inferior Occipital Cortex, Fusiform Gyrus, Inferior Frontal Gyrus, Superior Frontal Gyrus, Inferior Parietal Lobule and Superior Parietal Lobule. For the IPS and its subdivisions, we delineated these ROIs manually on the functional contrast of the localizer scans (uncorrected threshold at p < 0.01). The delineation of the IPS was carried out as we have done in previous studies (Bulthé et al., 2014a). The current approach thus provides the needed consistency between the present study and these related studies. More specifically, the borders of the IPS ROIs were determined on the basis of anatomical coordinates (Left IPS: MNI [-42 -42 42] to [-23 -62 51] and Right IPS: MNI [42−42 45] to [27–60 51]). The Anterior part was determined by the 4 most anterior slices, and the posterior part was determined by the 4 most posterior slices. This was done in a consistent manner across subjects. There was no significant difference between the groups in the number of voxels that were included in the ROIs (all puncorrected > 0.08; all pFDR > 0.80).

The supramarginal gyrus, superior occipital gyrus, and angular gyrus were excluded from further analyses because they could not be defined in at least five subjects. This was because there were no voxels in the anatomical mask that showed increased activity during the localizer task. If it was not possible to identify one of the remaining ROIs in a participant, this participant was excluded in subsequent analyses for that particular ROI.


Correction for multiple comparisons

We applied the same hierarchical FDR-correction as in our previous work (Bulthé et al., 2014a). All group differences, for univariate and multivariate ROI-based analyses, were evaluated with a two-sided two-sample t-test. Within each level of the hierarchy, a correction for multiple comparisons (FDR) across all ROIs in that level was applied. This reasoning is similar to the well-known statistical approach of only testing a priori t-contrasts (e.g., pairwise comparisons) if an F-test that includes all conditions is significant. To be certain that we did not overlook any important smaller ROIs (i.e., in case a higher level ROI did not show a significant group difference), we also applied an FDR-correction across all ROIs. However, none of the ROIs survived this more stringent FDR-correction when the higher-level ROI did not show an effect.


Univariate analysis

For every participant, two contrasts for the experimental runs were calculated: symbolic numbers minus fixation and non-symbolic numbers minus fixation. For this analysis, no distinction was made between the numerical magnitudes within each format. A second-level group analysis in SPM12 was done for these contrasts to test activation differences in symbolic and non-symbolic numbers between the two groups at the whole brain level (threshold of p < 0.05 after FWE correction at voxel-wise level). The figures for this analysis were made with BrainNet Viewer (Xia et al., 2013). An ROI-based univariate analysis was also conducted to test for group differences within each format. We performed two-sample t-tests and corrected for multiple comparisons in a hierarchical manner, as described above.


Multivariate analysis


Subject classification based upon spatial variation in univariate activity levels

We used the functional contrasts ‘symbolic numbers minus fixation’ and ‘non-symbolic numbers minus fixation’ from the experimental runs for every participant. It is important to point out that this analysis differs from searchlight-based or ROI-based MVPA, as it does not investigate the underlying differences in the quality of the neural representations of symbolic numbers and non-symbolic numbers between the groups. Instead, it evaluates whether there is a more general difference in activation between the two groups when symbolic and non-symbolic numbers are processed. In this way, this analysis is more closely related to a second level univariate analysis than to multivariate ROI-based decoding and searchlight analyses. The main difference with a second level univariate analysis is that there is no activity-based comparison at the level of single voxels, but a spatial pattern comparison between the two groups across the whole brain or across a selected ROI. A similar subject classification approach has been used in research on other neurodevelopmental disorders, such as autism spectrum disorders (Uddin et al. (2011); Iuculano et al. (2014)) and dyslexia (Tamboer et al., 2016).

The subject classification analysis was implemented with custom code written in Matlab with the LIBSVM toolbox (Chang and Lin, 2011) that we made freely available via the Open Science Framework at https://osf.io/4rfz6/files/. The classification was performed with linear support vector machines with the following parameters (and these are the default values of the LIBSVM toolbox): a radial basis function kernel as decision function with parameter gamma set to 1; a C-SVC classification algorithm with parameter C set to 1. An intuitive explanation of the meaning of these parameters can be found at http://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/svm/plot_rbf_parameters.html. We applied a leave-one-pair-out-cross-validation (LPOCV) technique, similar to the procedure used by Ung et al. (2014). We opted for the LPOCV procedure because if we would apply a leave-one-out cross-validation there would be a “class imbalance”, i.e., there would be an unequal number of exemplars in the two groups during the classification, which would result in a bias to the largest group. With the LPOCV method, the classifier was trained on all participants, except for one random participant from the control group and one random participant from the dyscalculia group. Afterwards, the trained model was tested on this left-out pair. This procedure was repeated until each participant was left out once. Because of this random division into pairs, slightly different accuracies can occur depending on the division. The LPOCV was therefore ran 1000 times, and the results were averaged across all these repeats.

Statistics were obtained by a Monte Carlo Permutation test (Mourão-Miranda et al., 2005). The class labels of the training set were randomly permuted 1000 times and the same LPOCV procedure as described above was applied. A p-value for the subject classification accuracy was obtained by the number of times the permutation accuracy was greater than or equal to the subject classification accuracy, divided by 1000. For this subject classification, we noted that the permutation-based threshold for statistical significance was very similar to the threshold that would have been set by a simple parametric binomial test, which would take into account the proportion of participants classified in a particular group. To correct for multiple comparisons, we applied an FDR-correction across the four lobes and across the IPS regions.


Whole brain searchlight analysis of the decoding of neural magnitude representations

A whole brain searchlight analysis is particularly suited for finding where in the brain the local spatial activity pattern differs across conditions without selecting any ROIs (Kriegeskorte et al., 2006; Kriegeskorte and Bandettini, 2007). We used “The Decoding Toolbox” (Hebart et al., 2015) together with our own custom made code in Matlab to carry out this searchlight analysis. The classification model (SVM) and its parameters for the ROI-based decoding were similar to the ones used for the subject classification analysis.

During the searchlight analysis, a sphere with a radius of two voxels (volume of max. 33 voxels) was sequentially moved across the entire grey-matter volume (Bulthé et al. (2014a). For each participant, the searchlight analysis resulted in a map for each format. Afterwards, the maps were spatially smoothed using Gaussian kernels of 8 mm FWHM (equal to the univariate smoothing level). Finally, a second-level analysis was done in SPM12 to test for group differences and this was done for both formats (threshold of p < 0.05 after FWE correction).


ROI-based decoding of neural magnitude representations

For each ROI, a decoding classification analysis was implemented with custom code written in Matlab using the LIBSVM toolbox (Chang and Lin, 2011). The classification model (SVM) and its parameters for the ROI-based decoding were similar to the ones used for the subject classification and searchlight analyses.

The response patterns, containing the t-values of all voxels for all conditions and each run in that ROI, were obtained. These response patterns were subsequently standardized by subtracting the mean across voxels and then dividing this by the standard deviation across voxels for each condition. We followed a repeated random subsampling cross-validation procedure: The data were randomly divided into 70% training data and 30% test data (the latter were averaged to one response pattern per condition), and this was repeated 100 times.

The pairwise decoding of all eight conditions resulted in an 8 × 8 matrix, for which we then averaged across several decoding accuracies to obtain two comparisons of interest: symbolic numbers (mean within-format decoding accuracy for symbolic numbers) and non-symbolic numbers (mean within-format decoding accuracy for non-symbolic numbers). It is important to note that each time we mention “decoding of non-symbolic numbers” or “decoding of symbolic numbers”, this represents the average across multiple pairwise decoding accuracies. Group differences were tested with a two-sample t-test and corrected for multiple comparisons with FDR for the four lobes and for the IPS subparts separately.


Functional connectivity analysis

Pre-processing steps for this analysis comprised: (1) bandpass filtering between 0.01 and 0.2 Hz (Balsters et al., 2016; Baria et al., 2013); (2) regression of head motion parameters and their first derivatives; (3) regression of white matter and ventricle signals and their first derivatives (Ebisch et al., 2013); (4) regression of task-related BOLD fluctuations (task = the contrast ‘task minus baseline’) (Boets et al., 2013; Ebisch et al., 2013); (5) scrubbing of motion-affected functional volumes (Power et al., 2012); and (6) spatial smoothing at 4 mm FWHM.

The eight ROIs of level III, which were created for each participant for the analyses described above, were included as seed ROIs for the functional connectivity analysis. We obtained a representative BOLD time course for each ROI by averaging the time courses of the voxels within the ROI. For each participant, we then created a functional connectivity matrix by calculating Pearson cross-correlations between the BOLD time courses of each pair of ROIs. After converting the single-subject matrices to Z-scores with the Fisher's r-to-Z transformation, we calculated a group-level matrix by conducting a random effects analysis across subjects (pFDR <.001). Group-level comparisons among functional connectivity scores were performed by calculating independent-sample t tests on the Z-score matrices (pFDR <.05).


DTI data acquisition and analyses


DTI data acquisition

DTI data were collected for 23 control participants and 21 participants with dyscalculia. Diffusion images were acquired on a 3T Philips Ingenia CX Scanner using a single spin shot EPI with SENSE acquisition. Whole brain images were acquired with the following parameters: 58 sagittal slices, slice thickness = 2.5 mm, voxel size = 2.5 × 2.5 × 2.5 mm³, repetition time = 7600 ms, echo time = 82 ms, field-of-view = 220 × 240 mm2, matrix size = 80 × 94 and acquisition time = 10 min 32 s. Diffusion gradients were applied along 60 noncollinear directions (b = 1500 s/mm2).


Image preprocessing and tractography

Preprocessing of the raw diffusion MRI data was done with ExploreDTI (Leemans et al., 2009) and contained following steps: (1) Images were corrected for eddy current distortion and subject motion; (2) A non-linear least square method was applied for diffusion tensor estimation; (3) For each participant a whole brain tractography was estimated using the following parameters: uniform 2 mm seed point resolution, FA threshold of 0.2, angle threshold of 40°, and fiber length range of 50–500 mm.

We used the TrackVis software to delineate white matter tracts for each participant in their native brain space (Wang and Wedeen, 2007). Based on the review of Matejko and Ansari (2015), the following tracts were delineated: genu and splenium of the corpus callosum (CC), left and right inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus (IFOF), left and right inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF), left and right arcuate fasciculus (AF), which was divided into three parts, i.e. frontal to temporoparietal arcuate fasciculus (AFFTP), frontal to temporal AF (AFFT), frontal to parietal AF (AFFP), and left and right temporal to parietal AF (AFTP). We opted for deterministic tractography as it is the preferred method for hypothesis-driven tractography. To delineate the tracks, we manually drew ROIs for each individual in their native brain space. These ROIs were defined based on anatomical landmarks in the brain. The delineation of all the tracts for each participant of the control group were done by two independent raters. The inter-rater reliability for all tracts ranged from 0.87 to 0.99, demonstrating a high reproducibility of the tractography.

For all tracts, the fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), axial diffusivity (AD), and radial diffusivity (RD) values were extracted for each participant. To test for differences in white matter between the two groups, two sample t-tests were performed in Matlab for each DTI metric (FA, MD, AD, and RD values) of each tract. An FDR correction for multiple comparisons was applied across tracts.


Results


Group matching

Behavioral and neuroimaging data were collected in 24 individuals with dyscalculia and 24 healthy controls. All adults with dyscalculia met the DSM-V (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) criteria for specific learning disorder with an impairment in mathematics. None of the control participants met the criteria for specific learning disorder. The groups were matched on sex, intelligence, age, educational history and reading ability. As expected, the groups differed significantly in their mathematical abilities.

presents a summary of the results of all tasks. Two-sample t-tests showed that the groups only differed in their performance on the tests measuring mathematical abilities. The results of all these behavioral tests demonstrated an appropriate matching between the two groups.


Behavioral analysis

A 2 × 2 ANOVA (group x format) was performed to test group and format differences on the number comparison task that was executed during the experimental runs. For accuracy, there was no significant difference between the control group (95.75%, SD = 1.97) and dyscalculia group (94.77%, SD = 1.39) (F1,92 = 2.29, p = 0.13, dCohen = 0.45). A significant effect for format was observed and accuracy was higher for symbolic (M = 97.35%, SD = 1.45) than for non-symbolic numbers (M = 93.17%, SD = 1.41; F1,92 = 41.04, p < 0.001, dCohen = 1.89). There was no significant interaction between group and format (F1,92 = 0.01, p = 0.92, dCohen = 0.03).

For reaction time, a significant group difference was observed, with faster response times for controls (M = 0.90s, SD = 0.07) than for individuals with dyscalculia (M = 1.18s, SD = 0.07) (F1,92 = 41.2, p < 0.001, dCohen = 1.89). Again, a significant format effect was observed with faster reaction times for symbolic numbers (0.91s, SD = 0.05) than for non-symbolic numbers (1.17s, SD = 0.08) (F1,92 = 34.67, p < 0.001, dCohen = 1.74). There was no interaction between group and format (F1,92 = 0.36, p = 0.55, dCohen = 0.17).

The two groups performed the task equally well in terms of accuracy, but individuals with dyscalculia were significantly slower compared to the control group. It should be noted that a similar behavioral pattern was observed in a multi-method imaging study on impairments in dyslexia (Boets et al., 2013).


Neural activation levels for symbolic and non-symbolic numbers


Univariate analyses

As a first step, and similar to earlier studies, we performed univariate analyses to investigate group differences in the overall activation level. No significant group differences for symbolic and non-symbolic numbers were found with a whole brain voxel-wise t-test (second-level analysis, voxel-wise FWE corrected at p < 0.05, height threshold T = 5.29, extent threshold k = 0 voxels).

For the ROI-based univariate analysis, we found no significant group differences in brain activity for symbolic and non-symbolic formats in the All Regions analysis (Dots: t46 = 1.44, p = 0.11; Arabic digits: t46 = 1.86, p = 0.07). There were also no significant differences in activity in any of the individual ROIs (lowest pFDR = 0.10).


Subject classification

To further investigate whether there were distinguishable patterns of activation versus fixation between the two groups, we applied a subject classification procedure (see Methods). Subject classification allowed us to examine if the activation patterns of both groups for either formats at various spatial levels were different enough to be picked up by a classifier.

The results of the subject classification analysis did not show a significant subject classification accuracy, with the same patterns in the All Regions ROI, for both non-symbolic (classification accuracy = 0.57, p = 0.17) or symbolic (classification accuracy = 0.51, p = 0.45) numbers. None of the ROIs showed a significant effect at an FDR-corrected level for both formats. Even with these sensitive classification methods, we did not find significant differences between the participant groups in terms of their general pattern of activation. These analyses suggest that the same representations and processes were involved in the two groups.


Summary of univariate results

We found no univariate differences in brain activity between adults with and without dyscalculia. A whole-brain second level univariate analysis did not reveal any significant activity level differences between the groups. A subsequent ROI-based analysis in 17 ROIs confirmed the whole-brain univariate finding of no group differences. We also applied a subject classification analysis to verify whether there were more distributed and subtle activation differences between both groups. Again, this analysis did not reveal significant group differences. Taking these three analyses together, we conclude that there were no significant univariate differences between adults with and without dyscalculia during number processing.


Quality of neural representations of symbolic and non-symbolic numbers


Searchlight analysis

The abovementioned results revealed no significant group differences in the level of activation for either numerical format. Previous research that compared the brain activity of individuals with and without dyscalculia (Ashkenazi et al., 2012; Mussolin et al., 2010b; Price et al., 2007; Rosenberg-Lee et al., 2015; Simos et al., 2008) only considered univariate comparisons. In this section, we conducted more refined analyses that allowed us to assess the quality of neural representations. To this end, we applied a whole-brain MVPA searchlight analysis based upon the decoding of different magnitudes. This analysis was performed separately for the non-symbolic and symbolic magnitude representations.

The results of these searchlight analysis showed specific ‘hotspots’ in both groups for non-symbolic and symbolic number representations. In controls, the non-symbolic representations of various numerosities (e.g., 4 dots versus 8 dots) were distinguishable in many regions of the dorsal stream (A). In individuals with dyscalculia, the non-symbolic number representations were distinct in the occipital pole and in a few patches in the parietal cortex (mainly superior parietal lobule) (B).

A group comparison for non-symbolic numbers (C–D) clearly demonstrated significantly less distinct non-symbolic number representations in the anterior parietal and frontal lobes, as well as in a small spot in the temporal lobe in individuals with dyscalculia compared to controls.

For symbolic numbers, we found fewer regions with distinct number representations for both groups, compared with non-symbolic numbers (C–D). This is consistent with earlier studies using a similar paradigm and data-analytic methods (Eger et al., 2009; Damarla and Just, 2013; Bulthé et al., 2014a, Bulthé et al., 2014b), which also showed a much lower ability to decode symbolic numbers compared to non-symbolic numbers. The searchlight maps of both groups were not significantly different for symbolic numbers. In other words, there appears to be no group difference in the overlap of the neural representations.

In both groups, the classifier was also able to distinguish between symbolic numbers in the occipital pole. This is likely due to the lack of being able to fully control for extensive and intensive visual features in these stimuli. The classifier was also able to distinguish between symbolic numbers in the motor and somatosensory cortex, but this significant accuracy might be due to a response confound. Most (four out of six) pairwise comparisons of numbers were between conditions that triggered different motor responses (e.g. smaller or larger than 5) and this might have been picked up by the classifier. Note that in a different study with the same paradigm and only 16 subjects, we did not observe this effect (Bulthé et al., 2014a). This suggests that it was a small effect that can only be picked up by the classifier when there is a sufficient sample size. No group differences were observed in any of these regions.


ROI-based decoding

The searchlight results should not be interpreted as evidence that number representations are relatively focal, because these searchlight analyses are notoriously biased towards finding focal representations (Bulthé et al., 2014b). We therefore applied ROI-based decoding analyses to look for more widespread differences between the two groups. This was first done on larger spatial scale (All Regions and different lobes) and subsequently on smaller spatial scales (IPS, temporal, frontal, and occipital regions).

To test whether there were distinct underlying neural representations for symbolic and non-symbolic numbers in each ROI, a classifier was trained and tested to differentiate between the different numerical magnitudes in one format in a given ROI. If there were distinct neural representations in that ROI, the decoding accuracies should be significant, with higher decoding accuracies indicating more distinct neural representations. We also compared the decoding accuracies of both groups for each format.


All regions

The classifier could distinguish the neural representations of non-symbolic and symbolic numbers in both groups (both p-values < 0.001) (&). For non-symbolic numbers, the neural representations were more separable in controls than in dyscalculia (t46 = 2.16, p = 0.04). For symbolic numbers there was no significant difference in the quality of the neural representations between controls and dyscalculia (t46 = −0.56, p = 0.58). Because decoding performance was markedly lower for symbolic than for non-symbolic numbers, with decoding performance going down from 63% to 47% overall, this absence of a significant group difference for symbolic numbers might have been due to a lack of sensitivity to detect a possible group difference.


Lobes

The decoding accuracies for non-symbolic numbers were significantly different from chance level in both groups in all lobes (all pFDR's < 0.001) (&). There was no significant group difference in the occipital lobe (pFDR = 0.11). A significant group difference was observed in the parietal lobe, temporal lobe, and frontal lobe (all pFDR's < 0.03), with more distinguishable neural patterns for non-symbolic numbers in controls than in individuals with dyscalculia.


Parietal ROIs

The neural patterns for non-symbolic numbers were distinct from each other in each group in the IPL, SPL, and the IPS (all pFDR's < 0.001) (&). Although there was a strong trend for more distinguishable neural patterns in controls than in individuals with dyscalculia in the IPL (pFDR = 0.052) and SPL (pFDR = 0.052), the group difference, with more distinct neural patterns in controls than in dyscalculia, was only significant in the IPS (pFDR = 0.048).


IPS subparts

Because there was a significant group difference for non-symbolic numbers in the IPS (&), its subparts were also analyzed for presence of distinct non-symbolic number representations in each group. We also tested whether there was a group difference in the distinctiveness of these neural representations. In all the subparts of the IPS the classifier reliably differentiated between the different neural representations of non-symbolic numbers in each group (all pFDR's < 0.001) (&). Only in the IPSRA, the distinctiveness of the neural representations was significantly higher for controls than for individuals with dyscalculia (pFDR = 0.02).


Temporal ROIs

The FG contained distinct neural representations for non-symbolic numbers in both groups (both pFDR's < 0.001) (&). There was no group difference in the distinctiveness of these neural representations (pFDR = 0.55).


Frontal ROIs

The classifier distinguished different neural representations for non-symbolic numbers for both groups in the IFG and the SFG (both pFDR's < 0.001) (&). The neural representations in the IFG and the SFG in controls were also more distinct than in individuals with dyscalculia (both pFDR's < 0.03).


Summary of multivariate results

We first applied a searchlight analysis, which investigated the processing of symbolic and non-symbolic numbers on a very local scale. These analyses demonstrated less distinguishable non-symbolic number representations in adults with dyscalculia compared to adults without dyscalculia, in the anterior parietal lobe, the frontal lobe, and in a small area in the temporal lobe. For symbolic number representations, we did not observe any group differences in the quality of the representations.

The searchlight results were confirmed by the ROI-based multivariate approach. For non-symbolic numbers, we found significantly less distinguishable neural representations in adults with dyscalculia compared with matched controls in the All Regions, the parietal lobe (including the IPS and right anterior IPS), the temporal lobe, and the frontal lobe (including superior and inferior frontal gyrus). For symbolic numbers, we did not observe any significant group differences.


Connectivity differences between the two groups?

We subsequently tested if the numerical impairments in dyscalculia were due to an access deficit and, consequently, to differences in connectivity. This was done by analyzing (A) functional connectivity between ROIs and (B) structural connectivity in specific white matter tracts (c).


Functional connectivity

A functional connectivity analysis was performed to investigate the ROIs that were functionally coupled with each other and to test whether this coupling differed between the two groups. Only the 8 ROIs on level III were included. For both groups, all the pairwise functional connectivity strengths were significant (controls: 10.92 < t23 < 38.81, all pFDR's < 0.001; dyscalculia: 12.80 < t23 < 37.58, all pFDR's < 0.001) (a–b). For the individual connections between ROIs, there were significant group differences for the connectivity between PVC (primary visual cortex) and IOC (t46 = −3.17, pFDR = 0.04) and between PVC and FG (t46 = −3.47, pFDR = 0.03) with higher connectivity in individuals with dyscalculia than in controls (c). Interestingly, none of the regions involved in this hyper-connectivity showed a group difference in the distinctiveness of neural representations in the previous analyses.


Structural connectivity

DTI measures the quality of the white matter tracts that connect different regions in the human cortex. None of the tracts under investigation showed a significant group difference (even at uncorrected level for multiple comparisons) for fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), axial diffusivity (AD), and radial diffusivity (RD) values. For FA, the t-values ranged from −1.85 to 1.41 (0.41 < pFDR < 0.91) (see supplementary material); for AD t-values ranged from −1.85 to 0.82 (0.54 < pFDR < 0.99); for MD t-values ranged from −0.92 to 0.90 (all pFDR's = 0.97); and for RD t-values ranged from −0.79 to 1.39 (0.89 < pFDR < 0.98).


Summary of connectivity results

The results of the functional connectivity analysis showed an increased connectivity between the primary visual cortex and fusiform gyrus, and between primary visual cortex and inferior occipital complex for adults with dyscalculia compared to controls. For the structural connectivity analysis, we did not observe any significant group differences.


Discussion

This study combined for the first time different neuroimaging methods (univariate and multivariate functional, and connectivity analyses) to investigate the impaired number representations hypothesis and the impaired access to number representations hypothesis in relation to dyscalculia. Our results indicate impaired non-symbolic magnitude representations in the IPS, parietal regions, and other brain regions in adults with dyscalculia. This is consistent with the impaired magnitude representations hypothesis. We also found functional connectivity differences in adults with dyscalculia, in line with the hypothesis of impaired access to number representations. These differences in connectivity were observed in brain regions that did not show a difference in the quality of magnitude representations. The neural correlates of dyscalculia in adults cannot be reduced to only impaired magnitude representations or to only impaired access to these magnitude representations. Our data further indicate that they also cannot be reduced to one or a few brain areas.

The observation that the deficits in dyscalculia cannot be localized to one brain region or cannot be explained by a single brain deficit has important consequences for the study of the neural basis of dyscalculia. This is especially so, because previous studies have either focused narrowly on the IPS and parietal regions or on one specific type of analyses, such as univariate analyses. Our findings are consistent with the idea that dyscalculia, just like other neurodevelopmental disorders, such as dyslexia, ADHD or autism (Pennington, 2006), is a heterogeneous disorder that arises from multiple risk and protective factors. As a consequence, its neural correlates will include combinations of diffuse functional disruptions, deficits in connectivity between regions, as well as anatomical differences (see also Johnson et al., 2002; Menon, 2011).


Functional impairments

We demonstrated that the deficits in the quality of neural magnitude representations are spread throughout the cortex, as was already suggested on the basis of more indirect evidence from univariate studies (Kaufmann et al., 2011; Rosenberg-Lee et al., 2015). In the current study, the representations in these regions outside the parietal cortex might be related to numerical representations as well as to how these representations are recruited during more general cognitive processes. For example, frontal regions often play an important role in attention and working memory processes required for problem solving, and these processes are also likely to occur when dealing with numerical magnitudes.

We demonstrated impaired quality of non-symbolic magnitude representations while participants were performing a numerical magnitude comparison task. We deliberately opted for timing parameters that allowed participants with dyscalculia to perform the task quite well. Their overall accuracy was not significantly different from controls, with a difference only observed for reaction times. Because the overall accuracy in individuals with dyscalculia was not different from matched controls, the impaired quality of magnitude representations at the neural level cannot be explained by one group not being able to perform the task and hence being less motivated/attentive. The slower reaction time of the participants with dyscalculia suggests that they were processing the stimuli for a longer period of time, which could have resulted in a better quality of the magnitude representations – the opposite of what we observed. Interestingly, a previous multi-method imaging study of phonological processing in dyslexia also compared participant groups with the same accuracy but different reaction time (slower in individuals with the dyslexia) (Boets et al., 2013). In that study there were no group differences in the quality of neural representations between individuals with and without dyslexia.

Although the deficit in non-symbolic number processing for dyscalculia was very clear in our study, we observed no group differences in the quality of magnitude representations for symbolic numbers. This does not necessarily mean that symbolic representations are not impaired in dyscalculia. Previous MVPA studies in healthy participants already showed that these symbolic representations are harder to detect than representations of non-symbolic magnitudes (Eger et al., 2009; Damarla and Just, 2012; Bulthé et al., 2014a, 2015; Lyons et al., 2015). This was also observed in the current study as we found smaller decoding accuracies, also in controls, for symbolic magnitudes. Because decoding performance was markedly lower for symbolic than for non-symbolic numbers, the lack of a significant group difference for symbolic numbers might be explained by a lack of sensitivity to detect a possible group difference. Future studies on the quality of symbolic number representations in dyscalculia should therefore collect more neuroimaging data of symbolic numbers. Another possibility to increase sensitivity of the imaging design might be to increase the difficulty of the task, for example by using two-digit symbolic numbers.

Our study differs from previous neuroimaging studies on dyscalculia in two respects. First, previous neuroimaging studies used univariate fMRI analyses to investigate differences in brain activation between individuals with dyscalculia and matched controls. Applying the same type of univariate analyses to our data as in previous studies, we failed to detect any clusters of voxels in the brain that showed a different level of activation in individuals with dyscalculia vs. healthy controls. It is not clear whether and in what direction our univariate null results would deviate from earlier observed task-dependent altered levels of activations in dyscalculia as mixed results have been reported. Several studies have reported a decreased activation in dyscalculia during non-symbolic number comparison tasks (Price et al., 2007), arithmetic problem solving (Ashkenazi et al., 2012), and symbolic number comparison (Mussolin et al., 2010a). On the other hand, Rosenberg-Lee et al. (2015) have reported increased activity in the IPS during arithmetic problem solving in children with dyscalculia compared to matched controls. Iuculano et al. (2014) found hyperactivity in children with dyscalculia compared to matched controls in multiple cortical areas in the prefrontal and parietal cortex (including the left IPS), and ventral temporal-occipital cortex. These mixed findings might be due to differences in task domains, task difficulty or samples. Therefore, no obvious and unequivocal prediction can be made about the direction of univariate differences in the neural response of individuals with dyscalculia when comparing them to healthy controls.

Second, all previous functional neuroimaging work on dyscalculia has been carried out with children. The current study is the first neuroimaging study with adults with dyscalculia. Hence, it was not known to date whether this altered functional activation levels in the IPS and other brain regions associated with dyscalculia remain altered throughout the lifespan. Our results suggest that such differences in overall activity may have diminished during adulthood. This does not exclude the possibility that during development there were time points during which hyper- or hypoactivation in the IPS in children with dyscalculia could have been observed. Related to this issue, Iuculano and colleagues (2015) have demonstrated that the difference in brain activity between children with and without mathematical learning disabilities diminished after remedial interventions. This suggests that even in dyscalculia, brain activity can normalize after successful remediation, a possibility that also has been observed in dyslexia (Temple et al., 2003). On the other hand, group differences in overall brain activity between adults with and without dyscalculia might only emerge when more complex numerical tasks, such as calculation rather than number comparison are used.

To conclude, our multivariate analyses results provided the first evidence that non-symbolic number representations were less precise in adults with dyscalculia in comparison to a strictly matched control group. Our findings of impaired number representations in adults with dyscalculia are observed at both the distributed and the local scale. The ROI-based MVPA clearly demonstrated less precise non-symbolic number representations in dyscalculia throughout the dorsal stream and the IPS, and therefore showed a very distributed neural correlation with number representations in dyscalculia. On the other hand, the searchlight analysis demonstrated several local areas in the temporal, parietal and frontal cortex, where less precise non-symbolic number representations were present in adults with dyscalculia compared to adults without dyscalculia. For symbolic magnitudes we did not observe differences in neural quality between the two groups under study. Further investigation is needed to determine whether the symbolic neural representations are less precise in dyscalculia.


Connectivity deficits

The current study is the first neuroimaging study to consider the structural and functional connectivity correlates in adults with dyscalculia. We observed increased functional connectivity in temporal/occipital regions in adults with dyscalculia. However, we found no group differences in any of the white matter tracts (four in total with 17 segments) under investigation.

We observed hyper-connectivity in adults with dyscalculia, which is in line with functional connectivity (Rosenberg-Lee et al., 2015) and resting-state connectivity (Jolles et al., 2016) data in children with dyscalculia. The hyper-connectivity in our study was observed between FG and PVC and between IOC and PVC, regions known to be involved in the processing of complex visual objects (Grill-Spector et al., 2008; Menon et al., 2000). It has been previously demonstrated that children with dyscalculia have decreased grey matter volume in these regions (Rykhlevskaia et al., 2009). The observed increased connectivity in the study of Rykhlevskaia et al. (2009) was related to arithmetic skills, such that more functional connectivity in these regions was associated with lower arithmetic skills.

The increased functional connectivity in dyscalculia in our study might be interpreted in terms of compensatory processes that were activated during digit number processing in dyscalculia. More specifically, this increased functional connectivity from the occipital cortex to the inferior-temporal cortex might be explained by increased connectivity to the “visual number area” (located in the inferior-temporal cortex). This area was first identified by Shum et al. (2013) who collected intracranial electrophysiological recordings. Shum et al. (2013) demonstrated that this area responds more strongly to digits than to other stimuli, which were well-matched in terms of visual (letters, false fonts), semantic (number words) or phonological (phonologically similar non-number words) similarity. Using monkey fMRI, Srihasam et al. (2012) also found an area in the ventral temporal cortex selective for trained symbols (opposed to untrained shapes and faces). These results suggest that such regions only develop when a high level of visual proficiency with number symbols is reached (as was the case for the younger monkeys in the study of Shrihasam et al. (2012). Against this background, we hypothesize that the observed increased connectivity in the direction of the inferior-temporal cortex might reflect compensatory mechanisms in individuals with dyscalculia to process Arabic digits. It is important to emphasize that we did not study the exact location of this “visual number area”, as this region is close to the fMRI signal-drop out zone produced by the nearby auditory canal and venous sinus (Shum et al., 2013). On the other hand, recent data by Grotheer et al. (2018) suggest that it is possible to investigate brain activity in this inferior temporal area via fMRI and that this region may be involved in mathematical processing more broadly. Future studies should therefore more carefully investigate this region and examine the possibility of compensatory mechanisms is this region in dyscalculia.

In contrast to the functional connectivity differences in this study, we did not observe any differences in structural connectivity in tracts that were previously related to numerical processing (Matejko and Ansari, 2014). This is in contrast to two previous studies in dyscalculia, who observed that children with dyscalculia had decreased connectivity in the right temporal-parietal areas (Rykhlevskaia et al., 2009), and the bilateral superior longitudinal fasciculus (Kucian et al., 2013). There are two possible explanations for the discrepancy in findings. First, it might be that the white matter differences observed in children with dyscalculia are only present early in development, and that over time these white matter differences become very small or even negligible. Second, the present study included a very strictly matched control group that took into account not only sex, age, and intelligence, but also educational history and environment. This strict matching might also explain why we did not replicate previous neuroimaging studies in which such matching was not employed. However, this strict matching is critical to attribute the observed differences to the presence of dyscalculia and not to possible differences in education.


Domain-specific vs. domain-general deficits

There is an increasing awareness that the neural origins of dyscalculia may not be restricted to domain-specific deficits, such as impaired representations of number or deficits in access to these domain-specific representations. In addition, the neural correlates of dyscalculia might also include domain-general deficits and impairments that are not specific to learning mathematics (Ashkenazi et al., 2013; Fias et al., 2013; Geary et al., 2017; Rubinsten and Henik, 2009; Szűcs, 2013; Wilson et al., 2015) For example, impairments in executive functions, working memory, attention or inhibitory control all have been highlighted as potential risk factors for dyscalculia (Rubinsten and Henik, 2009).

Our multi-faceted analyses might point to both domain-specific and domain-general deficits. Impaired neural representations for non-symbolic magnitudes in adults with dyscalculia in brain regions that are typically correlated with numerical cognition (IPS and parietal cortex), might point to domain-specific impairments. On the other hand, various observations suggest domain-general effects. For example, the impaired neural magnitude representations in dyscalculia were not only located in the IPS and parietal regions. As in previous studies, we demonstrated that deficits in functional neural correlates of number in dyscalculia were spread out throughout the cortex (Kaufmann et al., 2011; Rosenberg-Lee et al., 2015; Rotzer et al., 2008; Rykhlevskaia et al., 2009). In our study, the representations in (some of) these extra-parietal regions might be related to numerical representations as well as to how these representations are recruited during more domain-general processes. For example, frontal regions often play an important role in attention and working memory processes required for problem solving, and this also applies to processing information in a numerical context. Our functional connectivity results showed hyper-connectivity in dyscalculia between visual regions and fusiform gyrus. Interestingly, increased functional connectivity was previously linked to compensation processes and inhibitory processes (Geerligs et al., 2012; Rosenberg-Lee et al., 2015). It is important to acknowledge that these interpretations should be made with caution, as they might be reflective of reverse inference, and future studies are needed to directly test these interpretations.


Limitations

Some limitations should be kept in mind when evaluating the results of the current study. The behavioral data showed trends towards group differences in reading, IQ and motor reaction time, yet all of these effects were small. It is, however, important to emphasize that all scores on these measures were in the normal range and that none of the participants with dyscalculia had impairments in these abilities. These small trends could not explain the individual impairments in mathematics in the participants with dyscalculia.

Our data only included female participants. We did not initially intend to exclude male adults from our study. Our public call for participants was directed to all individuals with dyscalculia, independent of sex. We would like to point out that there have been many other studies on dyscalculia with only or mainly female participants (all female: Defever et al., 2014 and Vanbinst and De Smedt, 2016; one male: Cappelletti et al., 2011; mainly females: Mussolin et al., 2011). To the best of our knowledge, epidemiological studies do not indicate a strong gender bias towards females in dyscalculia (for a review, see Devine et al., 2013), although it needs to be noted that girls are more diagnosed with dyscalculia than boys (Moll et al., 2014).

We reported the overall functional connectivity across all task conditions. Future studies should investigate functional connectivity in much more detail by examining it in relation to specific task manipulations and by comparing it to pure (i.e. task-independent) resting-state connectivity as acquired by additional resting state fMRI. First, it is relevant to search for task-dependent differences in functional connectivity and their association with dyscalculia. This would require, however, a different analytic approach than in the current study. We analyzed our data with the typical approach to analyze functional connectivity in resting-state data (after regressing out the univariate task activations). The extension of this approach to study interactions with the task requires that the different tasks are presented in blocks of a long duration, which was not the case in the present paradigm. An alternative is the psycho-physiological interaction approach that mainly tests for fluctuations in activity across trials modeled in a regression approach. Second, there are also potential interactions between magnitude representations and functional connectivity that can be discovered by the so-called multivariate connectivity analyses that were introduced recently (Anzellotti and Coutanche, 2018). Given that we observe that dyscalculia is characterized by less distinctive magnitude representations, it is not unlikely that the temporal fluctuations in these magnitude representations will also be affected. Future studies are needed to further test these predictions.


Conclusion

Our study supports a clear deficit in the quality of non-symbolic magnitude representations in adults with dyscalculia, confirming the impaired number representations hypothesis. We also observed hyper-connectivity in visual brain regions in adults with dyscalculia, which is in line with the impaired access hypothesis. The deficits in dyscalculia were not be localized in one particular brain region (such as the IPS). They could not be reduced to one type of brain deficit (such as only impaired number representations). Our study illustrates the many advantages of combining different imaging techniques at the whole brain level to disentagle the neural correlates of neurodevelopmental disorders compared to studies with a focus on only one brain region and/or only one neuroimaging method. Future studies should therefore continue to apply multi-method approaches to investigate neurodevelopmental disorders and mental disorders at large, in adults as well as children.


Premembering Experience: A Hierarchy of Time-Scales for Proactive Attention

Anna C. Nobre, Mark G. Stokes — Neuron, 2019. PMC6873797, CC BY 4.0.

Memories are about the past, but they serve the future. Memory research often emphasizes the former aspect: focusing on the functions that re-constitute (re-member) experience and elucidating the various types of memories and their interrelations, timescales, and neural bases. Here we highlight the prospective nature of memory in guiding selective attention, focusing on functions that use previous experience to anticipate the relevant events about to unfold—to “premember” experience. Memories of various types and timescales play a fundamental role in guiding perception and performance adaptively, proactively, and dynamically. Consonant with this perspective, memories are often recorded according to expected future demands. Using working memory as an example, we consider how mnemonic content is selected and represented for future use. This perspective moves away from the traditional representational account of memory toward a functional account in which forward-looking memory traces are informationally and computationally tuned for interacting with incoming sensory signals to guide adaptive behavior.


Main Text

Memory’s most compelling illusion is that it represents the past. However, it is clear from an ecological perspective that memory is all about the future. The purpose of memory is to learn about the environment to anticipate future demands—not just putting back the pieces of the past for recollection (remembering experience) but deriving possibilities based on the past to guide future adaptive behavior (premembering experience). This notion has old roots (Helmholtz, 1867), but, surprisingly, the fundamental operations through which memories guide adaptive behavior lack an established theoretical framework, and their mechanisms have yet to capture the in-depth and systematic investigation they deserve. We propose that memory, over a broad hierarchy of timescales, supplies the essential elements for selective attention to guide perception and performance flexibly and adaptively. We introduce the term “premembering” to capture this prospective and dynamic role of memory. Our construct complements proposals for how memories can be used to inform other cognitive functions, such as adaptive control, decision-making, and imagining future situations.We focus on how memories guide selective attention. The role memory plays in guiding behavior has also been considered within other cognitive domains.“Cognitive control” refers to the collection of mechanisms that set and adjust our goals and that monitor and regulate performance according to competing demands. Thus, the selective attention mechanisms we review are subordinate to cognitive control, prioritizing and selecting putative targets and overcoming irrelevant distraction within a particular goal setting. Memories are increasingly recognized to play an important role in influencing the degree of top-down control exerted on a given trial. They include both short-term traces between successive trials as well as intermediate memory traces that develop over task performance (Chiu and Egner, 2019).“Decision-making” refers to the process of choosing one of a set of alternatives to produce a beneficial outcome. Choices are made based on expectation of rewards developed through previous experience. Current models of decision-making mostly rely on reinforcement learning. Recent computational studies suggest that different types of memory traces may work together to optimize reinforcement learning, including those resulting from slow incremental implicit learning over trials as well as episodic traces uniquely linked to individual experiences (Botvinick et al., 2019).“Decision-making” is closely related to selective attention, which can be involved in prioritizing information for guiding choice behavior. Expectations play an essential role in both sets of processes. However, interestingly, they each stress a different consequence of prior knowledge. In decision-making, predictions based on priors are mainly used to attenuate the processing of what can be anticipated (Friston, 2010). In selective attention, predictions are mainly used to enhance the processing of anticipated task-relevant information. These two phenomena nicely illustrate the flexibility with which memory-related traces can be used to guide adaptive performance. The specific consequence of prior knowledge will be heavily dependent on the purpose of the task (Nobre, 2018).“Episodic future thinking” involves drawing on previous experiences to imagine oneself in future situations (Atance and O’Neill, 2001, Schacter et al., 2008). The construct is useful in different types of situations, such as navigation, planning to implement intentions, understanding others’ mental states, and simulating future events. Neuropsychological, developmental, and brain imaging studies have revealed substantial overlap between the neural system supporting episodic future thinking and episodic recollection, suggesting that the LTM traces available for recollection can also be used prospectively and flexibly to build novel plausible scenarios and run simulations (Schacter et al., 2008). Episodic future thinking differs from our construct of premembering in being a specifically deliberative process based on LTM traces available to awareness to inform behavior in the future. Premembering is a broader construct, considering the influences of memories of different types and timescales on ongoing or imminent behavior.

Selective attention (hereafter called “attention”) refers to the set of functions that prioritize and select information to guide adaptive behavior (Nobre, 2018). These functions modulate incoming sensory signals and influence their processing at multiple stages to inform awareness, decisions, actions, and subsequent memories. It has long been appreciated that short-term memory, or “working memory” (WM), plays an important role in forming attentional templates (e.g., Desimone and Duncan, 1995). Here we suggest that WM is part of a much larger family of heterogenous attention-guiding memory traces that span multiple timescales.

The premembering perspective has important implications for understanding the content and formatting of memory. Rather than slavishly storing and using veridical traces, the brain flexibly selects and even distorts memory content to enhance its utility in guiding attention. Moreover, task-relevant informational content may also be stored in a neural format that is optimized for the anticipated utilization of the memory to guide performance.


Multiple Timescales of Memories Guide Attention

The essence of memory is the traces left by passing experience. These range from transient perturbations to engrams that last a lifetime, capturing modality-specific fragments to relational and integrated wholes and supporting unconscious states to recollective phenomena. Such traces can provide essential informational content required for prospectively prioritizing and selecting what is important. Working together, memory content and attention functions shape how the brain transforms incoming signals to guide perception, choice, action, and the formation of new memories to serve adaptive behavior in the future. It can be argued that these prospective properties of memory are what define its fundamental ecological purpose: to collect relevant aspects of experience to anticipate future demands and guide behavior.


Short-Term Traces

Drawing a clear line defining when present becomes past may be impossible. Nevertheless, it is clear that past traces affect perception even from their earliest moments. The very stitching of visual perception across eye movements into an apparent cohesive flow may rely on short-term memories bridging the anchoring and landing fixation contents (Irwin and Gordon, 1998). Furthermore, transient salient visual stimuli intrinsically capture attention and leave a brief excitatory trail, temporarily enhancing processing of stimuli that follow in their immediate wake (Posner, 1980; A).

At slightly longer timeframes, WM provides a limited set of more durable traces that are independent of continuous sensory stimulation and resistant to interference and that act to guide adaptive behavior (Baddeley, 2003). The fundamental role WM plays in guiding attention is widely recognized and has been studied extensively (Desimone and Duncan, 1995). Information in WM has been considered the major source of top-down proactive attention. Even before the target stimuli appear, these memory traces influence the pattern of brain activity in a proactive fashion to facilitate the processing of signals associated with likely relevant items (Chelazzi et al., 1993, Kastner et al., 1999, Stokes et al., 2009). These top-down anticipatory states based on WM templates are often associated with willful, volitional orienting of attention (Helmholtz, 1867, Posner, 1980). However, it is important to note that WM content can also influence incoming information processing in an involuntary fashion (Soto et al., 2008; see below).

Moreover, beyond the scope of classic WM, the relation between successive items can also influence information processing. For example, when searching for an odd-one-out target, its identification is facilitated when the current target shares a defining feature value (Maljkovic and Nakayama, 1994) or location (Maljkovic and Nakayama, 1996) with the target in the preceding trial. Traces from preceding stimuli also alter the quality of perception. Reports of the spatial frequency and orientation of a visual item are systematically distorted by that of preceding items (e.g., Fischer and Whitney, 2014).

Short-term memory traces can be used to enhance or suppress information processing, depending on the situation. For example, after initial facilitation of stimuli in the wake of non-informative salient stimuli, decrements in performance occur at the same location; the “inhibition of return” has been proposed to encourage sampling and exploration (Posner and Cohen, 1984). Pre-exposure to irrelevant or distracting stimuli can facilitate performance in visual search tasks by helping overcome distractor interference (Olivers et al., 2006). However, when the current target shares the identity or features of a distractor in the previous trial, performance decrements occur (negative priming; Fanini et al., 2006, Tipper, 1985). Reward associations can further magnify both facilitatory and inhibitory effects between successive stimuli (Della Libera and Chelazzi, 2006, Kristjánsson et al., 2010).


Intermediate Traces

Although most research has focused on the role of short-term traces in anticipatory attention, the memory traces that guide our perception stretch further back in time. Most of the knowledge that guides the interpretation of sensory signals and sets up expectations about the occurrence and context of relevant events is stored in our long-term memory (LTM; Nobre and Mesulam, 2014). However, somewhere between short-term traces that guide performance between successive events and remote long-term memories that guide performance between distant episodes lives a rich variety of memory traces reflecting regularities learned and utilized within a task setting. An elegant study by Carlisle et al. (2011) showed the gradual transition from WM to a longer-term trace when search targets were held constant for a number of trials (B). For early trials, they showed a robust event-related potential associated with the location and number of items in the WM template (contralateral delay activity [CDA]; Vogel and Machizawa, 2004). As trials progressed, the CDA progressively diminished, implying a gradual handover to a longer-term, intermediate memory store.

Increasing numbers of experimental approaches are beginning to explore how different types of intermediate traces guide attention within task settings. “Probability cueing” refers to performance benefits resulting from the higher prevalence of a task-relevant item within a given location (Shaw and Shaw, 1977). The frequent appearance of a target at a given location facilitates its identification, whereas the frequent appearance of an irrelevant stimulus at a location attenuates its distracting effect (Goschy et al., 2014, Wang and Theeuwes, 2018, Ferrante et al., 2018, Noonan et al., 2016). Memory traces linked to probability cueing are long lasting and largely acquired implicitly (Jiang 2018). A related but different phenomenon is “selection history” (e.g., Kyllingsbaek et al., 2001), which refers to facilitation in identifying stimuli previously selected as targets independent of their probability.

“Reward history,” referring to the likelihood or value of a reward typically associated with given target stimuli within a task, has strong and persistent effects on performance (Anderson et al., 2011, Chelazzi et al., 2014, Krebs et al., 2011, Raymond and O’Brien, 2009). Reward manipulations often come bundled with manipulations of other sources of attention modulation, such as probability cueing or selection history. In complex search environments, reward history combines with other factors to guide effective performance (e.g., Navalpakkam et al., 2010). In tasks that carefully control for other sources of influence, stimuli with features that have high reward associations act as potent distractors, even when they are otherwise inconspicuous and task irrelevant (Failing and Theeuwes, 2015, Hickey and Peelen, 2015).

Learning and utilization of more complex associations also occur within task settings. “Contextual cueing” shows that pick-up of repeated spatial configurations of stimuli within visual search arrays facilitates target identification (Chun and Jiang, 1998). This type of memory guides search behavior, resulting in fewer fixations and faster search times (Harris and Remington, 2017). Neurophysiological markers of target detection are also enhanced (Johnson et al., 2007, MacLean and Giesbrecht, 2015, Schankin and Schubö, 2009). Learning of statistical regularities over time similarly leads to improvements in behavioral performance (Schapiro et al., 2016). Interestingly, the presence of statistical regularities within stimulus streams spontaneously captures attention, leading to facilitation of target identification in structured relative to unstructured streams (Zhao et al., 2013). Both contextual cueing and statistical learning are thought to involve hippocampus-related memory systems, even though they are learned largely implicitly (Chun and Phelps, 1999, Schapiro et al., 2016). A recent neurophysiological study of sequence learning in a serial response task has also revealed proactive anticipation of upcoming stimuli and associated responses based on learned spatiotemporal expectations (Heideman et al., 2018).


Long-Term Traces

Although the role of LTM in guiding attention has been less well explored than that of WM, its fundamental role in defining perception, choosing actions, imagining, and forming new memories has long been recognized (Bartlett, 1932, Helmholtz, 1867, Moscovitch et al., 2016; Box 1). We propose that the role memory plays in guiding attention may contribute to its fundamental influence over our mental experience and behavior.

In everyday situations, the bank of remote memory traces from previous settings and episodes arguably provides the richest source of information for guiding attention and perception. When waiting to meet a friend on a busy street, we rely on LTM to search them out based on their appearance and likely route. LTM provides knowledge about whether and how relevant events occur in particular contexts and about their likely reward outcome values. Thus, they afford rich content for flexible, proactive, and dynamic biases to guide the prioritization and selection of relevant information (Aly and Turk-Browne, 2017, Bar, 2004, Nobre and Mesulam, 2014). An increasing variety of experimental approaches is being used to explore how LTM content is used proactively to guide adaptive behavior. Although differing in detail, the approaches share the notion that the brain uses LTM information constantly, proactively, and predictively.

In visual search tasks using simple stimulus arrays, semantic knowledge of features commonly associated with objects facilitates target identification, overcoming usual costs associated with feature binding (Rappaport et al., 2013). On the other hand, distractors with associative links to the target disrupt the visual search by capturing attention (Moores et al., 2003). Furthermore, newly learned associations continue to affect performance on subsequent tasks, even when completely irrelevant (Fan and Turk-Browne, 2016).

In tasks using complex scenes or environments, “contextual priming” studies show that previous experiences within particular contexts guide the identification and interpretation of objects within the same contexts (Bar, 2004). When searching for a specific item within a scene, LTM works alongside lower-level statistics of visual features to guide performance (Navalpakkam and Itti, 2006). Multiple types of LTM are at play (Wolfe et al., 2011, Le-Hoa Võ and Wolfe, 2015). Search performance benefits from schematic probabilistic knowledge of encountering the item within a particular context (Võ and Henderson, 2009) as well as from its likely location relative to the layout of the scene (Torralba et al., 2006) and to other objects within a scene (Bar, 2004). In addition, specific knowledge about the location of an item within a particular scene also contributes—episodic guidance (Brockmole and Henderson, 2006). Interestingly, incidental memories formed through active search and selection of items within a scene lead to stronger performance benefits and subsequent memories than familiarity or explicit attempts to memorize items within scenes (Draschkow et al., 2014), suggesting that effective memories fall out of natural behavioral interactions.

Memory-guided attention tasks show how learning of object locations through repeated visual search in complex scenes or environments facilitates performance in subsequent tasks. Performance measures reveal significant improvements in detecting and discriminating target items as a result of previously learned specific contextual association between the particular item and a scene or three-dimensional environment (Becker and Rasmussen, 2008, Draschkow and Võ, 2016, Kit et al., 2014, Summerfield et al., 2006).

“Memory-guided orienting” tasks provide a good platform to investigate anticipatory biases based on long-term memories (Summerfield et al., 2006; C). Participants form object-scene associations to a high and stable level during a learning session; the consequences of these memory traces are then tested in a separate attention-orienting session. The separation helps disentangle effects of early learning from those of subsequent memory utilization. In our own research, we have used learned scenes presented in isolation as memory cues, followed by the appearance of a target stimulus to be identified or discriminated. The critical behavioral comparison is between performance depending on whether the target location is correctly predicted by previous memory experience (valid memory cue) versus incorrectly predicted (invalid memory cue) or unpredicted (neutral memory cue). Strong and reliable effects occur for both perceptual sensitivity (Patai et al., 2012) and response times (Summerfield et al., 2006). By presenting memory cues and targets individually, it is possible to measure memory-related brain activity that biases excitability according to anticipation of the target location. fMRI reveals that memory cues engage the hippocampus as well as the dorsal frontoparietal network associated with the control of spatial attention (Summerfield et al., 2006, Stokes et al., 2012). In addition, activity levels in visual cortical regions become spatially biased in anticipation of the target location (Stokes et al., 2012; C). Electrophysiological recordings also reveal memory-related spatial anticipatory biases in the form of lateralization of alpha-band power (Stokes et al., 2012, Summerfield et al., 2011). Anticipatory biases in the cue-target period are followed by modulation of event-related potentials related to visual processing (Summerfield et al., 2011) and spatial selection (Patai et al., 2012, Doallo et al., 2013) of target items. Reward associations further potentiate the effects of memory-based orienting. Even a single association with a modest monetary gain or avoidance of loss during the last learning block leads to performance improvements in the subsequent attention-orienting session, even though reward is irrelevant to the orienting task. Target stimuli during the orienting task elicit larger visual P1 potentials when previously associated with reward or punishment avoidance (Doallo et al., 2013, Suárez-Suárez et al., 2019).

Rosen et al. (2014) have followed a similar approach involving learning and utilizing spatial contextual associations in a change-detection task. By comparing memory-guided and visually guided attention conditions, they have highlighted a set of cortical regions and differences in hemispheric lateralization associated with LTM-based orienting (Rosen et al., 2016).

Thus, findings with memory-guided orienting tasks clearly illustrate the ability of the brain to use LTM content proactively to guide prioritization and suggest the involvement of limbic, memory-related circuits. In monkeys, recent studies recording activity from neurons in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex during free viewing provide converging evidence that medial temporal areas, traditionally associated with memory, are closely related to attention. Neurons in the entorhinal cortex show strong visuospatial coding properties, signaling gaze location using multiple frames of reference (Meister and Buffalo, 2018). Entorhinal neurons further show a grid cell-like arrangement of viewed spatial locations, using only covert attention in the absence of any eye or other physical movement (Wilming et al., 2018). In addition to grid cells, saccade direction cells are also present, with largely independent populations encoding the direction of previous versus future saccades (Killian and Buffalo, 2018). Together, such findings point to mechanisms that could support spatial attention based on LTM. Recordings in the hippocampus showed that slow-wave ripples, thought to promote plasticity, occurred during a search for object changes within scenes and that their probability increased with scene repetition and near remembered targets (Leonard and Hoffman, 2017). Such a mechanism would be a good candidate for supporting memory-guided attention during search.


Dynamic Prospective Memories

In addition to carrying information about the location and identifying attributes of anticipated events, memory traces also carry information about their timing. Memory-based temporal expectations can therefore enable the brain to prepare for events in a dynamic, temporally structured, and efficient way (Nobre and van Ede, 2018). Temporal expectations rely on learning temporal regularities that occur over multiple timescales. Neural markers of proactive temporal anticipation have been observed when the timing of stimuli follows a regular temporal rhythm (Cravo et al., 2013), probabilistic conditional probabilities (Cravo et al., 2011), or sequences (Heideman et al., 2018). Across episodes, long-term memories can also guide temporally structured anticipatory attention. Using a temporal variant of the memory-guided orienting task, Cravo et al., (2017) showed improved perceptual sensitivity and response times to detect and discriminate visual targets occurring at the learned temporal interval (valid memory cue) relative to the other interval (invalid memory cue). Event-related potentials elicited by the memory cue revealed clear modulation of target anticipation according to temporal expectation. Behavioral and neural markers of validity effects correlated with one another and with the quality of learning of the temporal association.


Plurality across Types and Timescales

Recognizing that memory traces of different types and timescales proactively guide perception invites us to reconsider dominant concepts and dichotomies in the attention literature. The simple separation between “bottom-up” sources of prioritization based on physical salience and “top-down” sources based on current goals is clearly insufficient. To explore the natural kinds of memory-based attention, it is important to separate two fundamental factors: their volitional character and their source.

Subjectively, attention can be voluntary or involuntary, and its source can be external, based on physical salience (exogenous), or internal, based on brain states linked to current goals or previous experience (endogenous). Often these two factors are conflated, with exogenous sources assumed to guide involuntary attention and endogenous sources assumed to guide voluntary attention. Instead, they should be viewed as theoretically separable. Although physically salient stimuli capture attention involuntarily, endogenous sources can guide attention both voluntarily and involuntarily. In addition to their use in goal-based voluntary attention, both short-term as well as LTM sources can also have automatic, involuntary consequences for perception. For example, short-term memory carrying goal-related information to perform one task also inadvertently influences performance in another task, sometimes causing significant interference (Soto et al., 2008). Memory traces acquired over a task setting—reflected in probability cuing, selection history, reward history, contextual cueing, or sequence learning—are often acquired incidentally and utilized involuntarily and without explicit knowledge (Chun, 2000, Jiang, 2018). Remote, long-term memories for the presence and location of items within rich, complex scenes are more often accompanied by conscious recollection (Brockmole and Henderson, 2006, Jiang, 2018). Although it is likely that these associations are used to direct attention voluntarily, they may also orient attention involuntarily. Under most conditions, benefits in LTM-based orienting correlate with measures of explicit memory (Cravo et al., 2017, Salvato et al., 2016), suggesting a viable source for voluntary attention. However, dissociations have also been noted. Although explicit retrieval of object-scene memories is significantly compromised in older individuals compared with younger counterparts, the benefits of memory-based attention are spared (Salvato et al., 2016). The relationship and the degree of interaction between these two modes of memory-based attention are important directions for future research (Nobre and Mesulam, 2014).

In recognizing the role that memory associations within task settings play in attention, some contemporary models of attention have proposed adding a third, “history” source to the traditional bottom-up and top-down sources in attention (e.g., Awh et al., 2012). The inclusion is an important first step toward acknowledging the fundamental role played by memory, but there are also inherent limitations with treating memory as a single and separate additional source of attention control. On one hand, it is not possible to extricate memory from the two traditional sources of attention. Brief memory traces contribute to effects of bottom-up attention, prioritizing stimuli that trail physical singletons, and WM traces are essential for goal-based top-down attention. On the other hand, amalgamating memory sources into one common history factor works against evidence suggesting the plurality of memory mechanisms at play.

The internal, memory-based sources of attention are many. Memories of various durations and types contribute, from traces that stitch the continuity of perception to those that guide the recognition of a long-lost friend. Most likely, multiple memory systems and mechanisms are involved. For example, both contextual cueing and memory-based orienting involve LTM for the location of a target object within a given configuration in an array or scene, and in both cases, the medial-temporal areas have been implicated. However, brain imaging shows increased hippocampal activity during memory-guided orienting in scenes (Hannula and Ranganath, 2009, Summerfield et al., 2006) and decreased activity by repeated versus novel arrays in contextual cueing tasks (Greene et al., 2007, Giesbrecht et al., 2013). Electrophysiological recordings also show different patterns of modulation of potentials associated with target selection (N2pc), with attenuation by memory-guided orienting (Doallo et al., 2013, Patai et al., 2012) and enhancement by contextual cueing (Kasper et al., 2015, Schankin and Schubö, 2009). Striking differences occur even when comparing different types of memory traces within a single task. Goldfarb et al., (2016) contrasted the effects of contextual cueing (associations between specific array configurations and target locations) versus probability cueing (probabilistic learning of most likely target locations and response choices) in guiding visual search in a common task. Although contextual cueing modulated activity in the hippocampus, probability cueing modulated activity in the striatum. The effects were selectively predictive of attention benefits across successive trials and correlated with performance measures. Numerous functional dissociations have also been observed in behavioral effects of attention based on different types of memory within a task context. Although often entangled in natural contexts, probability cueing effects can be separated from single-trial priming effects (Jiang 2018), from selection history (Ferrante et al., 2018, Wang and Theeuwes, 2018), and from goal-based, short-term-memory cueing (Goschy et al., 2014, Jiang, 2018). Likewise, reward history can be separated from selection history (Anderson et al., 2017).

Thus, the literature suggests a rich diversity of mnemonic influences on attention, with at least some functional dissociations. There is much empirical work ahead to reveal the natural kinds and neural mechanisms of memory-based attention to derive its principles of organization and develop useful theoretical models. Traces of different kinds and durations could act separately and largely independently; they could compete, they could become integrated within a unified predictive model (e.g., in a Bayesian framework; Friston, 2010), they could converge and operate through a common priority map to modulate sensory processing (Bisley and Goldberg, 2010), or they could combine in mutually supportive ways to enhance the quality and flexibility of biasing signals (Botvinick et al., 2019). At this stage, it is premature to clump together memories into a single source of attentional control, and doing so could discourage or misguide much needed investigation in this important area.


Prospective and Adaptive Memories

Premembering has implications for understanding the nature of memory itself. Consonant with a role in serving future behavior by grounding attentional selection, the very nature of memory traces is forward looking. What is encoded, maintained, and selected for retrieval is strongly influenced by what is likely to be important for future behavior.


Future-Relevant Content of Short-Term Memory

At the shortest timescales, the contents of memories maintained across eye fixations are strongly influenced by the location of the upcoming saccade. Even before a saccade is made, the information corresponding to its upcoming landing zone is remembered better than information at other, equidistant locations (Irwin, 1992).

Within WM research, findings increasingly highlight the prospective qualities of these traces. The contents of WM are strongly influenced by current task goals. They are selective and can even be distorted to facilitate performance based on anticipated task demands. The selectivity of WM was elegantly illustrated by a neurophysiological study in monkeys showing that neuronal activity in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) was largely dominated by the single relevant item of a multi-item array during a selective delayed-match-to-sample task (Rainer et al., 1998). Later, responses in prefrontal neurons were shown to be most sensitive to stimulus dimensions that were relevant for making categorical discriminations imposed by the task (Freedman et al., 2001). Although prefrontal neurons differentiated these discriminant features, they were less sensitive to other equally available, non-discriminant physical features until these became task relevant. Similar effects were reported for the parietal cortex when monkeys performed categorical discrimination tasks based on arbitrary boundaries along continuous feature dimensions (Freedman and Assad, 2006).

Selectivity in WM is also well documented in the human brain. The CDA marker of WM derived from electroencephalograms (EEGs) shows that encoding can be spatially and item selective (e.g., Vogel and Machizawa, 2004). In addition, selectivity can also occur for relevant features within memory items. Using multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) to derive population-response properties from fMRI data, Serences et al. (2009) found that decoding during a WM delay depended on the expected demands during recall. Participants performed a delayed matching task on colored gratings and were cued that either color or orientation was relevant to the discrimination. Patterns of activity in the visual cortex selectively maintained the task-relevant feature, consistent with a prospective memory code for guiding future behavior (A).

Studies in human participants have also demonstrated that selective contents in WM can be updated flexibly as predictions change about the items or features that will be relevant for task performance (Griffin and Nobre, 2003, Landman et al., 2003). Cues presented during the delay that retrospectively inform participants about the item most likely to be probed (retro-cues) result in significantly better memory performance. fMRI studies show selective maintenance of task-relevant features after informative retro-cues that predict or instruct which stimulus or attributes will be probed (Kuo et al., 2014, LaRocque et al., 2017, Lepsien and Nobre, 2007, Sligte et al., 2009). Human neurophysiological studies also show flexible updating of selective content in WM during maintenance with retro-cues that indicate which item in memory is most likely to be probed (Kuo et al., 2012, Poch et al., 2014, Wallis et al., 2015; B). Such updating can also occur in the absence of external cues, when the passage of time is associated with the likely item to be probed, illustrating the flexibility of updating selective WM contents and the role of temporal expectations (van Ede et al., 2017).

From a functional perspective, it is not always optimal simply to maintain a veridical representation of previous input. When making some types of fine-grained delayed discriminations, it can be more advantageous to focus on neural information tuned away from the behaviorally relevant feature to maximize separability from distractor items (Navalpakkam and Itti, 2007). In such tasks, behavioral measures confirm that WM templates are adaptive distortions of the experienced information (Navalpakkam and Itti, 2007, Geng et al., 2017). Application of multivariate methods to derive tuning functions of fMRI voxels confirmed that WM templates in such tasks reflect distortions of the perceived stimulus, thus being adaptive rather than veridical (Scolari et al., 2012). Interestingly, in addition to being shifted, the relevant feature information maintained in the target template can also be sharpened to increase separability from distractor stimuli in the task (Geng et al., 2017, Yu and Geng, 2019; C).

These studies clearly reveal the prospective face of WM: content is optimized to the expected demands of future processing. In some cases, the prospective WM representation triggered by a stimulus bears no physical resemblance to it. Rainer et al. (1999) trained monkeys on a paired-associate task that systematically manipulated the relationship between memory items and expected probe stimuli. This revealed a subset of neurons coding for the expected stimulus during the delay period even though it was not actually presented on that trial. This also demonstrates the interaction between WM and LTM.

WM representations also go beyond the experienced stimulus to construct motor representations when specific actions can be anticipated. Most WM tasks tend to probe the perceptual content of the memoranda and typically isolate perceptual qualities of stimuli from particular responses. In everyday life, however, the perceptual content of WM often also carries motor affordances, such as when reaching out and grasping the cup of coffee outside your field of view or repeating a telephone number to a friend. In a recent visual WM task that linked the reporting of particular stimulus orientations to a specific hand, it became clear that motor representations are derived from visually encoded stimuli and that motor information is in a similar state of readiness as visual content when participants are probed (van Ede et al., 2019; D).


Future-Relevant Content of LTM

The prospective attributes of LTM are much more difficult to study. Except under highly constrained experimental conditions, it is difficult to determine what aspects of experience will prove useful to guide future behavior at distant time points. Nevertheless, the prospective nature of LTM can be gleaned from a few observations. The content of LTM is selective. We better remember items that were relevant during the encoding context (Aly and Turk-Browne, 2017). We retain aspects of stimuli that are useful for adaptive behavior. Although our memories of the details in the appearance of a penny are shockingly poor (Nickerson and Adams, 1979), we readily remember the attributes that distinguish a penny from other coins. Similarly, our well-established difficulty with individuating and remembering faces from other cultures and races may, in part, reflect our focus on discriminant features that are informative within our given cultural context (Rhodes et al., 1989).


Functional States for Memory-Guided Attention

When considering the prospective nature of memory, studies have typically focused on the task dependency of the representational content (as reviewed above). This information-based perspective provides an important starting point. At minimum, the content of memory provides the basic information needed for adaptive guidance of preparatory attention. However, we need to delve deeper to understand how memories proactively exert their influence in adaptive behavior. Focusing specifically on WM, we consider how mnemonic states functionally contribute to memory-dependent processing of subsequent input.


Computation-Specific Codes

From a functional perspective, we can distinguish the task relevance of specific types of information from their intended use. For example, tasks may differ in terms of which stimuli are relevant (e.g., squares versus circles in a match-to-sample paradigm), but tasks can also differ in how memories will be used. The same memory item (e.g., red square) could be required for comparing it with a previous item (e.g., color match-to-sample) or for reproducing its exact hue (e.g., continuous report). Under these circumstances, the same information is maintained but for different computational purposes.

Theoretical simulations suggest that WM may be coded differently depending on expected future use. Orhan and Ma (2019) found that a recurrent neural network trained to perform WM exploited a range of different possible coding schemes depending on the precise nature of the memory task. Essentially, the same information content of a visual stimulus (e.g., orientation) was stored differently depending on how it would be interrogated at the end of the delay.

The extant empirical data are also consistent with the theoretical proposal that the format of WM depends on expected use. For example, Warden and Miller (2010) showed that delay-related activity in the PFC differs when the monkey remembers the same stimuli (natural objects) for different types of recall (match judgement versus serial order). Muhle-Karbe et al. (2017) reported similar evidence in humans. Using fMRI, they found that the patterns of neural activity coding for visual stimuli during a memory delay critically depended on how memories were to be used at the end of the trial (implement versus recall).

If computational specificity is functionally relevant to future processing and also inherent to WM, then we might predict that the content of WM always guides attention. The evidence for this hypothesis is mixed. In a series of behavioral and neuroimaging studies, Soto et al. (2008) found that holding an item in WM automatically biased attention to matching items in an unrelated secondary search task. This effect persisted even when the task strongly encouraged participants to mentally separate the WM item from the search task (Soto and Humphreys, 2007). This obligatory link suggests that simply holding something in WM is sufficient for guiding attention. However, it turns out that the story is a bit more complicated. When there is more than one item in the WM set, it is easier to decouple from attentional selection (Downing and Dodds, 2004).

To reconcile the apparent contradiction, Olivers et al. (2011) proposed that one item in WM is in a prioritized state and serves as an attentional template. We term this the “active” item. If only one item is in memory, then it is automatically also the active item guiding visual search. If, however, there are multiple items in WM, then only one item is functionally active, and others act as functionally “latent” items. In the absence of any particular difference in relevance among items, priority could be assigned to any one of them. On average, this dilutes the effect of automatic attentional capture because the critical item only coincides with the active one on some trials. Unless priority is under direct experimental control, it is difficult to disentangle variability in priority state across trials from a diluted effect shared across items.

Active and latent memories can be studied more directly by experimentally manipulating the relative priority of items in WM using retro-cues (Griffin and Nobre, 2003). Behavioral and neural evidence confirmed that participants can flexibly toggle priority between different items in WM, resulting in performance benefits for the currently relevant item. Interestingly, latent items are not forgotten, just temporarily de-prioritized while the active item guides current behavior (Lepsien and Nobre, 2007, Myers et al., 2018, van Ede et al., 2018).

It is tempting to think of retro-cueing simply as an internal spotlight boosting the representational content of cued relative to uncued (and potentially distracting) memoranda. However, we argue that retro-cues may also transform the format of a memorandum, preparing it for future use, such as by placing it in a prioritized state and linking its informational content to future action (Myers et al., 2017). Moreover, a change in priority status need not result in a cost to other information in WM (Myers et al., 2017). When one item is initially prioritized, the performance cost to uncued items can be overcome when there is time or opportunity to reset priorities (Myers et al., 2018, Rerko and Oberauer, 2013, van Ede et al., 2017). Thus, in contrast to the typical consequence of attention (in perception), trade-offs in information quality are not necessary when prioritizing items in WM (Myers et al., 2017). Instead, deficits arise mainly because item-related traces in WM are not currently optimized for readout.

Human neurophysiology also supports the general view that prioritizing an item in WM involves a discrete state transition (Wallis et al., 2015) rather than sustained internal attention. Using magnetoencephalography (MEG), we observed that shifting priority in WM leads to a transient lateralization of posterior alpha power (Wallis et al., 2015; B), indexing a punctate process of spatial selection. This contrasts with a sustained pattern of alpha lateralization, as observed during anticipatory attention in perception (Wallis et al., 2015; see also Worden et al., 2000). We interpret this transient response as a discrete process of setting up the most relevant item to guide future target processing.

Recent brain imaging studies also identified different neural correlates of WM depending on current priority status. There is a quantitative difference in decodability between active and latent items. Across multiple experiments, Lewis-Peacock et al. (2012) have shown that active items more readily decoded from patterns of visual activity. Indeed, latent items often have no detectable neural trace even though they remain in WM and are available for future use when they are re-prioritized (Sprague et al., 2016).

These decoding studies show that latent working memories can be nearly impossible to detect in delay period activity. Nevertheless, complementary recent evidence shows that latent memories may be measured using approaches that are sensitive to changes in neural states that might not be reflected in tonic activity. The impulse response approach (Wolff et al., 2015) borrows from the logic of active sonar, in which a well-characterized impulse (“ping”) is emitted toward a hidden landscape, and the contours are inferred from distortions in the reflected signal. In the case of “neural sonar,” a neutral visual stimulus acts as a sensory ping impulse and interacts with the brain state, resulting in a state-dependent impulse response. Changes in the neural landscape can be inferred from distortions in this output response. Importantly, this approach is theoretically sensitive to any change in the functional state of the targeted system. In addition to the manifest delay activity relating to firing in neuronal assemblies, which has been the focus of most WM studies to date, it can also reveal activity-silent neural states, such as temporary changes in synaptic weights within neuronal assemblies (Stokes, 2015).

Using this approach, it has been possible to observe robust memory signals in the impulse response despite dramatic differences in activity-based decoding between active and latent items (Rose et al., 2016, Wolff et al., 2017). This suggests that even functionally latent states have a robust neural signature in silent neural states. Therefore, latent WM is not necessarily just a weaker version of active WM, but, rather, it can be maintained in a qualitatively different neural state. Such a scheme makes sense when one considers that latent memories carry information that may become important down the line and can therefore be just as important to maintain as currently active memories. The important difference is that latent memories should be kept functionally dormant while the active memory is guiding behavior to avoid cross-item interference. Some recent fMRI studies provide initial support for this idea. For example, recent fMRI studies identified different brain areas (Christophel et al., 2017) and different coding schemes within the visual cortex (van Loon et al., 2018) associated with active and latent working memories.


How WM States Influence Attention

The classic biased-competition model of attention proposed that perceptual templates in WM bias visual processing to prioritize task-relevant items (Desimone and Duncan, 1995). This idea is grounded in the notion that WM is maintained via persistent activation of sensory-specific neural codes (e.g., Chelazzi et al., 1993), resulting in an elevated baseline for subsequent processing of related input. For example, persistent delay activity associated with remembering the letter X essentially pre-activates the neural code for X, providing a head start for the sensory processing of X (or X-related) stimuli (Desimone and Duncan, 1995).

Indeed, there is extensive evidence for such persistent activity associated with WM and preparatory attention. During WM delays, persistent activity occurs across many brain areas (Christophel et al., 2017), from the visual cortex (Pasternak and Greenlee, 2005) right up to the PFC (Curtis and D’Esposito, 2003). The earliest evidence for WM-related persistent activity was observed in the monkey PFC (e.g., Fuster and Alexander, 1971). WM delay activity is selective for the content of memory; specific cells are more active when their preferred (relative to non-preferred) stimulus is held in mind (e.g., Funahashi et al., 1989, Miller et al., 1996). At the population level, item selectivity gives rise to a population code that can be “decoded” by downstream regions. Similar evidence for item-decodable engrams have also been reported in the parietal cortex (Chafee and Goldman-Rakic, 1998) and in visual areas such as the inferior temporal cortex (Fuster and Jervey, 1981). Correspondingly, brain imaging studies using multivoxel pattern analysis have found stimulus-specific delay activity throughout the human visual system (e.g., Serences et al., 2009) and higher-order brain areas (Ester et al., 2015). This suggests that WM could be a systems-level phenomenon (Christophel et al., 2017), with different areas contributing to distinct but complementary functions (e.g., Dotson et al., 2018).

A very similar profile of activity is observed for preparatory attention. In preparation for visual search guided by a specific object or location in WM, activity in visual areas representing the relevant object (Chelazzi et al., 1993) or location (Luck et al., 1997) is elevated in anticipation of the search array. Human fMRI studies have also reported elevated levels of activity for the spatial location (Kastner et al., 1999) or identity (Stokes et al., 2009) of relevant, anticipated objects based on WM templates. Such findings have supported the influential idea that persistent activity associated with maintenance in WM provides the major neurophysiological mechanism for top-down attentional modulation by effectively biasing subsequent activation of matching sensory input (Desimone and Duncan, 1995). According to a simple baseline shift model, persistent activity for WM becomes preparatory activity for attention, giving relevant information an advantageous head start in competitive sensory processing.

Despite the general appeal of elevated baseline activity linking WM and attention, the specific neurophysiological evidence is not straightforward. Although classic evidence for item-specific delay activity highlighted pre-activation of target items, the actual correspondence between selectivity during the delay and sensory-related responses is more complex (Hayden and Gallant, 2009). A neuron’s stimulus preference during the delay often differs from preferences during stimulus processing in the visual cortex (e.g., Mirabella et al., 2007) as well as the PFC (Stokes et al., 2013, Spaak et al., 2017, Wasmuht et al., 2018). The evidence is also mixed for another core prediction: pre-stimulus activity should directly translate to a corresponding boost in the sensory signal. Although a number of studies found that trial-wise variance in item-specific delay activity correlates with behavioral performance (e.g., Giesbrecht et al., 2006), there is minimal evidence that this is achieved through a corresponding boost to target processing (e.g., Fannon et al., 2008). For example, in classic studies demonstrating anticipatory sustained delay activity (e.g., Chelazzi et al., 1993), the initial neuronal response to the target array is equivalent regardless of whether the target to be selected is effective or ineffective at driving the cell. Only later does neuronal firing settle into a strong or weak response depending on whether the target was effective or ineffective, respectively.

A different but related idea is that WM establishes a match filter in sensory areas that effectively computes the perceptual similarity between incoming sensory signals and an internal template (Hayden and Gallant, 2009, Sugase-Miyamoto et al., 2008, Myers et al., 2015). Theoretically, a match filter template does not depend on pre-activation of target templates but, rather, can be instantiated by more complex activity dynamics (e.g., Machens et al., 2005) or by short-term synaptic plasticity (Sugase-Miyamoto et al., 2008, Myers et al., 2015). This idea can be tested by examining the response to memory-matching stimuli rather than delay activity. For example, in a classic study, Motter (1994) found an enhanced response for stimuli that matched the cued color in V4. Hayden and Gallant (2009) observed a similar enhancement for matching stimuli, which they interpreted as evidence for a match filter mechanism. Sugase-Miyamoto et al. (2008) further demonstrated that the amplitude of match-related activity in single neurons in high-level visual areas co-varied with the amplitude of activity during encoding rather than during delay activity. This pattern was consistent with predictions from their match filter model instantiated with synaptic plasticity. Using MEG in human participants, we showed that perceptual decision-making based on templates held in WM is also consistent with a match filter mechanism (Myers et al., 2015).

Although the match filter model is typically invoked to explain WM decisions (e.g., Hayden and Gallant, 2009, Myers et al., 2015), the match-related enhancement signal could also serve attentional selection, providing a relative boost to target stimuli. Moreover, the same match-related enhancement would also naturally benefit the processing of related features, such as items in the spatial location of the match object. Match-related attentional enhancement is consistent with previous evidence presented above for automatic memory-based capture (e.g., Soto et al., 2008).


Setting the Initial Conditions for Memory-Guided Attention

In general terms, WM can be thought of as setting the initial conditions for state-dependent processing (Stokes et al., 2013). The initial condition at the time of target processing is determined by previous input. Differences in stimulus history cause differences in the initial condition, which, in turn, alter the response dynamics of the system during target processing (Remington et al., 2018). These state-dependent dynamics can perform a number of memory-related operations (Buonomano and Maass, 2009), such as reproduce a previous item (Mongillo et al., 2008) and its temporal delay (Wolff et al., 2019), bias the incoming signal for a match-filter response (Sugase-Miyamoto et al., 2008), adaptively distort processing based on off-channel tuning for optimal discrimination performance (Navalpakkam and Itti 2007), and instantiate a temporary decision rule for flexible decision-making (Mante et al., 2013). Importantly, the previous input that defines the initial conditions includes recent stimulation history (e.g., specific items in WM) but also stretches back across timescales (e.g., task instructions and learning form intermediate and LTM).

Mnemonic states could be expressed via elevated patterns of neuronal activity and/or altered patterns of synaptic weights over short and long timescales. In terms of WM specifically, understanding the relative contributions of neural states defined by activity patterns versus activity-silent traces remains an important area for investigation (Constantinidis et al., 2018, Lundqvist et al., 2018). Various accounts propose mappings between different functional and neural states in WM; functionally active WM is expressed as decodable activity, whereas functionally latent states are silent (e.g., Rose et al., 2016, Sprague et al., 2016, Wolff et al., 2017). However, at least theoretically, functionally active or latent memories could be stored in either activity-dependent or silent neural states. We should not conflate the two notions of active.

In summary, a functional perspective re-casts WM as a flexible shift in how the brain prepares to process future information rather than just maintaining a representation of past information. Considered this way, it is the functionality of the neural state that is most important and not merely the decodability of memory content. Decodability is only a minimal requirement for a memory. To understand how memories are stored for future use (recall, attention, or anything else), it is necessary to understand how mnemonic states interact with subsequent input to produce appropriate output. Recent methodological developments provide an expanding toolbox for exploring the functional properties of mnemonic states. For example, impulse perturbations provide a powerful tool for probing the functional state during memory delays (Wolff et al., 2017). Analysis tools for characterizing context-dependent neural dynamics (Remington et al., 2018) will also shed further light on the critical interaction between WM and subsequent processing.


LTM Biases

In principle, many of the mechanisms we have considered in the context of how working memories guide future processing may also apply to LTM. It will be important for future studies to determine the extent to which activity-silent LTM representations modulate information processing directly, depending on the overlap between present and past settings and goals. It will be informative to understand under what conditions long-term traces are prioritized and energized to guide adaptive behavior. In the latter context, it will also be interesting to learn whether or when activated LTM traces necessarily operate through functionally active WM states to guide attention (e.g., Atkinson and Shiffrin, 2016).


Conclusion

We have considered memory through a different temporal lens. Rather than focusing on how memories echo the past, we have considered how we use past experience to anticipate relevant events to unfold. In addition to providing evidence that traces across several timescales premember events proactively and dynamically, we argue that this basic ecological function of memory shapes the content and the format of what is stored, maintained, and accessed. Significant work lies ahead to understand how mnemonic neural substrates facilitate the processing of incoming information to guide adaptive behavior. Looking at memory from this perspective opens many interesting doors for future exploration, such as the types of memory-based modulatory mechanisms, the existence of a common or multiple memory-based priority maps to guide attention, and how memories can be selective and context dependent and yet be used to generalize to novel situations.


Fish, mirrors, and a gradualist perspective on self-awareness

Frans B M de Waal — PLoS Biology, 2019. PMC6366752, CC BY 4.0.

The mirror mark test has encouraged a binary view of self-awareness according to which a few species possess this capacity whereas others do not. Given how evolution works, however, we need a more gradualist model of the various ways in which animals construe a self and respond to mirrors. The recent study on cleaner wrasses (Labroides dimidiatus) by Kohda and colleagues highlights this need by presenting results that, due to ambiguous behavior and the use of physically irritating marks, fall short of mirror self-recognition. The study suggests an intermediate level of mirror understanding, closer to that of monkeys than hominids.

Complex cognitive capacities evolve bottom-up in small incremental steps from more basic traits shared across a wide range of species. Therefore, we do not expect all-or-nothing cognitive differences between related species. Yet, for the capacity of self-awareness, we still live with a "Big Bang" theory, according to which this trait appeared out of the blue in just a handful of species, whereas the vast majority lacks it. This view has been with us for half a century, ever since Gallup tested the responses of chimpanzees to mirrors. Without any specific training, anthropoid apes manually investigate a mark on their body that is visible only via a mirror, whereas rhesus macaques (and other monkeys) never do. This contrast within the primate order has prompted the assumption of a qualitative difference in self-concept that sets the hominids (humans and the great apes) apart. This contrast was later extended to other cognitive domains.

Challenges to this mental gap have been manifold and never-ending and cannot possibly all be reviewed here. An obvious method is to try to demonstrate mirror self-recognition (MSR) in nonhominids. Such attempts have been remarkably unsuccessful, however, except for a handful of species, notably bottlenose dolphins, Asian elephants, and Eurasian magpies. Conversely, the mark test has failed to produce the required response in a great multitude of nonhominids, such as in a recent well-controlled study of large-brained Psittaciformes. Alternatively, failure to find MSR in a given species has been attributed to lack of motivation (e.g., some animals may not care about paint on their bodies), trouble with attention (e.g., some animals avoid looking at "another” in the mirror), or a lack of perception (e.g., a visual paradigm may not suit an olfactory species), rather than the absence of a self-concept. There have also been attempts to explain away the mirror responses of apes, such as by attributing them to anesthesia (countered by). Others have trained animals to go through the motions indicative of a successful mark test, starting with conditioned pigeons—a study that has proven impossible to replicate—followed by extensively trained macaques.

Shaped by thousands of rewarded trials, mirror responses are about as meaningful as would be the literary talent of a monkey taught to type “to be or not to be.” (See for a critique of these travesties of the original mirror test.) The only measure that counts is the untrained response to the first visual body mark detected with the assistance of a mirror. Speaking from first-hand experience, I have no doubt that chimpanzees treat a mirror differently than most animals. On a sunny day, it is common for them to use my sunglasses as mirrors. While staring into them, they inspect the inside of their mouth, opening it wide to feel their teeth with a finger while coordinating closely with their reflection. They may also turn around to inspect an injury on their back, or females will try to take a look at their genital swelling. This is why we hardly need a mark test to realize that apes connect their reflection with their own body. I have also extensively worked with monkeys yet never observed any spontaneous self-inspection in front of a mirror. Nevertheless, many non-MSR species, including monkeys, demonstrate a basic understanding of mirrors. They know how to use them as tools to see things that are otherwise invisible and distinguish their own reflection from a stranger (see below).

MSR requires that the mirror test (a) be applied only when social reactions to the mirror have been replaced by self-directed behavior, such as testing the contingency between one’s own movements and those of one's reflection, (b) involve a purely visual mark, and (c) be done without previous training, least of all training of responses indicative of self-recognition. The most convincing MSR occurs in species capable of probing their own bodies, such as primates and elephants, or preening themselves at places they cannot see without a mirror, such as birds. Accordingly, one might think that only species with hands, trunks, or flexible necks can possess a self-concept. This rather absurd conclusion would follow from the mirror mark test and its reliance on self-touching and the visual sense, which explains why so many scientists have lamented its limitations.

This brings us to the current intriguing study by Kohda and colleagues of cleaner wrasses, Labroides dimidiatus. This particular fish, which services larger host fish by cleaning them of dead skin and ectoparasites, is well known for its sophisticated social behavior and economic decision-making and is therefore not nearly as cognitively simple as Osteichthyes are typically assumed to be. The cleaner wrasse's spontaneous reactions to the mirror are hard to interpret, though. They include swimming upside down and repeats of 400 times per day of certain atypical behaviors in front of the mirror. However odd and unusual these movements may be, whether they amount to explorations of the contingency between the self and its reflection is as speculative as in another fish study in which giant manta rays stayed close to a mirror while performing repeated actions.

Generous interpretations are also required to classify the non–self-touching behavior of cleaner fish as self-inspection guided by a mirror. Without any training, marked fish spent much time next to the mirror. Whether they looked at themselves was hard to ascertain, but they did orient to the mirror such that they could potentially see the visually marked side of their body and did so more frequently than they did for the unmarked or sham-marked side. Most importantly, the authors argue, the fish showed high rates of self-scraping on a substrate, especially throat-scraping after having been marked on the throat. They did not show this behavior after having received an invisible mark or in the absence of a mirror.

The authors go on to claim that cleaner wrasses exhibit “responses that fulfill the criteria of the mark test.” However, this extraordinary claim hinges on their view that self-scraping, and the way it varies with marks and mirrors, is equivalent to the mark-directed self-exploration with hands or trunks by humans, apes, and elephants, or the mirror-guided self-viewing reported for dolphins. But in the dolphins' case the marked areas were far more variable, as was their behavior in front of a mirror; some behavior was never seen away from it. The fish in the study under discussion, in contrast, performed a single stereotypical act after having seen what may have seemed to be another fish carrying an ectoparasite. This makes it hard to be sure that this response constitutes self-exploration, especially because this species is adapted to detect and remove ectoparasites from other fish. True, self-scraping is not a behavior one would expect if these fish interpret their reflection as another individual, but is this enough reason to conclude that they perceive the fish in the mirror as themselves? After all, the most compelling evidence for the latter would be unique behavior never seen without a mirror, whereas self-scraping, or glancing, is a fixed action pattern of many fish. We may need an in-depth study of this particular pattern before we can ascertain what it means when performed in front of a mirror.

One crucial aspect of the mark test by Kohda and colleagues is that the subcutaneously injected elastomer that puts a color mark on the fish is likely to be painful, or at least an irritant. The study controls for this possibility by having sham marks without the color, which indicate that the tactile sensation alone cannot explain the fish's behavior in front of the mirror. But the study does not control for a possible effect of pairing an intense physical sensation with a visual mark. Two recent studies on rhesus macaques illustrate the importance of this multimodality. These monkeys lack MSR if tested with a purely visual mark, but after having received a head implant they use the mirror to groom around the implant. The implant represents a huge abnormal visual stimulus associated with a tactile sensation that is probably quite painful. In another study, rhesus monkeys received food rewards to induce a visual-somatosensory association by projecting painful laser beams onto the monkeys' faces while forcing them to stare at themselves in a mirror. After having thus enhanced the stimulus' salience in thousands of trials, monkeys touched marks wherever they saw them, such as on walls and on other monkeys, including on themselves, during a mirror test involving a dye mark.

These studies demonstrate that the combination between a visual mark and a physical irritation helps monkeys make the connection between their own body and the specular image. Because the physical sensation alone or the visual mark alone does not allow them to do so, it is as if these animals need multimodal stimulation to get there. Apes, in contrast, show untrained MSR based on the visual sense alone. Instead of a traditional mirror mark test, monkeys thus appear to pass what could be called a Felt Mark Test. This is also the test applied by Kohda and colleagues, because the marks put on their fish were both visual and somatosensory. For the moment, therefore, my conclusion is that these fish seem to operate at the level of monkeys, not apes.

This is remarkable enough, though, because as opposed to the Big Bang theory of self-awareness, it is more realistic to adopt a gradualist perspective. It seems a gross simplification to lump all animals without MSR into a single cognitive category, from relatively small-brained birds (e.g., a robin’s unabating territorial attacks on its reflection in a window pane) to animals such as cats and dogs, which habituate quickly to their mirror image and learn to ignore it, or monkeys and African Grey parrots, which successfully use a mirror to locate out-of-sight objects. Whether pigs can do the same remains unresolved.

It is incorrect to assume, for example, that non-MSR animals merely see an unexpected conspecific in the mirror. This may be true for robins and Siamese fighting fish, but when brown capuchin monkeys were tested facing either a mirror, a familiar monkey, or an unfamiliar monkey, they were remarkably friendly to and interested in their own reflection. Females made about 38 times more eye contact with their mirror image than with a stranger, and males about 11 times. Strangers, in contrast, only induced fear and avoidance. The differences did not seem to reflect learning, at least not during the experiment itself, because they emerged at first exposure. Similarly, the heart rate of macaques confronted with a stranger rises at first, then drops, whereas their heart rate drops right away upon mirror exposure. Some non-MSR species seem closer to mirror understanding than others, therefore. They may not recognize themselves, but they also realize that their reflection is no stranger.

What if self-awareness develops like an onion, building layer upon layer, rather than appearing all at once? Such a model has been proposed for its development in human children, who express curiosity about their reflection well before passing the mirror mark test. Moreover, all animals need a self-concept. A monkey needs to know if a branch can carry his weight before landing on it, or whether he has the strength and skill to win a fight before challenging another individual. Animals need to be aware of the place and affordances of the self in its physical environment as well as the role of the self in their social group. Therefore, to explore self-awareness further, we should stop looking at responses to the mirror as the litmus test. There are many other evaluations possible, such as when macaques are able to distinguish a self-controlled cursor on a computer screen from one that moves on its own, when chimpanzees find hidden food by watching their own hand move via closed-circuit television, when elephants know when their own bodies interfere with performance on a task, or when dogs pay more attention to a novel odor added to a sample of their urine than to either uncontaminated urine or the novel odor alone. We need a much larger test battery, including nonvisual tasks, to develop a full understanding of how other species position the self in the world.

The next frontier will be to see whether animals care about how they look in the eyes of others to the point of embellishing themselves, the way we do with makeup, earrings, toupees, and the like. This possibility was first hinted at by observations of a female orangutan at a zoo, who would decorate herself by gathering lettuce leaves from her cage to pile them onto her head while inspecting herself closely in the mirror. Similarly, chimpanzees sometimes adorn themselves by walking around with the skin of monkey prey around their necks or develop a group-wide "fashion" to insert grass into their ears. Only with a richer theory of the self and a larger test battery will we be able to determine all of the various levels of self-awareness, including where exactly fish fit in.


Funding Statement

The authors received no specific funding for this work.


Waves of prediction

Karl J. Friston — PLoS Biology, 2019. PMC6776254, CC BY 4.0.

Predictive processing (e.g., predictive coding) is a predominant paradigm in cognitive neuroscience. This Primer considers the various levels of commitment neuroscientists have to the neuronal process theories that accompany the principles of predictive processing. Specifically, it reviews and contextualises a recent PLOS Biology study of alpha oscillations and travelling waves. We will see that alpha oscillations emerge naturally under the computational architectures implied by predictive coding-and may tell us something profound about recurrent message passing in brain hierarchies. Specifically, the bidirectional nature of forward and backward waves speaks to opportunities to understand attention and how it nuances bottom-up and top-down influences.


Introduction

It is difficult to find a contemporary paper in cognitive neuroscience that does not defer to the notion of predictive processing and associated schemes like predictive coding that implement predictive processing in cortical and subcortical hierarchies. For people not familiar with the rhetoric in this field, it is useful to distinguish between the principles of predictive processing and the neuronal process theories that might implement them. There are 2 approaches to predictive processing: the low road usually starts from Kantian notions and Helmholtz’s formulation of perception as unconscious inference. The basic idea is that the brain is a constructive organ, actively generating explanations for the sensorium and then testing its hypotheses against sensory data. This notion underwrites predictive coding in the brain, a scheme originally developed to compress sound files in the 1950s.

Predictive coding is appealing in its simplicity: essentially, it sets up a number of competing expectations about the causes of sensory input and then revises or updates these expectations on the basis of prediction errors. These errors are just the difference between what was predicted and what is actually observed. The ensuing belief updating can then be expressed as a recursive exchange of signals between neuronal populations encoding expected states of the world generating sensations and prediction errors. When predictions are generated under a hierarchical (generative) model of how (hidden) states of the world cause other states, we have a message-passing scheme that looks very much like the recurrent exchange of signals in visual cortical hierarchies; with ascending (prediction error) connections and a descending (prediction) counter-stream. Predictive processing has emerged as an enactive generalisation of this idea to encompass action (through the introduction of motor and autonomic reflexes) and applying the underlying (Bayesian) principles to planning and policy selection.

An alternative (high road) starts with the variational principles that underwrite self-organisation and assembly in sentient systems, to show that such systems can always be cast as making Bayesian inferences about their world, i.e., self-evidencing. This leads to the notion of active inference, which can be regarded as a first principle account of predictive processing. The key thing here is that active inference and predictive processing inherit from first principles, whereas schemes like predictive coding are particular (neuronal) process theories about how these principles are manifested in the brain. This means that all the heavy lifting—in terms of asking the right empirical questions—pertains to how predictive processing is implemented.

At present, predictive coding is the prime candidate for predictive processing, largely in virtue of its remarkable power in explaining extrinsic hierarchical connections and the intrinsic connectivity of cortical microcircuits. However, predictive coding is just a theory, and there are an increasing number of variants. Indeed, there are little ‘representation wars’ within the field. For example, are prediction errors or predictions passed forward from a lower level to a higher level? Or do we need separate neuronal populations to encode positive and negative prediction errors? These issues matter when it comes to finding definitive empirical evidence for the computational architectures entailed by predictive coding. So what would we expect to measure if predictive coding was the right kind of theory?


Predictions of predictive coding

There are many aspects of functional architectures and neurophysiology that might underwrite predictive coding. We will focus on electrophysiological oscillations. What would predictive coding predict about oscillations in the brain? There are a few rules with which all variants of predictive coding must comply. These include the existence of separable neurons or neuronal populations encoding expected states of the world and prediction errors. Crucially, for every expectation unit there is an accompanying error unit. Furthermore, expectation units only provide afferents to error units and vice versa. Furthermore, these recurrent connections must possess the form of a negative feedback loop. This holds irrespective of whether the reciprocal connections are intrinsic (within a cortical level) or extrinsic (linking different hierarchical levels).

With this picture in mind, one can conceive of distributed neuronal processing as being mediated by coupled oscillatory pairs of expectation and error units, such that error units excite expectation units and expectation units inhibit error units (polysynaptically). The implications for electrophysiology can be unpacked under 2 complementary characterisations of neuronal responses, namely, evoked or induced responses. Put simply, evoked responses are measured with the power of the average, while induced responses correspond to the average of the power. From the perspective of evoked responses (e.g., event related or local field potentials), one can imagine a sensory input perturbing a sequential or centrifugal hierarchy of coupled oscillators to produce a damped oscillatory response. The characteristic frequency of this response lies in the alpha range, with peaks separated by about a hundred milliseconds. Indeed, this characteristic response to stimuli has led to a whole industry, looking at successive peaks (e.g., N1, P2, etc.). From the current perspective, these evoked transients are exactly what would be predicted if recurrent message passing was in the game of resolving prediction errors—and suppressing the activity of error units (usually associated with superficial pyramidal cells). Clearly, the form of these transients will depend upon the hierarchical structure of message passing, such that (endogenous) components later in peristimulus time are consequent upon a penetration deep into the hierarchy and recurrent expression at lower (sensory) levels.

An alternative perspective on oscillatory dynamics is provided by induced responses, either characterised as a function of frequency over peristimulus time or in continuous recordings. In this arena, the predictions of predictive coding become more nuanced, with a focus on spectral asymmetries between forward and backward message passing. The current story is that ascending (forward) prediction errors are conveyed at a faster frequency (e.g., gamma), while backward (descending) predictions are manifest at lower frequencies (e.g., alpha and beta).

The thing that predictive coding brings to the table here is a fundamental asymmetry in the construction of predictions and prediction errors. This follows because predictions are based upon interactions between the multifaceted causes of our sensorium. For example, if I wanted to predict current visual input, I would have to combine expectations about what was generating my visual signals and where that object was. In short, I would have to use a nonlinear mixture of descending predictions afforded by expectations of what and where. Mechanistically, this interaction entails nonlinear transformations at the level of intrinsic connectivity and intralaminar synaptic exchanges. So why is this important for induced responses? Any nonlinearity of this sort converts a low frequency into a high frequency; one can see this easily by imagining what would happen if you squared a sine wave to double its frequency.

This means that the prediction errors, based upon nonlinear mixtures of expectations, must express higher frequencies than the expectations that generate predictions. This spectral asymmetry has now become a meme in many branches of neuroscience, ranging from the role of attention in visual neuroscience to the mechanisms that undergird speech perception in the auditory cortex. This basic asymmetry—and implicit cross frequency coupling—leads to interesting questions about the underlying synaptic physiology and neurotransmitter basis of predictive coding. An important theme here is the role of neuromodulation in augmenting or attenuating the excitability of superficial pyramidal cells, which may broadcast prediction errors. This theme of selective neuromodulation—at different levels of hierarchical message passing—will become particularly prescient later, when considering the relative influence of top-down and bottom-up afferents. So far, we have only considered the electrophysiological correlates of predictive coding in the time domain. But what about space and functional anatomy?


Waves of prediction

At this point, the results in Alamia and VanRullen acquire a particular importance, as we will now see. What does predictive coding have to say about the spatiotemporal propagation of dynamics over cortical hierarchies? One way to answer to this question is to build a minimal model of predictive message passing and ‘ping’ it with a stimulus to simulate a spatiotemporal response. This is precisely what the authors did—and then looked for evidence of alpha waves travelling up and down the hierarchy. Intuitively, one can imagine dropping a stone into a pond and eliciting concentric (alpha) waves spreading from the point of perturbation. However, we also have to factor in recurrent message passing, as waves are reflected from (hierarchically deployed) ‘edges’ of the pond back to the epicentre.

If we associate a sensory stimulus with a local perturbation at the ‘lower’ end of the pond, one might expect to see a predominance of ‘forward’ travelling waves. Conversely, if we perturb the ‘upper’ end, the waves would appear to travel in a ‘backwards’ direction. However, in both cases, waves will travel in both directions, due to recurrent connections. This is exactly what the authors established, using numerical analyses (and analytic solutions to differential equations that embody a simplified version of predictive coding). In short, hierarchical predictive coding suggests that forward and backwards travelling waves should be seen in response to sensory stimulation and top-down perturbations, respectively. Not only were the authors able to demonstrate that these dynamics could be recovered with a careful (Fourier) analysis of synthetic responses, they went on to show that the same phenomenology could be recovered from empirical electroencephalographic (EEG) signals. Clearly, there are many message-passing schemes that could account for travelling waves. However, the point is that this particular spatiotemporal pattern of evoked responses was predicted under minimal assumptions, afforded by the predictive coding hypothesis.

There are many details that attend this finding. For example, (in silico) travelling waves could only be elicited in the alpha range with a particular set of synaptic time constants (and axonal conduction delays) mediating the response of expectation units to error units. Crucially, the range of these parameters matched almost exactly with empirical observations, namely, extrinsic conduction delays of about 12 ms and a lumped synaptic time constant of about 20 ms. An interesting point here is that these characteristic (membrane) time constants are greater than one would expect when considering a spiking neuron (i.e., 5–20 ms.). As intimated in Alamia and VanRullen, this tells us something interesting about neuronal implementations of predictive coding. This follows from the fact that the effective time constants of population dynamics are typically greater than any constituent neuron. This suggests that predictive coding may implemented at the level of ensemble or population averages, which speaks to an interesting debate about the nature of population codes in a Bayesian setting. An intriguing aspect of the results of Alamia and VanRullen was the sensitivity of forward and backwards travelling waves to the (lower and upper) levels of perturbation. We will close by pursuing this, because of its special relevance for understanding the nature of hierarchal inference, its implications for higher cognitive functions, and the pathophysiology that may attend neuropsychiatric conditions.


The importance of being precise

The evidence for forward over backward travelling waves depends upon whether bottom-up sensory perturbations are supplied or higher-level activity was manipulated (c.f., changes in prior expectations). This was emulated in silico by switching on and off bottom-up versus top-down perturbations. In in a physiological setting, the sensitivity of prediction error units to their afferents holds the key for this selective gating and implicates all the neuromodulatory mechanisms mentioned above. This is an important aspect of predictive coding that takes us into the world of selective attention and sensory attenuation.

In brief, a key determinant—of the balance between descending predictions and ascending prediction errors—rests upon the precision or confidence afforded prediction errors. In short, if a prediction error conveys precise, newsworthy information, it will be amplified so that it has a greater impact on belief updating in subsequent hierarchical levels. Conversely, in noisy (or dark) unreliable settings, sensory precision can be attenuated, thereby emphasising top-down prior expectations over impoverished sensory evidence. This is just an expression of Bayes optimal inference. From a physiological perspective, the excitability of prediction error units—and their neuromodulatory control—takes centre stage in this selective gating. Finally, from a psychological perspective, we have an appealing metaphor for attentional selection and sensory attenuation. So why is this important for the spatiotemporal signatures of predictive coding?

As noted by Alamia and VanRullen, certain changes in attentional set will increase the precision or excitability of prediction error units lower in the hierarchy. In turn, this would increase the predominance of forward travelling waves. Conversely, in the absence of precise sensory information, or when holding unduly precise prior beliefs about the causes of our sensorium, one might anticipate a greater preponderance of backward travelling waves. This is clearly a prediction that could be addressed empirically, using the analyses described by Alamia and VanRullen and manipulations of attentional set. This may be particularly exciting because it also affords the opportunity to quantify people's ability to switch attentional set or indeed engage sensory attenuation when appropriate. I focus on this opportunity, because many psychiatric syndromes have been associated with a failure of sensory attenuation or an inability to modulate the precision of various prediction errors.


Mechanisms of species diversity in birdsong learning

Sarah Cushing Woolley, Jon Tatsuya Sakata — PLoS Biology, 2019. PMC6907863, CC BY 4.0.

Vocal communication is critical for social interactions across a diversity of animals. A subset of those animals, including humans and songbirds, must learn how to produce their vocal communication signals. In this issue of PLOS Biology, Wang and colleagues use genome-wide investigations of gene expression in species hybrids to uncover transcriptional networks that could influence species differences in song learning and production. We provide an overview of birdsong learning and discuss how the study by Wang and colleagues advances our understanding of mechanisms of song learning and evolution.

A tremendous diversity of sounds for communication are used across animal species, and often these signals are sufficiently distinct that they can be used for species recognition. Whereas the production of communication signals does not require specific experiences or learning in many species, some species, such as humans, must learn their communication signals. Researchers have long been fascinated with the remarkable plasticity involved in vocal learning and with the degree to which vocal learning shapes cultural evolution. However, less attention has been paid to the processes that bias and constrain the ability of young vocal learners to mimic the sounds and patterns of others and that maintain species differences in communication signals. For example, human infants are masters at acquiring language, and this predisposition for language acquisition hints that genes sculpt what young individuals can and will learn.

Songbirds are one the few vertebrate taxa that, like humans, learn their vocalizations. Broadly speaking, vocal learning in songbirds (as well as in other species) involves 2 learning processes—sensory learning and sensorimotor learning. In a typical process of vocal learning, young songbirds first memorize the song of an adult bird (“tutor”) during a developmental period of sensory learning. Then, songbirds undergo a period of sensorimotor learning (vocal motor practice) in which they refine their initially noisy vocalizations to match the memorized song. Songbirds continue to hone their vocalizations throughout development, and by the time they are adults, they can produce a song that bears great resemblance to the memorized song. Being able to hear others and oneself is critical in this process: individuals that are raised in isolation from song or prevented from hearing themselves sing during development fail to produce mature, species-typical vocalizations as adults. Moreover, decades of research have revealed that sensory and sensorimotor aspects of vocal learning are controlled by specialized neural circuits, including primary and secondary auditory cortical regions; vocal motor areas similar to mammalian motor and premotor cortices; and a cortical-basal ganglia-thalamic loop. Revealing the processes by which these neural circuits encode and use the memorized song(s) to shape vocal imitation remains a central focus in the neuroethology of song learning.

However, from the earliest observations of vocal learning in songbirds, an equally important aim has been to reveal the types of acoustic structures and sequences that birds cannot or do not learn and the biological mechanisms underlying species variation in song. There are over 4,000 species of songbirds, each recognizable to members of their own species by the acoustic features and patterns of their songs. Just as in humans, songbirds preferentially learn the communication signals of their own species. From an evolutionary standpoint, song is hypothesized to serve as a prezygotic isolation mechanism, a way for individuals to recognize other members of their species and avoid wasting time and energy in mating with members of a different species. For song to function effectively in reproductive isolation, species must avoid learning the songs of heterospecifics that share the same habitat and, instead, preferentially learn the songs of conspecifics. This bias has long been assumed to reflect genetic influences on song learning.

Two experimental approaches have historically been used to reveal genetic biases in and constraints on song learning. The first is to cross-foster young birds of one species to parents of a different species that sings a distinct song. Cross-fostering elucidates both the potential plasticity (based on what birds are able to learn from heterospecific foster parents) and the constraints (based on what species-typical features birds retain from their own species) of song learning. When cross-fostered to and tutored by a different species, a number of songbirds can learn to accurately reproduce the acoustic elements of heterospecific songs. However, even when exposed only to the songs of a heterospecific foster species, many songbirds retain hints of their species-typical structure when they imitate their foster parent’s song. For example, chaffinches that are cross-fostered to canary parents are able to learn to produce the acoustic elements within canary song; however, they perform these elements with chaffinch-typical phrases or timing. These cross-fostering experiments underscore that experience alone is not sufficient for songbirds to fully mimic the song of a different species and, moreover, that genes could shape the trajectory and nature of vocal learning.

A complementary approach to reveal genetic contributions to song learning is to generate hybrids between 2 species that produce acoustically distinct songs. The earliest studies of hybrids focused on behaviors with a minimal experiential component, whereas more recent work has provided detailed examinations of genetic and genomic contributions to learned behaviors, including the sensory and sensorimotor learning of birdsong. For example, hybridizations and backcrosses between border and roller canaries, 2 artificially selected strains of canary that differ in their tendency to sing high-pitched (border) or low-pitched (roller) song phrases, have revealed a contribution of autosomal and sex-linked genes to species variation in song phrases.

Together with candidate gene approaches, cross-fostering and species hybrid approaches have helped reveal the existence of genetic influences on song learning. More recently, advances in both genomic and computational tools have made it possible to assess the degree to which species differences in gene regulatory networks underlie species variation in vocal communication. Differences in gene expression, thought to contribute to phenotypic differences within and between species, can result from cis- and/or trans-acting regulatory differences. Changes in cis-regulatory elements include changes to promoter and gene sequences and messenger RNA stability, whereas trans effects reflect changes to diffusible factors including transcription factors, microRNAs, and chromatin regulators. In songbirds, species differences in transcriptional regulation within brain areas that are critical for song learning and production may contribute to the bias to learn species-typical songs.

To uncover the degree to which species divergences in regulatory networks could underlie species differences in song, Wang and colleagues (this issue) integrated cross-fostering, species hybridizations, and genome-wide transcriptional analysis of 2 related songbirds—zebra finches and owl finches. The authors first cross-fostered juvenile zebra finches and owl finches and demonstrated a strong signature of genetic constraints on song learning. Then, they hybridized zebra and owl finches and performed a genome-wide transcriptional analysis of 2 key song nuclei (HVC and robust nucleus of the arcopallium [RA]; see Figs and) in F1 hybrids to elucidate divergences in transcriptional regulatory networks between the 2 species. They found that divergence in transcriptional regulation accounted for approximately 10% of the variation in transcribed genes. Moreover, in contrast to many studies that highlight cis-regulatory changes as central to the evolution of gene expression, Wang and colleagues discovered that trans-regulatory changes were more prevalent than cis changes. Interestingly, these trans-regulatory changes in brain areas important for song production were associated with genes involved in synapse formation and transmission.

One gene in particular, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), was identified as an upstream mediator of a substantial number of trans-regulated genes in the vocal motor pathway. Moreover, there were species differences in both amino acid substitutions and BDNF expression levels, and Wang and colleagues examined the degree to which these species differences related to species differences in songs. They found that individual differences in acoustic features of song of F1 hybrids were more correlated with individual differences in the level of BDNF expression in HVC and RA than with the allele-specific expression (ASE) ratio, which associates with differences in amino acid substitution of the parental species. In addition, they found that manipulating BDNF in RA in the adult zebra finch by continuous, local administration of a BDNF agonist led to changes to syllable structure and sequencing in adult zebra finch song and affected the expression of over 500 downstream genes, including a subset of the genes putatively regulated by BDNF.

Taken as a whole, the study by Wang and colleagues represents significant progress in understanding the genetic and genomic underpinnings of species differences in vocal motor learning and production. Moreover, their data highlight a number of exciting directions to extend their findings and further elucidate the genetic bases of song learning. For example, future studies should focus on juveniles that are undergoing vocal learning to further examine both the identified factors from this study as well as search for additional transcriptional variation. Understanding how development and experience shape gene regulation and expression will provide deeper insights into mechanisms of song learning and evolution. In addition, because genes influence sensory acquisition and sensorimotor development, future work revealing how genes and regulatory networks for sensory and sensorimotor learning vary between species will be essential for understanding how species differences in song arise.

Finally, the study by Wang and colleagues also highlights an inherent challenge in the hunt for the genetic bases of species differences in behavior. Elucidating how complex gene regulatory networks evolve and how their evolution results in phenotypic change and speciation is a monumental task, especially when it involves phenotypes as complex, multidimensional, and dynamic as vocal learning and production. As our toolbox grows, and as studies move away from focusing on a handful of traditional candidate genes toward investigating gene regulatory networks, we will gain greater resolution into the multifaceted relationships between gene expression and species-specific behaviors, even for learned behaviors such as birdsong.


Funding Statement

The authors received no specific funding for this work.


Neural correlates of sparse coding and dimensionality reduction

Michael Beyeler, Emily L Rounds, Kristofor D Carlson, Nikil Dutt, Jeffrey L Krichmar, Aldo A Faisal — PLoS Computational Biology, 2019. PMC6597036, CC BY 4.0.

Supported by recent computational studies, there is increasing evidence that a wide range of neuronal responses can be understood as an emergent property of nonnegative sparse coding (NSC), an efficient population coding scheme based on dimensionality reduction and sparsity constraints. We review evidence that NSC might be employed by sensory areas to efficiently encode external stimulus spaces, by some associative areas to conjunctively represent multiple behaviorally relevant variables, and possibly by the basal ganglia to coordinate movement. In addition, NSC might provide a useful theoretical framework under which to understand the often complex and nonintuitive response properties of neurons in other brain areas. Although NSC might not apply to all brain areas (for example, motor or executive function areas) the success of NSC-based models, especially in sensory areas, warrants further investigation for neural correlates in other regions.

Brains face the fundamental challenge of extracting relevant information from high-dimensional external stimuli in order to form the neural basis that can guide an organism's behavior and its interaction with the world. One potential approach to addressing this challenge is to reduce the number of variables required to represent a particular input space (i.e., dimensionality reduction). We review compelling evidence that a range of neuronal responses can be understood as an emergent property of nonnegative sparse coding (NSC)—a form of efficient population coding due to dimensionality reduction and sparsity constraints.


Introduction

Brains face the fundamental challenge of extracting relevant information from high-dimensional external stimuli in order to form the neural basis that can guide an organism's behavior and its interaction with the world. To support complex patterns of behavior, populations of interconnected neurons must implement a rich repertoire of linear and nonlinear operations on their synaptic inputs that take into account context, experience, and anatomical constraints. For example, anatomical bottlenecks often force the information stored in a large number of neurons to be compressed into an orders-of-magnitude-smaller population of downstream neurons, such as storing information from 100 million photoreceptors in 1 million optic nerve fibers or resulting in a 10–10,000-fold convergence from cortex to the basal ganglia.

One potential approach to addressing this challenge is to reduce the number of signals required to transmit information in the network—for example, through sparse-coding schemes (text in bold appear in the Glossary section), in which information is represented by the activity of a small proportion of neurons in a population. A number of different definitions of sparsity can be found in the literature, which can sometimes lead to controversy as to which codes can still be considered sparse. An extreme example is the so-called local code, in which each unique event, or “context,” is encoded by a single active neuron, or “grandmother cell” (illustrated in the left column of). Local codes not only suffer from low representational capacity, because they allow a population of N neurons to encode at most N contexts, but also require a large number of neurons to cover the space of possible contexts. On the other hand, a dense code represents each context by the combined activity of all neurons in the population (right column). In theory, dense codes lead to high representational capacity (at M activity levels, allowing for MN contexts to be encoded), but they also suffer from neuronal cross talk because every neuron is involved in every context. Alternatively, sparse codes (center column) can be described as a trade-off between the benefits and drawbacks of dense and local codes, in which each context is encoded by a different subset of neurons in the population.. In general, sparse coding reduces the overall neural activity necessary to represent information.

Another approach to address this challenge is to reduce the number of variables required to represent a particular input, stimulus, or task space, a process known as dimensionality reduction. Although responses of individual neurons are often complex and highly nonlinear, a population of neurons might share activity patterns because of individual neurons in the population not being independent of each other. Dimensionality reduction methods have proved useful in elucidating these shared activity patterns and thus effectively explaining population activity using a lower number of variables than there are neurons in the population (for a recent review).

Neurons often encode several behaviorally relevant variables simultaneously, allowing for multifaceted representations of high-dimensional stimulus spaces. For example, a population of neurons tasked with encoding human faces might opt to represent each individual face as a combination of a set of standard faces (left column). In such a holistic representation of faces, each individual neuron would itself respond to a face as a whole (i.e., a face “template”) without explicitly representing individual face components, and an arbitrary face could be represented by combining different face templates (e.g., by adding 10% of template 1 to 20% of template 2 and subtracting 30% of template 3). On the other hand, faces can also be represented as a combination of individual face components, such as eyes, noses, and mouth, in what is known as a parts-based representation (right column). Both approaches allow for representing arbitrary faces as a combination of neural activity but have drastically different consequences on the set of stimulus features each neuron responds to. Although visual information from the eyes, nose, and mouth would of course be included in a holistic face representation, that information would not be explicitly represented as structural units in their own right. Linear combinations of holistic components often involve complex cancellations between positive and negative contributions and thus lack the intuitive meaning of adding parts to form a whole. In contrast, a parts-based representation allows for only nonsubtractive combinations of stimulus features. Although the relevant stimulus dimensions are often not known a priori, several sophisticated mathematical techniques exist that allow us to discover these representations directly from experimental data.

In this article, we review evidence from experimental and theoretical studies suggesting that a number of neuronal responses can be understood as an emergent property of nonnegative sparse coding (NSC), an efficient population coding scheme based on dimensionality reduction and sparsity constraints. In particular, we review evidence for NSC in sensory areas that efficiently encode external stimulus spaces, for associative areas to conjunctively represent multiple behaviorally relevant variables, and for the basal ganglia to coordinate movement.


Nonnegative sparse coding as a modern variant of the efficient coding hypothesis


Efficient coding

The fundamental principle of efficient coding is that a sensory system is adjusted to the specific statistics of the natural environment from which it encodes and transmits information. Efficiency, in this context, is an information-theoretic term that should not be confused with “minimizing energy expenditure.” Instead, a sensory pathway is treated as a noisy communication channel, in which the goal is to maximize the rate at which information can be reliably transmitted by minimizing the redundancy between representational units.

Early theories of efficient coding were developed based on the visual system. Attneave pointed out that there is a significant degree of redundancy in natural visual images because of correlations in both the spatial and temporal domains (for a recent review). For example, the luminance values of a pair of pixels separated by a fixed distance in a natural image are likely to be highly correlated. These statistical regularities constrain the images a visual system is likely to encounter to a tiny fraction of the set of all possible images. It was therefore argued that the visual system should not waste resources on processing arbitrary images but instead use statistical knowledge about its environment to represent the relevant input space as economically as possible.

Extending this idea to the neural level, Barlow proposed that the goal of early neurons in sensory processing is to transform raw visual inputs into an efficient representation such that as much information as possible can be extracted from them given limited neural resources. This efficient coding principle has been able to explain a wide variety of neuronal response properties in the early visual system, such as the center-surround structure of receptive fields (RFs) in the retina, temporally decorrelated signals in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), and the coding of natural scenes in the primary visual cortex (V1).

At the level of single neurons, efficient coding suggests that the information carried by a neuron's response can be maximized by using all response levels with equal frequency. For example, in the case of a neuron representing a single input variable with a single output variable, information is maximized when the input–output function corresponds to the cumulative probability function for the different input levels, as shown in. Note that this coding procedure amplifies inputs in proportion to their expected frequency of occurrence rather than reserving large portions of its dynamic range for improbable inputs. On the other hand, if the input–output function sensitivity is chosen as too low, high levels of the stimulus feature will be indistinguishable as the response function saturates; if the sensitivity is set too high, low levels of the stimulus feature cannot drive responses.

At the level of neuronal populations, neural responses should be both decorrelated (i.e., independent from one another) and sparse (i.e., involve only a small fraction of neurons in the population).


Sparse coding

Taking these ideas a step further, Olshausen and Field noted that natural images contain statistical dependencies beyond linear pairwise correlations among image pixels and argued that these higher-order correlations should be taken into account when developing an efficient code. Their goal was thus to find a linear coding strategy capable of reducing these higher-order forms of redundancy.

Linear sparse coding is one such strategy, in which monochromatic images I(x,y) are described in terms of a linear superposition of a number of B basis functions, wb(x,y):

where hb are stochastic coefficients that are different for each image. Learning a sparse code for images thus involved determining the values of both wb(x,y) and hb for all b and (x,y), given a sufficient number of observation of images, under the constraint that hb be sparse. In this context, hb was considered sparse if it took very small or very large (absolute) values more often than a Gaussian random variable would. This sparsity constraint allowed for basis functions that were not needed to describe a given image structure to be weeded out.

When Olshausen and Field applied linear sparse coding to natural images, they found that the emerging basis functions were qualitatively similar in form to RFs of simple cells in V1, thus giving empirically observed RFs an information-theoretic explanation. In this context, hb in corresponded to the (signed) activation value of a particular V1 neuron, and wb(x,y) were the connection weights (or synaptic weights in an artificial neural network) that were closely related to that neuron's RF.

Sparsity, in this context, is an information-theoretic concept related to how efficiently and completely information is encoded with the basis functions described previously. Please note that this is different from empirical observations of brain areas being “sparsely” activated; that is, sparse population activity does not necessarily imply that a brain area implements a sparse-coding scheme. This confusion is fueled in part by the wide variety of definitions of sparsity used in the literature. For example, even though sparse coding (as a theoretical framework) applied to natural images yields V1-like RFs, recent evidence suggests that neural activity in V1 might not be as sparsely activated as previously thought. However, V1 still codes stimuli efficiently.

Olshausen and Field went on to show that the set of basis functions that best described V1 RFs was greater in number than the effective dimensionality of the input (which they termed an overcomplete basis set). It is worth noting that sparse coding with an overcomplete basis set is typically associated with an anatomical fan-out motif, such as expanding 1 million optic nerve fibers into more than 100 million V1 neurons or from a small number of mossy fibers to a 100-fold–larger number of granule cells in the cerebellum.

However, as pointed out by Hoyer, linear sparse coding falls short of providing a literal interpretation for V1 simple-cell behavior for two reasons: (1) every neuron could be either positively or negatively active, and (2) the input to the neural network was typically double-signed, whereas V1 neurons receive visual input from the LGN in the form of separated, nonnegative ON and OFF channels.

In order to transform Olshausen and Field's sparse coding from a relatively abstract model of image representation into a biologically plausible model of early visual cortex processing, Hoyer thus proposed to enforce both input signal and neuronal activation to be nonnegative (though still allowing inhibitory connections). This seemingly simple change had remarkable consequences on the quality of the sensory representation: whereas elementary image features in the standard sparse-coding model could “cancel each other out” through subtractive interactions, enforcing nonnegativity ensured that features combined additively, much like the intuitive notion of combining parts to form a whole. The resulting parts-based representations resembled RFs in V1 much more closely than other holistic representations. These considerations led to the formulation of NSC in its current form.


Nonnegative sparse coding

As a special case of linear sparse coding, NSC shares the same goal of accurately describing observed data as a superposition of a set of sparsely activated basis functions, as well as enforcing dimensionality reduction. In addition, NSC requires all basis functions and activation values (i.e., wb(x,y) and hb in) to be nonnegative. However, NSC is more than just linear sparse coding with nonnegative weights. For example, whereas linear sparse coding typically uses a larger number of basis functions than there are dimensions in the input (thus achieving dimensionality expansion), NSC makes use of nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) to achieve dimensionality reduction. This has interesting implications for the kinds of basis functions that can be learned. Most prominently, the nonnegativity constraints used in NMF force the different basis functions to add up linearly, thus leading to the distinctive parts-based representations.

Consider S observed stimuli or data samples, each composed of F observed feature values, such as a collection of S images I(x,y)s (s∈[1,…,S]) from the previous example, each consisting of F different grayscale values. If we arrange the observed feature values of the s-th observation into a vector (i.e., by flattening each observed image), and if we arrange all vectors into the columns of an F×S data matrix V, then linear decompositions describe these data as

where W is an F×B matrix that contains as its columns the B basis functions of the decomposition (i.e., the b-th column of W corresponding to wb(x,y) ∀x,y in), and H is a B×S matrix containing as its columns the activation values of each basis function for a particular input stimulus (i.e., the b-th column of H corresponding to hb ∀b in). The difference between V and WH is termed the reconstruction error.

The goal of NSC is then to find a linear decomposition of V that minimizes the reconstruction error while guaranteeing that H is sparse. This can be achieved by minimizing the following cost function:

subject to the constraints ∀ij:Wij≥0, Hij≥0, and, where denotes the i-th column of W. Here, the left-hand term describes the reconstruction error, whereas the right-hand term describes the sparsity of the decomposition. The trade-off between accurate reconstruction and sparsity is controlled by the parameter λ (where λ≥0), whereas the form of f defines how sparsity is measured (a typical choice is the L1 norm on H).

Analogous to efficient coding, forces prediction errors to be amplified in proportion to their expected frequency of occurrence because a more frequent event would show up more frequently in V. Hence, accounting for a rare observation at the expense of ignoring a more common one would result in an increased reconstruction error.

In the case of λ = 0, reduces to the squared-error version of NMF. Although NMF enforces all elements of W and H to be nonnegative, the resulting decomposition might not be sparse, depending on the number of basis functions B. In order to emphasize decompositions in which H is sparse, should be minimized with λ>0.

Another open parameter is the number of basis functions, B, which controls the predictive power of the model and must be determined empirically. With a small number of basis functions, NSC is unlikely to achieve a low reconstruction error, be it in familiar contexts (training data) or in novel contexts (held-out test data). In this case, the error depends on the systematic bias of the model, and the model is said to underfit the data (left-hand side of). With increased model complexity, the model can learn subtle differences between different contexts with high accuracy, leading to a reduced bias (training) error. However, with increased complexity, the model is more likely to learn patterns between training contexts that arise either from underlying noise or from spurious correlations. As a result, the model will respond according to these learned patterns when a novel context is presented (rather than according to the underlying actual relationships), in which case the model is said to overfit the data (right-hand side of). Hence, the goal of a successful model is to find the ideal compromise in the bias–variance error trade-off (labeled “best model” in).

Analogously to, the basis functions obtained in NSC can be interpreted as the connection weights of a population of simulated neurons in an artificial neural network. In other words, under NSC, the number of basis functions B corresponds to the number of output neurons, and the response of the b-th model output neuron (b∈[1,…,B]) to a particular input stimulus s, termed rbs, can be computed by feeding the dot product of that neuron's connection weights (i.e., the b-th column in W) and a data vector (i.e., the s-th column in V) to an activation function Θ:

where “⋅” denotes the dot product. For example, the linear response of a model neuron can be calculated by setting Θ to the identity function Θ(x) = x. Note that the response of the model neuron to different stimuli s∈[1,…,S] involves different columns of V but always relies on.

Thus, we can utilize W (which must remain fixed once learned) and to simulate a model neuron's response to arbitrary input stimuli by replacing the column in V with new input. This allows us to investigate the response properties of individual model neurons much in the same way that experimental neuroscientists study biological neurons. This is important because it means that NSC can be used to model neural activity in the brain, and the resulting activity patterns generated by NSC can be compared to and evaluated against experimental findings.

It is important to note that the absence of negative weights in Eqs – does not preclude the modeling of inhibitory connections or even posit that inhibitory connections cannot participate in NSC. Rather, one important aspect of NSC is the parts-based, NMF-like decomposition of V; one way to achieve this is by enforcing nonnegativity constraints on W and H. Several studies have successfully incorporated inhibitory connections into their NSC-based models. One approach is to model them as nonnegative synaptic conductances. For example, Hoyer used NSC to model V1 neurons as receiving input from both excitatory ON and inhibitory OFF cells in the LGN. Using prewhitened natural images, Hoyer sampled 12×12 pixel patches from the images and then separated positive and negative values into separate channels. Each image patch was thus represented by a 2×12×12 = 288 dimensional vector, each element of which mimicked the activity of an ON or OFF cell in response to the image patch. These vectors were then arranged into the columns of V. This procedure not only preserved the parts-based quality of the encoding but also allowed the modeling of the convergence of ON and OFF pathways. Another approach is to drop the nonnegativity constraint on W and thus effectively operate with both positive and negative synaptic weights. Only recently did it become clear that this approach was able to preserve the parts-based quality of the encoding (as long as nonnegativity of H was enforced), thus simplifying the construction of more complex network topologies.


Empirical evidence for NSC in the brain

In this section, we review evidence for NSC in several brain regions. In particular, NSC has been observed in sensory areas, an association cortex area, and the basal ganglia. Although these findings suggest that NSC might apply elsewhere in the brain, thus warranting further investigation, we are aware that NSC does not apply to everywhere in the brain. We will further discuss the limits of NSC in the Model limitations section of the Discussion.

Because of its roots in efficient coding theories of natural image processing, there is a large body of research highlighting the role of NSC in visual cortex function. More recently, NSC-like computational models have found application outside visual cortex, where they have started to provide compelling evidence that a wide variety of neuronal response properties might be understood as an epiphenomenon of efficient population coding based on dimensionality reduction. Examples include elucidating the dimensions along which perceptual space is organized in the olfactory system, the coordination of movement in the cortico-basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop, and the combined representation of allocentric and route-based spatial navigation cues in retrosplenial cortex (RSC).

In the following subsections, we review studies describing evidence for NSC that either successfully explains response properties of individual neurons or has been instrumental in elucidating the dynamics at the population level. We start this section with some early modeling work that shows parts-based dimensionality reduction analogous to neuronal responses in inferotemporal cortex (IT).


NSC in the inferotemporal cortex

The notion of parts-based object recognition is compatible with hierarchical models of vision, in which activation of simple features feeds into the activation of complex features. There is a long history of debate as to whether humans detect faces based on their individual parts or as correctly arranged wholes (for reviews). The working hypothesis is that the brain might use holistic face information as an early gating mechanism to allow visual stimuli access to the face processing module but that most cortical circuitry relies on parts-based information. Converging evidence from human imaging studies and primate physiology suggests that faces are processed in localized “patches” within IT, where cells detect distinct constellations of face parts, such as eyes, and that whole faces can be recognized by taking linear combinations of neuronal activity across IT.

An influential paper by Lee and Seung found that applying NMF to a database of face images yielded sparse, localized features that resembled parts of a face in a similar fashion to responses in area IT. In their case, NMF acted on an F×S data matrix V, whose rows corresponded to distinct features of the input (e.g., F different pixels of an image) and whose columns corresponded to different stimuli or observations of those features (e.g., S different images). NMF was used to decompose the matrix into two reduced-rank matrices (inset) whose linear combination could be weighted such that the product of W and H provided an accurate reconstruction of V.

A particular image, in this case encoded by F = 19×19 = 361 pixels could be accurately represented by a linear combination of a small number (B = 49) of encoding variables or “basis images”. Such a representation is reminiscent to neural processing in IT, an area in the ventral visual “what” stream involved in encoding high-level object identity, in which images of whole faces can be linearly reconstructed using responses of approximately 200 neurons that each respond to a certain set of physical facial features.

Interestingly, such a parts-based representation is not specific to face processing in IT; the same principle can be extended to body-selective regions in IT.

Although there seems to be a consensus that information-theoretic explanations are relevant when investigating early sensory areas, higher-order brain areas are often considered to be specialized for performing tasks (e.g., recognizing objects, making decisions, navigating an environment) rather than the efficient encoding of information. It is therefore possible that the essential components of NSC might well be present in higher-order areas but, to date, have gone unnoticed.


NSC in the retina

Because of its roots in efficient coding theories of natural image processing, NSC figures prominently in the vision neuroscience literature. For example, NMF-based models were able to reconstruct in vitro neuronal spike trains from the salamander retina. By combining spike-triggered average with NMF, Liu and colleagues were able to identify the subunit layout of retinal ganglion cells. This technique, termed spike-triggered NMF (STNMF), involved applying NMF to the collection of those stimulus patterns contained in a spatiotemporal white-noise sequence that caused a given neuron to spike. Akin to common reverse-correlation analysis, the researchers averaged the collection of spike-eliciting stimulus segments to form the spike-triggered stimulus ensemble. STNMF then decomposed the ensemble of effective spike-triggered stimuli into a matrix W containing a set of modules (or basis functions) and a matrix H containing a set of hidden coefficients.

Intuitively, the modules derived by STNMF should capture the subunit decomposition of the cell's RF because the spike-eliciting stimuli should have essential statistical structure imprinted on them by the subunits, such as correlations between pixel values. And indeed, the identified modules corresponded to individual presynaptic bipolar cells, as verified by multielectrode array recordings with simultaneous recordings from individual bipolar cells through sharp microelectrodes. This allowed the researchers to improve predictions about how ganglion cells respond to natural stimuli without the need to guess a specific model structure that may be constrained in terms of the size, shape, number, or nonlinearity of ganglion cell subunits.


NSC in the early visual cortex

NSC has been extensively applied to early visual cortex, where it has successfully explained orientation and frequency tuning of simple and complex cells in V1 as well as edge-like pooling of spatial frequency channels in V2, including RF properties such as end-stopping and contour integration. These theoretical findings are in good agreement with a large body of research documenting the sensory response of V1 across animal models, although they are not without controversy. For example, one study criticized that some of the early sparse-coding models generated RFs that looked like stereotyped edge detectors and did not capture the diversity of RF structure observed in cat and monkey V1. However, by adjusting these models to limit the number of active neurons (“hard” sparsity) instead of limiting mean neuronal activity (“soft” sparsity), Rehn and Sommer were able to account for the diversity of shapes in biological RFs. Other researchers were concerned that the apparent sparse activation of V1 was an artifact of using simple artificial stimuli such as sinusoidal gratings and drifting bars, but Vinje and Gallant were able to show that natural viewing conditions actually increased the sparsity of V1 activation.

However, a number of recent studies suggest that responses are neither sparse nor low dimensional in V1 of the mouse and monkey. Using high-density electrophysiology, Stringer and colleagues found that the response of more than 10,000 visual cortical neurons to 2,000 image stimuli is high dimensional. In monkey V1, one needs to look at many principal components to decode natural images, and these principal components reflect contributions from most of the recorded neurons. In addition, V1 neurons in the mouse might encode both visual stimuli and behavior in a mixed representation: a recent study found no separate sets of neurons encoding stimuli and behavioral variables, but each neuron multiplexed a unique combination of sensory and behavioral information. These findings suggest that efficient coding might render an incomplete picture of sensory processing in V1 and that more studies are needed to reevaluate past findings. To this end, Stringer and colleagues suggested that the population code of visual cortex might be determined by two constraints: efficiency, to make best use of the limited number of neurons, and smoothness, which allows similar stimuli to evoke similar responses.

In summary, there is a large body of research showing that computational models based on efficient coding, such as NSC, can account for a variety of response properties in early visual cortex. Although methods like spike-triggered average and dimensionality reduction give us confidence that we have a good understanding of the sensory response in V1, this understanding remains far from complete and in fact might be missing a number of dimensions related to task, state, or behavior. With the exception of face processing in IT, NSC has yet to be applied to higher-order areas in the ventral visual pathway. The success of NSC in explaining V1 and V2 response properties suggests that it might be possible to extend the model to texture integration in V4.


NSC in the dorsal visual pathway

Our group found evidence for NSC in the dorsal subregion of the medial superior temporal (MSTd) area, which is part of the visual motion pathway in the dorsal visual stream. Neurons in MSTd respond to relatively large and complex patterns of retinal motion (“optic flow”), owing to input from direction- and speed-selective neurons in the middle temporal (MT) area (for a recent review). Although MSTd had long been suspected to be involved in the analysis of self-motion, the complexity of neuronal response properties has made it difficult to experimentally investigate how neurons in MSTd might perform this function.

When our group applied NMF to simulated neural activity patterns whose statistical properties resembled that of experimentally recorded MT neurons, we found a sparse, parts-based representation of retinal flow similar to the parts-based representation of faces encountered by Lee and Seung. The resulting “basis flow fields” showed a remarkable resemblance to RFs of MSTd neurons, as they responded to an intricate mixture of 3D translational and rotational flow components in a subset of the visual field. As a result, any flow field possibly to be encountered during self-movement through a 3D environment could be represented by only B = 64 simulated MSTd neurons, as compared with F = 9,000 simulated MT input neurons. This led to a sparse and parts-based population code in which any given stimulus could be represented by only a small number of simulated MSTd neurons.

shows the distribution of direction preferences of MSTd-like model units for rotation and translation, respectively. Each data point in the scatter plots specifies the preferred 3D direction of a model unit. Histograms along the boundaries show the marginal distributions of azimuth and elevation preferences. Not only did individual units match response properties of individual neurons in macaque MSTd), but the model was able to recover statistical properties of the MSTd population as a whole, such as a relative overrepresentation of lateral headings.

MSTd is known to encode a number of perceptual variables, such as the direction of travel (heading) and eye rotation velocity. During forward movement, retinal flow radiates out symmetrically from a single point, the focus of expansion (FOE), from which heading can be inferred. However, instead of consisting of a set of distinct subpopulations, each specialized to encode a particular perceptual variable, MSTd has been found to consist of neurons that act more like basis functions, in which a majority of cells were involved in the simultaneous encoding of multiple perceptual variables. A similar picture emerged when we investigated the involvement of MSTd-like model units in the encoding of both heading and eye rotation velocity.

Interestingly, the sparsity regime in which model MSTd achieved the lowest heading prediction error was also the regime in which MSTd-like model units reproduced a variety of known MSTd visual response properties (for experimental details, refer to). In contrast to findings about early visual cortex, this regime does not use an overcomplete basis set, yet it can still be considered a sparse coding regime because only a few MSTd-like model units were needed to recover the stimulus, and each model unit responded to a subset of stimuli (see Fig 8C in). Such an intermediary sparse code might be better suited (as opposed to an overcomplete basis set) for areas such as MSTd because the increased memory capacity of such a code might lead to compact and multifaceted encodings of various perceptual variables.

Taken together, the computational modeling work on MSTd described previously suggests that NSC is not specific to primary sensory areas and may be observed in other downstream sensory regions.


NSC in the auditory cortex

Analogous to early visual cortex, the auditory system is believed to decompose auditory signals into a set of elementary acoustic features such that the complete acoustic waveform can be described by a sparse population code that operates near an information-theoretic optimum. It is therefore not surprising that computational models based on NSC have been very successful at describing the spectro-temporal RF of neurons in the primary auditory cortex (A1). Response properties of A1 neurons are well described by a spectrogram; they are often tuned to stimulus frequency but are rarely phase locked to oscillations of the sound waveform. The cortical representation of auditory signals seems to not only be sparse but also rely on statistically independent acoustic features.

Similar to visual cortex, auditory cortex is hierarchically organized, with neurons in A1 responding to simple acoustic features of natural sounds and higher-order areas responding to more behaviorally relevant stimuli. The anterior superior temporal region of auditory cortex, for example, responds to categories of acoustic objects, such as sounds produced by voices and musical instruments. An intriguing question for future modeling studies is therefore whether NSC can be extended to the next level of the auditory hierarchy: Would it be possible to construct more complex acoustic objects from a sparse, parts-based set of elementary, A1-like acoustic features? And would the representation of such acoustic objects resemble neuronal responses in the anterior superior temporal region of auditory cortex?

Taken together, we suggest that auditory cortex is a good example for efficient and NSC-based coding in a sensory system other than the visual cortex, in which further study is warranted.


NSC in the olfactory cortex

The olfactory cortex is another nonvisual cortical area worth investigating for NSC-like responses. In contrast to most other sensory modalities, the basic perceptual dimensions of olfaction remain unclear. In particular, the olfactory modality is intrinsically high dimensional and lacks a simple, externally defined basis analogous to wavelength or pitch on which elemental odor stimuli can be quantitatively compared (for a recent review). Odors evoke complex responses in granule cells (located in the olfactory bulb) that evolve over hundreds of milliseconds. Granule cells use a sparse combinatorial code to convey information about odor identity and concentration. Downstream from the olfactory bulb, odors tend to activate a small but consistent proportion (approximately 10%) of cortical neurons in the piriform cortex, which is thought to form odor object percepts. Although piriform cortex is not topographically organized, a spatial structure can be discerned when examining the projections of output neurons, which are highly segregated and functionally specific. Whereas the anterior piriform cortex is associated with the encoding of odor identity and odor structure, the posterior piriform cortex is involved in associational aspects of odors, such as valence and similarity.

A compelling piece of evidence for NSC in the olfactory system was recently provided by Castro and colleagues: In an effort to elucidate the dimensions along which perceptual space might be organized in the olfactory system, they applied NMF to a perceptual dataset built from 144 monomolecular odors, each represented by a 146-dimensional vector (an “odor profile”). Each dimension in the odor profile corresponded to the rated applicability of a number of semantic labels, such as “sweet,” “floral,” and “heavy.” By applying NMF to the odor profile, they showed that a set of 10 sparsely activated basis functions could accurately describe any odor in the dataset. Interestingly, NMF revealed a prominent block diagonal structure to the full matrix H, indicating that (1) a given odor tended to be characterized by a single prominent basis function, implying that the basis functions recovered by NMF were perceptually meaningful, and (2) all ten basis functions were being used approximately with equal frequency, implying that the basis functions recovered by NMF could span the space of behaviorally relevant odors. This suggests that a given odor percept may be considered an instance of one of several fundamental qualities.

Furthermore, NMF recovered basis functions whose descriptors aligned with perceptual dimensions highlighted in several previous analyses of odor space, including but not limited to relative pleasantness (e.g., “fragrant,” “sickening”) and potential palatability (“woody, resinous,” “chemical,” “sweet,” and “lemon”). Odors clustered predominantly along these axes (as illustrated in) for three specific basis functions.

In summary, although sensory processing in the olfactory system remains an area of active research, there is evidence consistent with a sparse and parts-based encoding of odor identity and concentration. Only recently have NSC-based methods been employed to elucidate the neural code for olfaction. Future studies may provide additional supporting evidence.


NSC in the somatosensory cortex

In early areas of primary somatosensory cortex (S1), a number of parallels can be drawn to sparse, reduced information processing observed in other primary sensory cortices. First, activity in rodent barrel cortex, a region of S1 that is a major target for somatosensory inputs from the whiskers via the thalamus, can be extremely sparse, similar to activity in A1. Consequently, sparse-coding models have successfully explained the response properties of individual neurons in rat barrel cortex (e.g., Hafner and colleagues). Second, similar to V1, neurons in primate areas 3b and 1 of S1 act like Gabor filters for tactile orientation. The same is true for rat barrel cortex. Third, similar to visual area MT, primate S1 contains a subpopulation of neurons that can infer the direction of tactile motion from a spatiotemporal pattern of activation across a 2D sensory sheet (i.e., the skin). Specifically, neurons in area 1 of S1 tend to respond to plaid textures in the same fashion that MT neurons respond to visual plaids. These findings suggest that much of what can be said about sparse and parts-based information processing in visual cortex also applies to S1.

One NSC-like model that has enjoyed success in explaining complex S1 rodent response properties is the rectified latent variable model (RLVM), a combination of nonlinear dimensionality reduction with nonnegativity constraints. In an effort to elucidate the stimulus dimensions that individual S1 neurons respond to, Whiteway and Butts applied RLVM to a two-photon imaging dataset of hundreds of simultaneously recorded neurons in mouse barrel cortex while the animal was performing a tactile discrimination task. Interestingly, they found basis functions that properly identified individual neurons. Similar to the recorded neuronal responses, these basis functions were closely related to both the tactile stimulation as well as nonstimulus aspects of the behavioral task. Furthermore, RLVM achieved a lower reconstruction error than other linear dimensionality reduction techniques such as principal component analysis (PCA), thus highlighting the benefit of using NMF-based decompositions over PCA to explain neural data.

However, NSC has not been observed in nonhuman primate somatosensory cortex. Tactile information from various submodalities converges at later stages of monkey S1 and is multiplexed across different time scales using both rate and spike timing codes. These regions might represent different stages in the processing pipeline leading to form and texture perception. Primate area 2 of S1 is known to integrate both tactile and proprioceptive stimuli; for example, some neurons respond only to active reaching movements, some respond only to passive movements (e.g., unexpected perturbations to the hand that generate passive limb displacements), and others respond to both. These complex response properties may argue against a sparse and parts-based code in area 2.

Taken together, neurons in early somatosensory cortex respond to a small number of stimulus dimensions, not unlike to sensory neurons in early visual and auditory cortex. However, current evidence argues against NSC in higher areas of somatosensory cortex. The parallels to the visual system are striking though: area 1, which resembles visual area MT by showing Gabor-like responses to tactile motion, feeds into area 2, which resembles visual area MSTd by showing intermingling of responses to tactile and proprioceptive stimuli (analogous to intermingling of visual and vestibular stimuli in MSTd). It is therefore not unthinkable that an NSC-like model that operates on neuronal inputs to area 2—constructed analogous to—could reproduce some of these response properties. However, until the neuronal mechanisms underlying these complex response properties are better understood, one would have to conclude that NSC might not apply to later stages of somatosensory cortex.


NSC in the retrosplenial cortex

In our own work, we found evidence that NSC can explain response properties in RSC, an area important for navigation and spatial memory. Neurons in the RSC conjunctively encode multiple variables related to the environment and one's position and movement within it (e.g., position, head direction, linear velocity, and angular velocity), allowing the representation of spatial features of the environment with respect to multiple reference frames.

Using a similar methodology to, we applied NMF, with a sparsity constraint, to parameterized behavioral variables extracted from electrophyisiological recordings of RSC neurons in the rat while the animal ran back and forth on a W-shaped track (for experimental details, see Supporting information). We found a sparse and parts-based representation for behaviorally relevant variables such as the animal's position, head direction, and movement direction. Interestingly, model RSC neurons encoded these variables with respect to multiple frames of reference (e.g., head direction: allocentric reference frame, linear velocity: route-based reference frame). The dimensionality of the stimulus space was drastically reduced from F = 417 input neurons to a set of B = 30 model RSC neurons.

The basis functions recovered by NMF were then used to generate simulated responses of model RSC neurons according to, and the simulated responses were compared with neuronal responses from the electrophysiological recordings. Interestingly, simulated neuronal activity could be classified into three broad categories, with remarkably similar population statistics to rat RSC: (1) responding to left and right turns on a specific position along the route, (2) responding to left and right turns regardless of the position along the route, and (3) exhibiting complex and robust firing patterns without turn sensitivity (see as well as Supporting information).

Taken together, this study suggests that neuronal population activity in RSC is consistent with NSC. This is an example that NSC can apply outside sensory cortex, even where responses have not traditionally been considered sparse or parts based.


Reinforcement-driven NSC in the basal ganglia

There is computational evidence for a reward-driven variant of NSC in the basal ganglia, a cluster of deep forebrain nuclei that are involved in the processing of motor, associative, and limbic information (for recent reviews). The basal ganglia network may be viewed as multiple parallel loops where cortical and subcortical projections interact with internal reentral loops, forming a complex network ideally designed for selecting and inhibiting simultaneously occurring events and signals (for a recent review). To achieve this function, the basal ganglia connect most cortical areas to the frontal cortex through a series of convergent and sparsely connected pathways, in which signals from tens of millions of cortical neurons are projected onto a 10–10,000-fold smaller population of neurons in different subnuclei of the basal ganglia. Similar to the convergence of 100 million photoreceptors onto 1 million optic nerve fibers in the retina, these highly convergent pathways from cortex to the basal ganglia suggest a potential role for dimensionality reduction.

One possible model, termed the reinforcement-driven dimensionality reduction (RDDR) model, suggests that dimensionality reduction in the cortico-basal ganglia pathway is achieved via a combination of Hebbian and anti-Hebbian learning rules that are implemented by feedforward excitatory and lateral inhibitory connections. These learning rules control the strength of synaptic weights in the network by altering the weight of a given synapse in proportion to the correlation between the firing rates of its presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons. In Hebbian learning, synaptic weights are strengthened given a positive correlation (leading to a phenomenon referred to as long-term potentiation [LTP]), whereas synaptic weights are depressed if the firing rate correlation is negative (leading to long-term depression [LTD]). On the other hand, in anti-Hebbian learning, which is typically applied to inhibitory connections, correlated activities are subjected to LTD, and uncorrelated activities are subjected to LTP. In order to implement dopamine-modulated Hebbian learning in this model, a reinforcement signal was used to dictate the level of dopamine in the circuit (1 for reward-related events, 0 for the absence of reward-related events, and negative values to simulate dopamine depletion). The value of the reinforcement signal then determined the sign and magnitude of each synaptic weight change.

In the RDDR model, a reinforcement signal corresponding to dopamine modulates the Hebbian learning rule of the feedforward projections, allowing the network to learn to extract input dimensions that are associated with reward activity while suppressing behaviorally irrelevant input dimensions. Whereas the original RDDR model was a neural network–based model for performing PCA, later iterations incorporated nonnegativity constraints on the connection weights that effectively transformed the model into an NMF variant. The model predicted that these lateral connections facilitated learning by shaping correlations between neurons in the corticostriatal projections using dopamine-modulated LTP and LTD, which has yet to be experimentally validated.

In addition to suggesting a role for lateral connectivity in the basal ganglia, the RDDR model also advanced understanding of basal ganglia dysfunction in movement-related disorders such as Parkinson’s and Huntington’s disease. Previous studies had indicated that lesions to functionally healthy basal ganglia had minimal impact on behavior. Bar-Gad and colleagues then suggested that this was an expected finding because of the network's ability to reorganize connections, whereas abnormal dopamine levels should significantly alter the reinforcement signal that controls the model's ability to discriminate behaviorally relevant input signals (as in Parkinson disease). Accordingly, restoration of background dopamine levels via dopamine replacement therapy alleviates the symptoms, consistent with results of dopamine depletion and restoration in the model.

In summary, NSC is a prime candidate to allow the basal ganglia to compress information in the cortico-basal ganglia pathway and extract input dimensions that are associated with reward activity. However, the complexity of the basal ganglia network has so far prohibited a deep scientific understanding of the multifaceted neural computations it performs.


Discussion


NSC in the brain

We reviewed compelling evidence that a wide range of neuronal responses can be understood as an emergent property of efficient coding due to dimensionality reduction and sparsity constraints. In particular, NSC might be employed by sensory areas to efficiently encode external stimulus spaces, by some associative areas to conjunctively represent multiple behaviorally relevant variables, and possibly by the basal ganglia to coordinate movement.

NSC is tightly connected to a number of unsupervised learning techniques, such as NMF (a popular tool for high-dimensional data analysis), k-means clustering (an algorithm used to partition n observations into k clusters), and independent component analysis (ICA) (a computational method for separating a multivariate signal into additive, statistically independent subcomponents). Both NMF and ICA are capable of decomposing high-dimensional data into parts-based representations—in contrast to PCA, which usually results in holistic representations. As originally noted by Hoyer, if the fixed-norm constraint is placed on the rows of H instead of the columns of W, can be directly interpreted as the joint log-posterior of the basis functions and hidden components in the noisy ICA model.

Similarly, NSC is closely related to compressed sensing (for a recent review), and a recent study has even suggested to combine the two. Compressed sensing posits that neurons might implement dimensionality reduction by randomly projecting patterns of activity into a lower-dimensional space—namely, by synaptically mapping N upstream neurons to a downstream region containing M<N neurons. Analogously, compressed sensing supports dimensionality expansion by projecting into a larger downstream area. The theory of compressed sensing then provides the mathematical tools to reconstruct the original space from the random projections.

NSC, ICA, and compressed sensing often make similar predictions that only slightly differ in the nature of the basis function representation necessary to achieve optimal reconstruction (for details, please refer to the Discussion of). For example, whereas ICA emphasizes the statistical independence of unmixed sources, and compressed sensing requires basis function to be “maximally incoherent”, NSC does not make any such assumptions as long as the basis functions are nonnegative.


Potential neural mechanisms

To operate efficiently, it has been suggested that the brain might enforce geometrical and biophysical constraints on axonal wiring. In addition to reducing overall wiring length, the brain might also aim to minimize local delays by favoring a high degree of local connectivity. If connectivity reflects coding, it would not be surprising to find that such ecological considerations carry over into brain function, favoring sparse population codes and neuronal representations that are local in functional space (i.e., parts-based). However, wiring cost is likely to be only one of many constraints on the brain connectome, perhaps supplementing competitive pressures for hub-mediated information exchange between network modules.

In addition, evidence suggests that Hebbian-like synaptic plasticity rules allow neurons to perform statistical inference on their inputs. One particular study demonstrated through a mathematical proof that a certain form of spike-timing–dependent plasticity (STDP) in combination with homeostatic synaptic scaling (i.e., STDP and homeostatic synaptic scaling [STDPH]) can approximate the NMF algorithm. Similar to Oja's rule, which was developed to stabilize rate-based Hebbian learning (effectively resulting in PCA), Carlson and colleagues showed that synaptic scaling acts as a homeostatic mechanism to stabilize STDP (effectively resulting in NMF). Interestingly, we were able to apply these ideas to electrophysiologically recorded neuronal activity observed in the RSC of rats during a spatial navigation task (for experimental details, see Supporting information). Both STDPH and NMF were able to recover key features such as encoding spatial reference frames (i.e., allocentric and route-centric firing patterns) and position discrimination by reducing the dimensionality of behavioral variables (e.g., velocity, head direction, position). The neuronal and population responses from NMF and STDPH were comparable to the experimental findings. Furthermore, the STDPH model contained a highly flexible and generalizable code that could automatically encode new routes through the same environment without retraining.

However, more research is needed to elucidate any potential connection between NSC and the many different synaptic plasticity rules commonly found across brain regions, different stages in the life of an animal, and animal species.


Model limitations

Although NSC has proved useful in understanding a variety of neuronal responses as an emergent property of efficient population coding based on dimensionality reduction and sparse coding, it is clear that it does not apply to everywhere in the brain. In this section, we discuss some of the limitations to this theory.

First, there is increasing evidence that several motor variables are encoded throughout the brain, including early sensory areas. For example, in the mouse, running modulates the gain of visual inputs and is critical for integration of visual motion. A potential explanation for these widespread effects is that certain movements reflect changes in the animal's internal state, such as increased arousal during running. Interestingly, these results were not specific to visual cortex but were seen across wide regions of the mouse forebrain, suggesting that neuronal activity in these areas is more than just an efficient encoding of sensory stimuli.

Second, a practical limitation of dimensionality analyses in general is that the apparent dimensionality of the population response changes systematically with the complexity of the input space. For practical purposes, simulated models of neuronal circuitry are typically built with far fewer units than the number of neurons in the real network. By excluding input dimensions that are present in the brain, one will implicitly guide the simulated model away from spurious interactions that the real circuitry would have to handle. As a result, the simulated model might underestimate the true complexity of the task. Rather than trying to put an absolute number to the dimensionality of neuronal population activity in a given brain area, one should instead systematically vary the input to said brain area and ask whether the outputs of dimensionality reduction change in a sensible manner.

Third, part of the confusion about the role of sparse coding in the brain may arise from the wide variety of definitions of sparsity used in the literature: sparse population activity does not necessarily imply a sparse-coding scheme. In its widest possible theoretical sense, a neuron population exhibits sparse activity if the average activation ratio remains below 50% for binary neurons or below 100% for thresholded, rate-based neurons. However, it is not surprising that different brain areas might employ different degrees of sparsity. For example, a network of “grandmother” cells might be able to implement a maximally sparse code, but it would have to do so by sacrificing representational capacity (as in) and fault tolerance (i.e., the capacity to handle neuronal noise or the loss of a subset of neurons). Instead, some brain areas might prefer to operate at a degree of sparsity that still allows for some level of robustness or adaptability. It is conceivable that this “point of operation” might depend on the complexity of the stimulus to be encoded or the task to be performed—for example, favoring an extremely sparse code in V1 but giving rise to a slightly denser code with greater representational capacity in higher-order visual areas such as MSTd, which could lead to compact and multifaceted encodings of various perceptual variables (see Discussion in).

Furthermore, NSC does not apply to many regions of the brain, especially when the role of the brain area is to cause behavior. Two prominent examples in which NSC has not been observed are the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and motor cortex. For one, studies indicate that the population code in these regions may be quite dense (as in). For another, dimensionality reduction studies in these regions suggest that individually neurons typically encode multiple task-related signals at once, such as the animal's upcoming choice, state, and the strength of sensory evidence. Whereas feedforward neural networks are better predictors of neuronal processing in early sensory areas, it is interesting to note that motor activity seems to be well represented by recurrent neural networks as well as models based on random projection theory.

There is increasing evidence that responses in the primary motor cortex (M1) are neither sparse nor parts based. Instead, M1 neurons tend to be active during most movements, and response patterns of individual neurons rarely match those of individual muscles. In addition, M1 neurons show temporally complex patterns of activity leading to high-dimensional population activity, as measured by PCA during a reaching task. These findings might be due to the role of the motor system, which is to cause behavior rather than represent features. Motor cortex can be understood as part of a larger dynamical system spanning many areas, including the spinal cord, and incorporating sensory feedback (for a recent review). In this view, correlations between activity and movement parameters need not represent anything so long as the right patterns of activity are created at the level of the spinal cord.


Potential for NSC in other brain regions

There are several nonsensory areas that may demonstrate NSC. In this section we point to evidence that suggests this is the case but also discuss how sparse activity in these regions differs from NSC in sensory systems. We suggest that further studies should be carried out to assess the potential for NSC in these regions.


Hippocampus

There are aspects of the hippocampus that are comparable to the ideas of NSC proposed here. For example, the dentate gyrus is often associated with sparse activity. The expansion from a dense, enthorhinal cortex coding to sparse dentate gyrus activity suggested a mechanism of pattern separation. Since these early theories, accumulating evidence has supported the role of the dentate gyrus in pattern separation. However, the dentate gyrus projects to a highly recurrent CA3 region, which does not appear to be sparse or reduce dimensionality. Rather, the CA3 region has a role in pattern completion through autoassociation. Another feature of hippocampal processing that is related to NSC may be the place cell itself. Sparsity has long been used as a metric for place cell quality. A place cell is said to be sparse if it fires in a small region of the environment, and this is related to how much spatial information that cell encodes. In a sense, each place cell can be thought of as a "part" of the environment, and these parts cover the entire environment. Although this evidence points to sparse, parts-based, and reduced coding in some hippocampal regions, it does differ from the NSC representations in sensory areas. That is, sparse coding as defined previously for sensory areas is not necessarily the same as sparsity or as sparse activity leading to pattern separation. Still, it would be of interest to apply NSC to the hippocampal inputs, similar to the methods applied to RSC during a spatial navigation task, to see if sparse, reduced basis functions emerge in other regions.


Parietal cortex

Analogous to our modeling work in MSTd, it might be possible to apply NSC to other areas of the posterior parietal cortex that are involved in multisensory heading perception. Areas such as the ventral intraparietal (VIP) area and the visual posterior sylvian (VPS) area are also known to respond to optic flow, but they increasingly respond to inertial vestibular stimulation as well. Although the degree of sparsity of the population code in VIP and VPS is not known, the fact that neurons in these areas respond to mixtures of visual and vestibular heading cues make them prime examples to be examined with an NSC-based modeling approach.

Elsewhere in parietal cortex, single neurons act as basis functions to represent the spatial configuration of objects with respect to multiple reference frames (e.g., by transforming eye-centered to body-centered coordinates). This is similar to the integration of multimodal heading cues mentioned previously, as well as to other associative areas such as RSC, which demonstrates conjunctive coding of various spatial navigation cues. There is further evidence that actions are represented in parietal cortex with respect to arbitrary and abstract reference frames, such as with respect to a planned route through an environment. From a theoretical standpoint, NSC seems a good candidate to find an efficient, reference frame–agnostic representation of various behaviorally relevant variables, but future studies will have to address these issues step by step.


Future directions

In addition to the areas highlighted previously, the essential components of NSC might be present in other brain regions not traditionally associated with the efficient encoding of information. We offer three testable predictions of this theory:

First, we suggest that a variety of neuronal response properties can be understood as an emergent property of efficient population coding based on dimensionality reduction. Depending on input stimulus and task complexity, we expect the dimensionality of the population code to be adjusted according to the bias–variance dilemma. This point of operation might differ across brain areas—for example, favoring neurons that respond to a small number of stimulus dimensions in V1 but giving rise to mixed selectivity in higher-order brain areas such as MSTd and RSC.

Second, we predict that parts-based representations can explain RFs of neurons in a variety of sensory and associative cortices, including but not limited to those brain areas discussed here. In agreement with the literature on basis function representations, we expect parts-based representations to be prevalent in regions where neurons exhibit a range of tuning behaviors, display mixed selectivity, or encode information in multiple reference frames.

Third, where such representations occur, we expect the resulting neuronal population activity to be relatively sparse in order to encode information both accurately and efficiently. As noted previously, sparse codes offer a trade-off between dense codes (in which every neuron is involved in every context, leading to great memory capacity but suffering from cross talk among neurons) and local codes (in which there is no interference but also no capacity for generalization).


Conclusion

In conclusion, there is increasing evidence that NSC can account for neuronal response properties in a number of sensory and associative cortices, as well as subcortical areas such as the basal ganglia. Although NSC might not apply to all brain areas—for example, motor or executive function areas—the success of NSC-based models, especially in sensory areas, warrants further investigation for neural correlates in other regions.


Funding Statement

MB, ND, and JLK were supported by the National Science Foundation (Award IIS-1302125). In addition, MB was supported by the Washington Research Foundation Funds for Innovation in Neuroengineering and Data-Intensive Discovery. JLK was supported in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) via Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) Contract No. FA8750-18-C-0103 (Lifelong Learning Machines: L2M). Sandia National Laboratories is a multiprogram laboratory managed and operated by National Technology and Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA0003525. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of DARPA, AFRL, or the US Government.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

The software used to generate some of the data presented in Figs, and is archived on Zenodo (10.5281/zenodo.2641351). The latest version is available on GitHub: https://github.com/mbeyeler/2019-nonnegative-sparse-coding.


Machine and deep learning meet genome-scale metabolic modeling

Guido Zampieri, Supreeta Vijayakumar, Elisabeth Yaneske, Claudio Angione — PLoS Computational Biology, 2019. PMC6622478, CC BY 4.0.

Omic data analysis is steadily growing as a driver of basic and applied molecular biology research. Core to the interpretation of complex and heterogeneous biological phenotypes are computational approaches in the fields of statistics and machine learning. In parallel, constraint-based metabolic modeling has established itself as the main tool to investigate large-scale relationships between genotype, phenotype, and environment. The development and application of these methodological frameworks have occurred independently for the most part, whereas the potential of their integration for biological, biomedical, and biotechnological research is less known. Here, we describe how machine learning and constraint-based modeling can be combined, reviewing recent works at the intersection of both domains and discussing the mathematical and practical aspects involved. We overlap systematic classifications from both frameworks, making them accessible to nonexperts. Finally, we delineate potential future scenarios, propose new joint theoretical frameworks, and suggest concrete points of investigation for this joint subfield. A multiview approach merging experimental and knowledge-driven omic data through machine learning methods can incorporate key mechanistic information in an otherwise biologically-agnostic learning process.


Introduction

Today, the search for biological mechanisms at molecular scale can leverage an unprecedented amount of information. With the recent development of high-throughput technologies, data collection has received an enormous impulse that has radically changed the perspective toward molecular biology. The main protagonist of this shift is omic data—namely, experimental profiles with large coverage over multiple biological domains. Several levels of knowledge have become associated with emerging omic technologies. The most widespread to date include DNA sequencing (genomics), microarrays and RNA sequencing (transcriptomics), DNA methylation and histone modifications (epigenomics), and protein or metabolite mass spectrometry (proteomics and metabolomics). As technology moves forward, its associated costs decrease, and a growing wealth of data is being generated. Omic data therefore provide direct and convenient access to genetic variability and cellular activity. Undoubtedly, these datasets can be useful only if processed and deciphered through appropriate analytical tools.

A fundamental tool for the inspection, interpretation, and exploitation of omic data is machine (and deep) learning, which has arguably fueled several leaps forward in recent research and is expected to increasingly drive it in the near future. Machine learning can be described as a set of algorithms that improve prediction accuracy through experience, given a certain processable input from which they are able to learn and generalize. Beyond their predictive power, their diffusion in bioinformatics and computational biology is also due to the limited assumptions they require compared with other statistical or computational approaches. This makes them essential in a number of tasks, ranging from the understanding of RNA folding to estimating the impact of mutations on splicing and from the exploration of gene expression profiles to reconstructing phylogenetic trees.

In parallel, the increase in data and knowledge has also favored the development of mathematical models for biomolecular systems. Contrary to data-driven approaches, hypothesis-driven analysis of large-scale omic domains typically remains prohibitive given the difficulty in pinpointing the underlying biological mechanisms. There are, however, some exceptions. Among the various approaches, constraint-based modeling (CBM) of metabolism is receiving a huge impulse thanks to its wide scope and flexibility, enabling mechanistic insights into the genotype–phenotype environment relationship via integration with omic data. With recent advances in technology, we are now able to reconstruct large-scale metabolic reaction networks of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, and genome-scale metabolic models (GSMMs) are constantly increasing in number and variety across all life kingdoms.

These two computational frameworks have mostly been used in isolation, having distinct research communities associated with them. However, we believe that their complementary characteristics and common mathematical bases make them particularly suitable to be combined. Several works implemented this idea in various ways and were partially surveyed before. Nevertheless, a comprehensive and systematic overview on this subject is lacking. In this work, we first review the existing approaches for integrating machine learning and CBM by compiling a thorough record of previous studies based on a combined classification of the two frameworks. Then, we suggest possible future research lines to develop new methodological approaches at the intersection of the two fields.

We therefore aim at providing a comprehensive and systematic catalog of existing interactions between CBM and machine learning while distinguishing between the various methodological and applicative aspects concerned. In general, the central idea is that GSMMs can be used to generate an additional omic layer: the so-called fluxomic data. The multiomic learning considered here then integrates this newly generated omic with the ones already available. For instance, concatenation of two datasets following normalization is a viable option. However, we will describe why this may not be the best approach in practice. Although it is outside of the scope of this work, we also remark that other computational techniques have successfully been used to build on CBM approaches and study the multiomic nature of various organisms. These include Bayesian and metaheuristic optimization algorithms, as well as methods drawn from the theory of games, graphs, Markov chains, and information.

In the following sections, we first concisely summarize the rationale and scope of machine learning and CBM of metabolism. Next, we review and classify previous studies in which these two frameworks were combined. Finally, we discuss similarities and differences among their mathematical bases, evaluate the advantages and limitations of computationally generating omic information, and outline aspects that have not been explored so far. To distinguish among the different types of mathematical models considered, throughout the text we will use the term “data driven” to refer to machine and deep learning models, whereas “knowledge driven” will refer to constraint-based models. If the meaning is intended to be more general, we will simply use the term “biological model.” Overall, we show that mining and integrating experimental and GSMM-generated multiomic data with machine learning techniques can unveil unknown mechanisms in a sample-specific manner, hence identifying relevant targets for biotechnology and biomedicine. Compared with approaches applying machine learning to omic data directly, we believe that a multiview approach merging experimentally and GSMM-generated omic data can include key mechanistic information in an otherwise biology-agnostic learning process.


Data-driven exploration of biomolecular systems

The key problem in an increasingly omic-based biology is the difficulty in extracting knowledge from large and complex datasets. This task can be conveniently tackled through machine learning algorithms, many of which can be adapted to specific settings and omic types. A number of recent developments in the application of machine learning to problems in molecular biology and biomedicine have been critically analyzed in previous surveys, along with their limitations and challenges. Here, we concentrate on recalling the main characteristics of basic methods, with a focus on those suited for the simultaneous analysis of heterogeneous data.


Types of machine learning approaches

A fundamental distinction in machine learning is between “supervised” and “unsupervised” learning approaches. In supervised learning, the goal is to predict one or more targets associated with a given sample. For instance, pathogenicity resulting from mutations can be predicted starting from the sequence as a continuous risk score or a discrete risk class. Broadly speaking, supervised learning methods can be subdivided into two main categories: classifiers, which aim to predict sample classes (e.g., pathogenic versus nonpathogenic variants), and regressors, whose task is to estimate numerical quantities (such as pathogenicity risk level). Several methods, such as support vector machines (SVMs) or artificial neural networks (ANNs), can be used to solve both classification and regression problems.

In contrast, unsupervised learning allows the exploration of data collections by deconstructing variation or correlations among samples. Unsupervised learning approaches are largely classified as either association algorithms, which uncover latent rules or trends in data, or clustering algorithms, which partition samples based on their inherent and often hidden characteristics. Owing to the large volume of omic data, its condensation or simplification can prove to be useful in order to facilitate its interpretation. The most popular approaches for data dimensionality reduction are (1) principal components analysis (PCA), which reduces data into low-dimensional representations summarizing maximum variance among variables; (2) factor analysis, which decomposes data based on latent relationships describing the correlation between variables; and (3) matrix factorization, which breaks down data matrices into denoised constituents. For instance, nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) has been used to infer the ecological interaction networks of different gut microbial communities, starting from high-dimensional metagenomic samples. Finally, as regards clustering approaches, the most widespread ones fall within the k-means and hierarchical clustering families, but many other algorithms are available with several applications.


Machine learning for multiomic data

A single type of data usually offers a partial view on biological complexity and limits our understanding of it. Data-integration methods can facilitate the combined analysis of multiple omic datasets, which may be heterogeneous, in order to more closely represent genotype–phenotype relationships. Data may be generated starting from the same samples through different omic measurements, or even with different omic measurements across different samples measured in the same system. As omic domains are inherently interconnected, signals missing from a single dataset can be compensated for in a multiomic data–driven model, therefore decreasing the likelihood of false negatives. At the same time, the mutual reinforcement of heterogeneous omic signals can limit false positives.

Most successful large-scale data-integration approaches are metadimensional methods, which simultaneously span multiple data sources and can cope with variable inputs. They are broadly categorized into “concatenation-based,” “transformation-based,” and “model-based” integration, whose general characteristics are displayed in. Alternatively, they are also called early-, intermediate-, and late-stage integration methods, respectively. In the machine learning context, algorithms dealing with data from multiple heterogeneous sources are referred to as “multiview” or “multimodal” learning algorithms.

Concatenation-based integration fuses multiple data types together by concatenating data matrices into a single comprehensive matrix. Next, a learning algorithm is applied to this combined matrix. An advantage of this approach is the relative ease of applying statistical methods to any final data matrix. However, combining multiple matrices together can be challenging because of differences in scaling or inherent biases of each data type. Normalization techniques can be used to ensure that data of different orders of magnitude converge on the same scale, but differences in noise and variance can still affect the results, and as such, this kind of approach can lack reliability. Moreover, a data reduction step may be necessary if too many variables make the analysis infeasible.

Transformation-based integration converts each dataset into an intermediate form such as a “graph” or a “kernel matrix” (i.e., a matrix describing a precise, mathematically defined similarity among observations). The integration of the two datasets is then performed at the level of transformed data, hence resulting in an integrative graph or kernel matrix, which is used in the learning phase. This approach has the advantage of preserving the original properties of the data and the capability to combine virtually any data structure or format by applying the appropriate transformations. The main disadvantage is the difficulty of detecting interactions among different sources, missing cross-omic correlations and therefore resulting in hard interpretation.

Model-based integration generates machine learning models from each dataset and subsequently combines them to produce a final data-driven model. This kind of integration can have even larger flexibility compared with the transformation-based approach. For instance, in patient-centered studies, it is possible to combine models coming from various groups of patients for which different data sources have been analyzed. However, this strategy can miss interaction among different data types as well. Furthermore, it is particularly sensitive to overfitting, so it is recommended when the data pool is extremely heterogeneous.

All these strategies are commonly applied to heterogeneous datasets obtained from different experimental sources. However, there are also computational methods for generating data on the omic levels for which empirical means are inadequate. In particular, we concentrate on CBM of metabolism, as described in the following section.


Constraint-based analysis of metabolic networks

Metabolism is one of the major biological components that coparticipates with the genotype in composing the phenotype. Metabolites can generate signals that are received at other omic levels, whereas metabolic feedbacks can compensate or modify genetic and environmental signals through complex nonintuitive routes. Unfortunately, omic-scale metabolite probing is still immature and suffers from major limitations. The main obstacles are high biochemical heterogeneity and concentration variations that can occur within subsecond timescales and span several orders of magnitude. In turn, metabolic reaction fluxes cannot be directly measured at large scale, and their estimation from indirect measurements presents even more challenges.


Genome-scale metabolic models

Despite these experimental difficulties, metabolism remains the domain in molecular biology with the vastest knowledge, accumulated over the past century. Reconstructions of entire metabolic reaction networks have immediately followed after completing the first genomes in the late 1990s. GSMMs are mathematical representations of such networks and their relationships with associated enzymes and encoding genes, comprising the metabolic functionality of a cell. A vast range of computational methods have been developed upon the framework of GSMMs to investigate interactions between genotype, environment, and phenotype. Acting as integrative platforms for multiomic data, they can also help identify nonintuitive phenomena in metabolism. Importantly, they also enable evaluation of the complete metabolic state of cell populations even when metabolome profiling is infeasible.

The mathematical framework of GSMMs is grounded on two physical assumptions. The first assumption is mass and charge conservation, which guarantees that the total mass of produced substrates equals the total mass of those consumed. Second, the system must be at steady state, meaning that internal metabolite concentrations do not change over time. The steady-state assumption differentiates CBM from the modeling based on ordinary differential equations. The latter allows the study of metabolic systems in dynamical conditions, but it is computationally expensive and requires detailed knowledge of initial metabolic conditions and kinetic reaction coefficients. For these reasons, it is only feasible for small systems and therefore cannot capture long-range phenomena or general metabolic reprogramming. Conversely, GSMMs are restricted to steady-state conditions, but they can span the entire cellular metabolism or even multicellular communities.

Modeling fluxes can be crucial for gaining a better understanding of both metabolic activity and wider biological phenomena. At a reaction and pathway level, flux balance analysis (FBA) is currently the most widely used tool to estimate the flow of metabolites in metabolic networks. FBA allows determination of the flux configuration that yields maximal or minimal rate through one or more target reactions. In its basic form, it is mathematically defined as a linear optimization problem targeting a subset of reaction fluxes. Usually, when no other obvious cellular objective is involved, the maximization of biomass is considered as a reasonable goal not only for bacteria under evolutionary pressure but also for cancer cells under a proliferative regime. For other types of cells, identifying the true objective is still a challenge; therefore, biomass is commonly taken as a reasonable proxy. Various FBA variants take into account further biological constraints or regularizations and are defined as quadratic, mixed-integer, or multilevel programs.


Condition-specific constraint-based models

In a typical constraint-based metabolic model, fluxes are the variables whose values have to be determined. Because there are usually a greater number of reactions than metabolites in a GSMM, the problem is underdetermined—meaning that multiple solutions can satisfy it. In order to determine biologically meaningful solutions, it is often necessary to further refine the model by applying additional biological, physical, or chemical constraints. For example, these may account for enzyme capacity and promiscuity, spatial occupation, metabolite sequestration, and multiple levels of gene, transcript, and protein regulation. Constraints derived from experimental data are particularly useful, as they are employed to build GSMMs that directly reflect observed biological conditions (e.g., those in particular tissues or pathological states).

The development of condition-specific or context-specific GSMMs constitutes a further data-integration framework, as shown in. In this case, the process starts from raw data and knowledge on cellular physiology that are aggregated and converted into a GSMM. Although in the early phases of this field, global reconstructions were built by long manual efforts to aggregate and make sense of scattered information, methods to partially automate this process are now available, and in principle, they can be used to construct hundreds of knowledge-driven models. General-purpose GSMMs can then be used as scaffolds onto which omic data are mapped during the successive integration, thus obtaining newly refined models with additional constraints. Mapped data can be transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic profiles or information on splice isoforms or codon usage, as implemented in a number of works and software packages. Depending on the external data introduced, it is possible to generate GSMMs that reflect specific properties or states of particular tissues, cell types, microbial strains, or even individual cells.

Transcriptional profiles are the most popular omic to build context-specific GSMMs via an array of methods utilizing different contextualizing criteria. Switch-based methods utilize a gene expression threshold to turn off reactions associated with lowly expressed genes, thereby pruning the metabolic network. Conversely, valve-based methods map the transcriptional information on the constraint-based model in a continuous fashion. There are instead fewer approaches focused on the integration of proteomic and metabolomic data. Commonly, algorithms such as iMAT, INIT, and METRADE provide a framework for integrating both gene and protein expression data, with IOMA providing the opportunity to integrate proteomic and metabolomic data. However, more specific approaches for protein data are being developed. For instance, a method known as GECKO constructs a GSMM with enzymatic constraints using kinetic and omic data. This is achieved by expanding the stoichiometric matrix of the GSMM to include rows representing enzymes and columns representing enzyme usage in reactions, whereas enzyme kinetics (kcat values) is modeled by pseudostoichiometric coefficients in this matrix. Constraining protein abundance in this way has the effect of significantly reducing flux variability and improving the accuracy of the predictions. Methodology and applications for condition-specific GSMMs have been reviewed in detail elsewhere.


Combining constraint-based analysis and machine learning

The integration of CBM of metabolism with machine learning is based on two key ideas. The first is that genetic and environmental perturbations propagate in a nonlinear fashion through metabolic networks and assume patterns on a reaction flux level that may be used to gain mechanistic insights into several research questions. The second is that GSMMs can act as both an analytical framework to represent biological systems and generators of information to be mined. In other words, flux solutions obtained by a GSMM can be treated like additional numerical data (another omic layer) and analyzed via learning algorithms. With the knowledge-driven metabolic model being set, the information extracted from it may depend on the task of interest and on the variables deemed relevant. As a result, it is possible to leverage the whole array of techniques defined on CBM (see the "Constraint-based analysis of metabolic networks" section). Additionally, constraints at the metabolic level can be used to enhance the learning in multiomic settings, as explained in this section.

Despite these potential advantages, such integrated methodologies have remained confined to a few studies so far. In this section—to the best of our knowledge—we outline the existing examples of integration between machine learning and CBM grouped based on the task type as shown in and.

The studies reviewed here and included in the table are grouped by task type: supervised or unsupervised fluxomic analysis, supervised or unsupervised multiomic analysis, generation of constraint-based models, and fluxomic data. Each study is annotated with the methodological building blocks related to the two computational frameworks (CBM and machine learning). Abbreviations: ANN, artificial neural network; CBM, constraint-based modeling; CHO, Chinese hamster ovary; dFBA, dynamic FBA; FBA, flux balance analysis; FCA, flux coupling analysis; FVA, flux variability analysis; GLM, generalized linear model; kNN, k-nearest neighbors; LASSO, least absolute shrinkage and selection operator; ME model, metabolism and gene expression genome-scale metabolic model; NMF, nonnegative matrix factorization; PCA, principal component analysis; pFBA, parsimonious FBA; RNN, recurrent neural network; SVM, support vector machine; SVM-RFE, SVM based on recursive feature elimination; TFBA, thermodynamics-based FBA; XGBoost, extreme gradient boosted trees.


Supervised fluxomic analysis

The baseline case is when biological targets are predicted based solely on metabolic fluxes obtained from general-purpose GSMMs. The output of FBA or related techniques can then be fed to algorithms for supervised analysis without data integration being involved.

For instance, Sridhara and colleagues investigated whether bacterial growth conditions could be inferred from intracellular flux configurations. Multinomial logistic regression was used in conjunction with least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) regularization to relate growth conditions to simulated metabolic fluxes. The regression enabled prediction of growth conditions for a particular FBA solution by using internal metabolic fluxes as input, with regularization serving to select the most relevant fluxes and prevent overfitting.

In the context of human metabolism, integration of constraint-based models and machine learning has been shown to correctly identify side effects of inhibitory drugs with higher accuracy than baseline methods. Drug-specific actions were simulated by in silico gene deletions, and the associated metabolic perturbations were estimated through flux variability analysis (FVA), whose results were fed to an ensemble SVM. Artificially reproduced metabolic alterations improved the results compared with a predictor used on drug biochemical structures. In a similar fashion, but for a different objective, a deep neural network and a differential search algorithm were applied to design gene deletion interventions in E. coli for the production of xylitol. Also in this case, FBA coupled with artificial gene knockout served as a generator of genome-scale fluxomic data. Another recent study tested a flux-based data-driven approach for the prediction of titer, production rate, and yield across different bioprocessing settings. Based on an ensemble of state-of-the-art machine learning techniques, flux features were shown to boost predictive accuracy in this scenario, typically characterized by sparse data.

Importantly, CBM and machine learning can be formulated as a joint problem by embedding stoichiometric constraints in a learning task. As an example of supervised method, a discriminant analysis technique based on metabolic network constraints—called dynamic elementary mode regression discriminant analysis (dynEMR-DA)—was defined to identify pathway activation patterns that best discriminate between experimental conditions. The methodology expands the concept of elementary flux modes (EFMs)—which are the simplest paths in a GSMM that characterize the associated flux space—to dynamic conditions. The algorithm seeks to determine the EFMs that differ the most in terms of time evolution.

Expanding the analysis of fluxes to an ecological scale, DiMucci and colleagues developed an approach to predict interactions among bacterial species starting from temporal simulations of cocultures through dynamic FBA (dFBA). A random forest classifier was trained on binary vectors representing the exchange reactions in each GSMM, using dFBA relative yield predictions of cocultures with respect to independent cultures. This data-driven model allowed better generalization than the simple distance-based criterion commonly employed in microbial community studies and also allowed inferring the metabolic exchanges underlying the predicted interactions. In another ecological context, Chien and Larsen proposed that supervised classification of niches of bacterial species can benefit from the information generated by metabolic models. They reconstructed GSMMs for 21 Pseudomonas species living in the endosphere and rhizosphere and simulated 12 media formulations in order to generate predictive features. A cross comparison of SVM, ANN, and NMF suggested that metabolic flux features may be more predictive than purely genomic features.


Unsupervised fluxomic analysis

The exploration and statistical characterization of fluxomic profiles extrapolated from a GSMM can be of interest to shed light on the underlying physiology. In the absence of a well-defined biological target, unsupervised machine learning approaches can generally characterize correlation or variation across multiple samples. This allows clustering metabolic states or describing them in terms of sparser sets of variables.

This was first realized by Segre and colleagues, who exploited a GSMM to explore epistasis in yeast metabolism. The task was accomplished by performing agglomerative clustering on the fitness landscape of single and double deleterious mutants for all genes involved in metabolism, for which the fitness was defined on FBA growth rate ratios. The analysis identified a widespread modular organization of genes into groups linked exclusively by buffering or aggravating epistatic interactions, leading the authors to extend the concepts of modularity and epistasis based on the observed intermodule connections rather than on intramodule properties. An analogous approach was employed in the context of gut microbiome ecology, in which Magnúsdóttir and colleagues performed a large-scale study on the ecological interactions among community members across a combination of Western or high-fiber diets and aerobic or anaerobic conditions. Similarly, these interactions were evaluated in terms of hierarchical clustering of the relative growth between interacting and noninteracting pairs predicted through FBA. The microbes were then profiled based on their interactions, identifying three major subgroups enriched in species with different carbohydrate fermentation capabilities. Positive interactions were observed mainly among metabolically distant organisms, confirming independent studies.

Furthermore, dimensionality reduction techniques can be employed to deconstruct the entire flux space associated with constraint-based models, as done for E. coli. In this case, PCA served to filter and synthesize the variation in biochemical reaction fluxes achievable by the metabolic network. Nontrivial cross correlations among pathway activities can be captured, and associated metabolic capabilities can be comprehensively evaluated in terms of imposed constraints.

Finally, as in the supervised scenario, the analysis of multiple flux profiles can benefit from constraining a learning objective with stoichiometric knowledge. Alternative hybrids of PCA and stoichiometric flux analysis, termed as principal elementary mode analysis (PEMA) and principal metabolic flux mode analysis (PMFA), extract flux modes generated by metabolic models that contribute the most significantly toward variance while penalizing deviations from the steady state. These methods are able to overcome some of the shortcomings of using general PCA for the statistical interrogation of flux distributions—e.g., the overlooking of reaction stoichiometry and the need for a predefined set of pathways. PEMA was also extended to analyze non-steady-state EFMs.


Supervised multiomic analysis

When experimental data is available, it can be aggregated with CBM-generated fluxomes to build multiomic sets of features and predict targets of interest. Thanks to the peculiar advantages of each individual data-integration approach, there are multiple ways to combine them depending on the questions addressed and on the available resources. One-stage integration by machine learning methods is a possibility, as described in the Machine learning for multiomic data.

This strategy was first investigated to predict metabolic reaction essentiality in E. coli. FBA-like approaches coupled with artificial gene deletions can efficiently estimate essential reactions, although this often requires precise knowledge of nutrient availability in a given condition. The essentiality is usually evaluated merely based on the biomass accumulation rate, which may be an imprecise estimator in some cases. Plaimas and colleagues investigated whether it could be possible to improve FBA predictions by combining the estimated growth rate with additional topological, genomic, and transcriptomic data. By using an SVM as classifier, they successfully verified an improvement in accuracy. An analogous approach was used by Szappanos and colleagues to predict positive and negative genetic interactions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. A random forest was trained with FBA-based fitness and genetic interaction scores in addition to a large array of gene-pair characteristics such as paralogy, protein annotations, protein interaction network topology, single deletant fitness, mRNA expression, quantitative phenotypic correlation, and compartment localization. Traditional features were shown to give low precision for the majority of gene interactions, whereas FBA-based features brought significant improvements in predictive precision and recall, indicating that genome-scale CBM captures relevant information that is missed by gene-level traditional features. The approach was tested again in the context of gene essentiality prediction by Nandi and colleagues, who instead employed flux coupling analysis (FCA) as feature generator to take gene adaptability into account in varying environmental conditions.

However, the metabolic capabilities of a cell population vary according to environmental and genetic conditions. For the sake of prediction, it is therefore important that metabolic information extracted by GSMMs reflects the differences between these conditions. This can be achieved through the creation of condition-specific metabolic models (see the "Condition-specific constraint-based models" section). This constraint-based integration was used for the first time by Li and colleagues to predict novel drug-reaction interactions in cancer. They employed a linear programming model to enforce the agreement between gene expression and metabolic fluxes in order to determine fluxomic profiles relative to 59 cell lines, which were used for binary classification by a kernel k-nearest neighbor (kNN) model. A similar procedure was used to explore the molecular biology of aging. Using the transcriptomic data from the CD4 T cells of 499 healthy participants, personalized CD4 T-cell metabolic models and their fluxomes were obtained with a continuous gene expression map. Applying elastic net regression to these individual metabolic fluxes and the chronological ages of the individuals allowed establishing metabolic age predictors and their effect sizes. Using these polyomic predictors, the metabolic age of an individual could be defined and calculated, providing a basis for improved prediction of individual aging and life expectancy. A similar strategy was employed to metabolically and mechanistically evaluate the impact of synthetic mutations in P. putida starting from corresponding gene expression measurements.

Effectively learning from empirical omic profiles and associated GSMM-based metabolic states necessitates fully exploiting all the varieties of multiomic analysis methods. In this case, a two-stage integration can be achieved through the creation of condition-specific GSMMs and the subsequent machine learning–based data integration. This idea was used to predict the metabolic capabilities of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells for diverse growth conditions. In the study, it was shown that combining fluxomic and transcriptomic data in mammalian cells can provide a better estimation of secondary metabolite production, such as lactate. The pipeline includes building bioreactor-specific GSMMs and bilevel FBA optimization, which provided information on the metabolism associated with each growth condition. Later, both fluxomic and transcriptomic data were used to predict lactate accumulation with improved accuracy. Considering a wider omic array, Kim and colleagues developed a general framework for multiomic inference based on various machine learning methods. Their platform can be used to perform cross-omic predictions among five biological layers: transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic, fluxomic, and phenomic. All of them are composed of experimental data aggregated from a number of studies, except the fluxomic layer, which is the result of condition-specific FBA following the integration of transcriptomic and proteomic data.

More sophisticated data-integration pipelines have also been developed. A study used a method similar to sparse-group LASSO to identify phenotypic extreme currents (ECs) based on a combination of metabolic network features and gene expression data. Extreme pathways are subpathways (i.e., a subset of largely invariant pathways in the metabolic network that consistently yield steady-state flux), which are decomposed by linking them with a given phenotype. In other words, all ECs were associated with a gene set; based on gene expression data, those displaying a statistically significant association to a given clinical phenotype were identified. Uncertainty in the kinetic properties of enzymes is one of the main challenges in developing kinetic models of metabolism. Andreozzi and colleagues designed a strategy called in silico characterization and reduction of uncertainty in kinetic models (iSCHRUNK) to minimize such uncertainty, in which fluxomic and metabolomic data are integrated with a GSMM to create a thermodynamically consistent GSMM. Subsequently, decision trees are used to evaluate kinetic parameters. Finally, a recent work has used CBM to support an ANN. DeepMetabolism is an ANN method that integrates unsupervised pretraining with supervised training to build a deep learning model with the ability to predict phenotypic outcomes. In its five-layer autoencoder, the first input gene layer was followed by two encoder layers (protein layer, phenotype layer), and the last two layers were decoders (reconstructed protein layer, reconstructed gene layer). Connections between the layers were regulated by biological priors, with FBA used to set the connectivity between the proteomic and the phenomic layer and therefore embed metabolic knowledge in the ANN architecture.


Unsupervised multiomic analysis

Like in the supervised case, unsupervised algorithms can be applied on heterogeneous sets of experimental and GSMM-generated omic profiles. For instance, environmental condition–specific metabolic modeling was combined with statistical modeling by Angione and colleagues to estimate the metabolic pathway activation cascade triggered by different environmental stimuli. The methodology was shown to better characterize the relationships among different pathways compared with static analysis, especially those occasionally interacting depending on the environmental conditions. In the same fashion, varying genetic conditions can be characterized in terms of associated changes on the metabolic level and potentially exploited in synthetic biology studies. For instance, decomposition of mutant-specific fluxomic profiles through PCA led to identifying novel biomarkers for rhamnolipids production. Analogously, Yaneske and Angione utilized both agglomerative hierarchical clustering (AHC) and k-means clustering on transcriptomic data and fluxomic profiles in order to characterize the aging process in human. Subsequent comparison of the clustering between transcriptomic and fluxomic data revealed that fluxomic profiles were better predictors of chronological age and age-associated metabolic biomarkers.

Moreover, metabolism and GSMMs can be used as a basis to understand underlying genomic variation. The Gene Expression Latent Space Encoder (GEESE) is a recently proposed approach in which transcriptomic information is fed into a deep generative model (specifically, a variational autoencoder) combined with a GSMM. Initially, gene expression data is provided as an input to the autoencoder, returning reconstructed gene expression vectors that are then used to train an FBA approximator. The deep generative model is trained to minimize the loss between the fluxes obtained by passing the reconstructed gene expression through the approximated FBA and the fluxes generated by the real FBA while keeping the weights of this approximator constant. Based on this approach, latent patterns in gene regulation could therefore be identified while mechanistically accounting for downstream metabolic perturbations.


Generation of constraint-based models and fluxomic data

Besides analyzing fluxomes generated via CBM, machine learning can be combined with CBM itself to acquire novel fluxomic information. For instance, a suite of different machine learning algorithms (SVM, kNN, and decision trees) was used to directly predict fluxomic configurations starting from genetic and environmental factors. The training was performed by aggregating 13C metabolic flux analysis estimations with associated genetic and environmental information from a cohort of studies. In a second stage, the predicted flux outputs were adjusted to satisfy stoichiometric constraints using quadratic optimization in order to account for the flux balance and boost their accuracy.

Although in the previous paragraphs we have presented examples of machine learning applications on FBA outputs, data mining can even be used as a preliminary step to gain additional constraints for CBM. For example, Brunk and colleagues applied a series of multivariate analysis methods (including PCA) on metabolomic data to better understand inner correlations and identify key metabolites influencing interstrain variation. Consequently, this enabled fixing sets of flux constraints inside the E. coli GSMM and achieving a better characterization of each culture phase. This strategy also allows estimating metabolic fluxes in conditions that are not directly accessible to FBA, such as in unsteady-state FBA (uFBA), in which multiple flux profiles associated with dynamic conditions can be predicted. The underlying idea is to use PCA and linear regression to define constraints for an FBA model starting from metabolomics data. Because whole-metabolome measurements are generally difficult to achieve, uFBA also includes an algorithm to estimate unmeasured metabolite concentration differences on the basis of those that are measured. The obtained constraint-based model can be used for traditional FBA, FVA, or related analyses in dynamic conditions. Finally, an ensemble of methods were used to estimate enzyme catalytic turnover bounds for a whole E. coli GSMM, improving its predictions on proteome allocation compared with the integration of turnover rates measured in vitro. It is interesting to note that, in this case, FBA solutions associated with random environmental conditions were also included in the supervised learning phase, corresponding to a fluxomic analysis as described in the "Supervised fluxomic analysis" section.


Perspective

As detailed in the previous section, a number of data- and knowledge-driven workflows can be devised depending on the research goals and on the available resources. Ideally, multiomic settings appear the most promising for effectively grasping meaningful biological patterns, not only because of the well-known advantages of data integration but also considering the complementary characteristics of experimental and GSMM-based data. In the "Advantages and limitations of expanding the multiomic array in silico" section, we first articulate this point, highlighting the strengths and limitations of both omic types. In the "Emerging applications" section, we outline important scenarios to which we believe this multiomic machine learning framework could be applied and which are largely or entirely unexplored so far.

At the same time, many novel integrative methods could be developed given the variety of algorithms existing within the machine/deep learning and CBM frameworks. In particular, in the last section, we discuss two related aspects that we believe could inspire the design of novel integrative methods: the importance of interpretability in biological data-driven models and the connections of both CBM and machine learning to mathematical programming (see the "Building on common mathematical roots: Toward predictive and interpretable biological models" section).


Advantages and limitations of expanding the multiomic array in silico

Because of their generation process, fluxomic profiles obtained through a GSMM provide an alternative and mechanistic perspective on the underlying biology compared with traditional omics. Both possess complementary benefits and drawbacks in scientific and operational terms, as outlined in this section, which make them particularly suitable for integration.

As previously pointed out, important differences exist first of all in terms of genetic coverage and prior knowledge. Experimentally generated omic data can span vast portions of the genome, transcriptome, or proteome, despite the limitations of some technologies to achieve full coverage. CBM is instead normally limited to metabolic networks, although extensions to other domains have been advanced. Second, generation of traditional omics requires no prior information, whereas GSMM construction assumes extensive knowledge of the metabolic system under consideration, although a semiautomated knowledge-driven model creation partially alleviates this burden. On one hand, experimental data generation can be therefore more readily translated to new systems. On the other hand, experimental data is also prone to contain false-positive cues and can sometimes be superficial or ambiguous in its biological meaning. For instance, the high expression level of a gene does not necessarily lead to an increased enzyme activity if it is part of an enzymatic complex, as it would be limited by the expression of the other genes in the complex. Conversely, GSMMs are usually highly curated and provide a mechanistic description of biological processes, linking together genes, enzymes, metabolites, and reactions. GSMMs are therefore able to account for isozymes and enzymatic complexes through gene–protein reaction rules. Compared with annotations with an abstract structure, they can also describe the functional role of genes more precisely, as they provide a direct representation of biochemical processes. Despite their well-defined meaning, the scope and precision of fluxes generated in silico are, however, limited by the quality of the metabolic model used and by the available knowledge and understanding of a system, which may often be partial.

If experimentally generated omics are the first step toward a comprehensive understanding of living systems, the use of condition-specific GSMMs can therefore help contextualize and interpret them on a large scale. This fusion can also help identify gaps or inconsistencies in knowledge-driven models and maintain a comprehensive biological scope. Likewise, errors arising during experimental measurements might be mitigated through constraint-based integration, also controlling for biological soundness.

Furthermore, cost and time factors may motivate the integration of the two data types, albeit to varying degrees between constructing a GSMM or its condition-specific variants and the calculation of flux data. The initial building and curation of general-purpose knowledge-driven models can in fact be time-consuming and require up to months or even years, despite aid from computational pipelines. However, if a baseline GSMM is already available, the creation of context-specific counterparts and associated flux solutions is generally fast through dedicated software. Besides, the generation of experimental omic data is notoriously cheaper than ever, but it remains a nonnegligible cost, especially when dealing with numerous samples. For cell systems with already-validated GSMMs, FBA and related techniques can therefore quickly provide an additional omic layer to integrate with the others at extremely low cost. This consideration is especially important in the case of large sample numbers, which are essential for machine learning methods to identify robust and biologically meaningful patterns.

There are nevertheless unsolved issues involving, to some extent, all omic data types and posing major limitations to studies based on them. In particular, we mention the quality of estimated biological phenomena and related biases. As previously mentioned, experimental measurement is subject to intrinsic noise and uncertainty that has to be corrected through appropriate normalization, and small numbers of technical replicates may undermine the statistical significance of the observed signals. Additionally, traditional omics are affected by sampling or technology-specific systematic errors—in particular, batch effects. In some cases, technology-specific issues can even compromise the overall data quality, like in the sequencing of PCR-challenging regions. Besides, in silico calculation of fluxomes has to deal with uncertainty and bias on different levels as well. The steady-state assumption poses a limit to the kind of fluxomes that can be reasonably estimated, and in several situations, it may be unclear how to choose among multiple valid flux solutions. In addition to this, uncertainties arising in experimental settings may propagate to omic-based condition-specific GSMMs. As a result, external validation of FBA-predicted fluxes is generally required, at least on the level of cellular growth or most relevant pathways. Thorough GSMM evaluations are highly beneficial for the improvement of these platforms, but they have been conducted only in a limited number of systems, such as E. coli and S. cerevisiae. However, as a consequence of the iterative refinement of GSMMs through the accumulation of new knowledge and data, their coverage and quality are rapidly increasing.

All these points are very important to bear in mind for a correct and meaningful analysis and interpretation of the underlying biology. Overall, knowledge-driven fluxomic data relies on strong assumptions that require cautious evaluation to ensure biological soundness. At the same time, experimental data generation has to deal with issues that in some cases risk undermining any scientific conclusions. For these reasons, signals obtained from both experimental and GSMM-based omic studies should always be thoroughly evaluated through careful study design, appropriate statistical methods, and independent data (when available), without omitting negative results in downstream reports.


Emerging applications

Despite the challenges highlighted in the previous section, omic data analysis will probably remain fundamental in numerous contexts and spread to new ones. Given the complementary advantages of GSMM-generated fluxomes and other omic data, their integration therefore has the potential for many novel applicative scenarios. As long as steady-state metabolism is deemed relevant to the task at hand, CBM can be employed to extend the omic or multiomic data array, and machine learning techniques can be used to identify hidden patterns. For instance, metabolic engineering could enormously benefit from integrative biological models, which are more efficient and cost-effective than empirical trials in terms of both pathway design and bioprocess parameters. Further, CBM extensions for modeling dynamic conditions can overcome the intrinsic limitations of FBA and open the door to another range of applications. In spite of this, only a few studies have investigated this scenario so far, as visible in.

Our survey also shows that many previous studies dealt with bacterial systems—in particular, E. coli, which is arguably the organism with the most highly curated GSMMs. However, for several eukaryotic organisms—including human—constraint-based models are now available with increasing scope and precision, which constitute a promising platform for integrative biological models. Initial studies have demonstrated this in the context of human aging and disorders, as well as for drug development. The accumulating wealth of data extracted from human tissues is a particularly valuable resource, which has however yet to be fully exploited through data- and knowledge-driven approaches. This union has the potential to unveil novel clinical biomarkers and drug targets if properly implemented in omic studies.

Moreover, there are emerging research areas that are likely to require strong analytical and automation skills in the near future. In particular, we refer to those applications that require GSMMs of growing size, such as for cell populations and microbial communities. At present, CBM can be used to describe multiple cell types, tissues, or even the heterogeneity within cell populations. Given that no cell lives in isolation, all these models will be increasingly important to understand its interactions and behavior in larger systems. At the same time, focusing on individual cells is increasingly revealing essential in fields like cancer biology, in which single-cell technologies are being improved and expanded to new omic layers. Single-cell RNA-seq alone will make the amount of data generated scale up to the millions of samples, or even higher numbers. The spread of these technologies can further fuel the emergence of a larger omic data era, with the associated challenges in terms of data analysis and interpretation. Even in this context, data- and knowledge-driven computational tools appear essential to cope with these challenges.

Finally, as mentioned previously, CBM is extensible to biomolecular domains other than metabolism. Efforts have particularly focused on integrated constraint-based models of gene expression and metabolism. The formulation and validation of novel constraints could aid in developing further methods for multiomic data mining, but at the same time, it poses challenges associated with the increase in knowledge-driven model size and heterogeneity.

In all these contexts, we believe that effectively combining machine learning and CBM allows achieving a richer and more meaningful mechanistic comprehension of inherently multiomic system. New integrative approaches are also expected to ultimately contribute to the progress of applicative fields such as biotechnology, bioengineering, and biomedicine.


Building on common mathematical roots: Toward predictive and interpretable biological models

One last aspect of pressing importance concerns the trustworthiness of integrative data- and knowledge-driven models and their capacity to produce novel insights. Interpretability is a desirable property for any mathematical model, and it constitutes a particularly delicate and widespread criticality in machine learning. Indeed, most automatically generated models are complex and provide no direct explanation for their predictions. At the same time, interpreting results, generating hypotheses, and testing them is imperative to maintain scientific rigor. As discussed before, in this context, model interpretation relies on model transparency and post hoc analyses. Transparency refers to the human understanding of a whole model, a learning algorithm or their parts, variables, and parameters. For example, in multiple kernel learning, the weights assigned to input kernels can in some sense be regarded as their contribution to the given task. Alternatively, it is possible to infer relationships between input and output through additional algorithms or reasoning applied a posteriori. For instance, some methods can determine data samples whose predictions are similar, or they can compute local dependencies on input features.

Note that interpretability does not uniquely depend on the data-driven model form but also on the input preprocessing. A neural network trained on intuitively meaningful features learns a data representation that can be visualized and reasoned upon more easily than a linear model trained on heavily processed features.

It can be therefore argued that CBM constitutes a vehicle for obtaining biological knowledge in the form of coherent information equipped with mechanistic relations at a single-reaction level. From this point of view, the generation of flux data from a condition-specific GSMM can be regarded as an elaborate but transparent feature engineering step, in which a fluxome is the result of combining available omics with expert knowledge and mathematical optimization. Therefore, we believe that CBM could be the key to building more interpretable machine learning models—for instance, by providing variables of clear meaning.

Perhaps even more importantly, paths for building more interpretable and mechanistically meaningful biological models exist also on a methodological level. In particular, it may be useful to consider that both machine learning methods and FBA-based approaches are grounded in mathematical programming (also called mathematical optimization), even though from distinct points of view.

In machine learning, optimization tasks target any cost function that is assumed to minimize the true predictive error and allow the final model to generalize. Like in traditional mathematical optimization research, this discipline seeks to formulate investigative questions in terms of tractable and scalable problems. In addition, other qualities such as easy implementation and interpretation are important, disregarding high accuracy and robustness across wide classes of problems. Many of these goals are shared also by metabolic CBM. First, tractability and scalability remain of primary interest, especially with the growing size of GSMMs and microbial community models. Second, highly precise solutions are not indispensable, as long as they define the phenotypic state(s) associated with prior assumptions. In fact, the use of regularization is starting to be recognized as a standard in FBA, with the goal of identifying more realistic solutions, especially when the full flux distribution is used for inference or postprocessing. Moreover, the ease in implementation and interpretation of FBA-related approaches is usually guaranteed by embedding physical, biochemical, or evolutionary assumptions.

This underlying connection can potentially be exploited to develop novel hybrid methods and provide a second way toward more transparent biological models. For instance, the learning problem can be formulated by integrating constraints borrowed from a knowledge-driven model. This idea has been already implemented both in the context of unsupervised fluxomic analysis and supervised fluxomic analysis, as described in the "Combining constraint-based analysis and machine learning" section. However, the existing case studies are limited, and more work is needed to understand how to effectively integrate mechanistic biological information in data-driven algorithms, especially given their variety and heterogeneity. Although challenging, the idea appears particularly promising if extended to multiview learning methods that would thereby fully leverage an expanded combination of data and knowledge.


Conclusion

The use of machine and deep learning in computational and systems biology will keep growing in parallel with the rapid advancement of high-throughput omic technologies. However, extensions of current methodologies are needed to adapt to the heterogeneous, multidimensional nature of omic data. Here, we have explored the joint application of machine learning and genome-scale metabolic modeling in the context of multiomic analysis, evaluating strengths and pitfalls in developing hybrid methods that draw from both fields. Machine learning is a valuable tool for deconstructing biological complexity for the purposes of condensing high-volume multiomic datasets and extracting relevant outputs from them. In turn, CBM makes it possible to analyze metabolic activities associated with distinct properties or states specific to each cell, tissue, or community. This is achieved through multiomic data integration and the estimation of an additional (flux)omic layer that is closer to cellular phenotype.

CBM can provide ways to inject mechanistic knowledge within novel multiview methods, aiding in the achievement of data- and knowledge-driven analysis of biological systems. Given the increasing recognition of the importance of metabolism and mechanism-aware omic data analysis in a range of biomedical and biotechnological problems, we envisage that this multiomic machine learning approach could be useful to researchers across computational biology.


Predictive learning: its key role in early cognitive development

Yukie Nagai — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2019. PMC6452246, CC BY 4.0.

What is a fundamental ability for cognitive development? Although many researchers have been addressing this question, no shared understanding has been acquired yet. We propose that predictive learning of sensorimotor signals plays a key role in early cognitive development. The human brain is known to represent sensorimotor signals in a predictive manner, i.e. it attempts to minimize prediction error between incoming sensory signals and top–down prediction. We extend this view and suggest that two mechanisms for minimizing prediction error lead to the development of cognitive abilities during early infancy. The first mechanism is to update an immature predictor. The predictor must be trained through sensorimotor experiences because it does not inherently have prediction ability. The second mechanism is to execute an action anticipated by the predictor. Interacting with other individuals often increases prediction error, which can be minimized by executing one's own action corresponding to others’ action. Our experiments using robotic systems replicated developmental dynamics observed in infants. The capabilities of self–other cognition and goal-directed action were acquired based on the first mechanism, whereas imitation and prosocial behaviours emerged based on the second mechanism. Our theory further provides a potential mechanism for autism spectrum condition. Atypical tolerance for prediction error is hypothesized to be a cause of perceptual and social difficulties.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘From social brains to social robots: applying neurocognitive insights to human–robot interaction’.


Introduction

Human infants acquire various types of cognitive abilities after birth. Although neonates do not seem to inherently know how to control their body or how to interact with an environment, their actions become more accurate and purposeful with increased experience. The ability to communicate with other individuals also develops through primary social interactions. Young infants, who may not know with whom to interact (e.g. social versus non-social agents) or how to interact with them, learn to be engaged in social relationships with the help of their carers. A big mystery here is the nature of the fundamental ability that leads to cognitive development. Despite a number of findings from behavioural and neuroscience studies, the mechanisms underlying cognitive development have not yet been completely uncovered. One well-known developmental theory is the dynamical systems approach, which suggests that motor and cognitive development appears as a dynamical change within a complex system. For example, new behaviours are thought to emerge as a result of many decentralized and local interactions between infants and their environment. This theory provides a feasible explanation; however, it focuses on the phenomenal aspect rather than the underlying neural mechanism. It is therefore hard for computational researchers to break the theory down into mathematical architectures. An open challenge is to devise a computational unified theory that accounts for the underlying mechanisms of development.

Robotics researchers have been addressing the above issue by synthesizing infant-like development in robots. Cognitive abilities that have been successfully reproduced in robots include self–other cognition, imitation, joint attention, intrinsic motivation and so on. Their experiments have empirically supported conceptual theories proposed by psychologists and, moreover, revealed new perspectives to cognitive development. For example, sensorimotor contingency, which has been viewed in psychology as a core mechanism for development, enabled robots to acquire even social behaviours based on non-social sensorimotor experiences. However, these studies target only specific cognitive functions such as joint attention. The extent to which these architectures can account for cognitive development has not been determined yet.

This paper aims to propose a computational theory that explains and replicates the diversity and continuity in cognitive development. Inspired by recent evidence from neuroscience studies, we suggest that predictive learning of sensorimotor signals plays a key role in early cognitive development. It is known that the human brain has an internal model of the world. Humans are able to simulate the dynamics of an environment and to purposefully control their body by employing the internal model. Researchers in cognitive neuroscience have advocated that predictive coding accounts for the internal model. They suggest that the brain attempts to match incoming sensory signals with top–down prediction by minimizing prediction error. Computational models based on predictive coding have also been proposed. Rao & Ballard showed that top–down prediction in a visual cortex model led to the development of simple-cell-like receptive fields. Tani and colleagues demonstrated action learning in robots. Their robots, which were equipped with a recurrent neural network, learned to minimize prediction error and thereby acquired the ability to manipulate objects. Their close analysis even revealed that motor behaviours were developmentally structured in the neural network, the process of which was analogous to infant development. Following these successful studies, this paper presents a unified computational account for cognitive development. We suggest that two mechanisms for minimizing prediction error lead to the development of cognitive behaviours: updating an immature predictor to refine own sensorimotor abilities and executing an action estimated by the predictor in response to others’ action. Our experiments using robotic systems demonstrate how cognitive abilities such as self–other cognition, goal-directed action and helping behaviour develop based on the above mechanisms.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: § first presents a basic architecture of predictive learning. A traditional theory of predictive coding is extended to more throughly explain cognitive development. Then, our theory for cognitive development is proposed, where the advantages of predictive learning over contingency learning are explained. provides case studies of robot experiments. Our computational models reproduce infant-like developmental dynamics in robots. discusses further potentials of our theory. We suggest that developmental disorders such as autism spectrum condition (hereafter ASC) can be explained by atypicality in predictive learning. Finally, profound discussion and conclusion are given in §§ and, respectively.


Predictive learning theory accounting for early cognitive development


Basic architecture of predictive learning

illustrates a basic architecture of predictive learning that is modified from. The architecture consists of two modules: a sensorimotor system (the lower box), which interacts with the environment, and a predictor (the upper box), which simulates the sensorimotor system in the brain.

The first module is the sensorimotor system, which corresponds to the body. It has the roles of executing an action under a certain sensory state at time t and of consequently perceiving a sensory feedback at t + 1 from the environment. Na and Ns indicate the number of action modalities (e.g. gaze, speech and hand movement) and of sensory modalities (e.g. visual, audio, tactile and proprioceptive senses) that the body has, respectively. For example, if an infant extends his arm ai(t) (i = arm movement) towards an object sj(t) (j = visual sense), the sensorimotor system receives a tactile signal sk(t + 1) (k = tactile sense) as well as a visual feedback sj(t + 1) when he reaches the object. How to segment sensory and action modalities and how to discretize time depend on target scenarios.

The second module is the predictor, which represents the internal model of the sensorimotor system. The predictor receives and the efference copy of in order to estimate both a sensory state and a motor signal at t + 1, while the sensorimotor system affects the environment. The aim of the predictor is to accurately simulate the sensorimotor system by learning to minimize prediction error, which is calculated as the difference between the actual sensory feedback and the predicted one: Note that the predictor can have a hierarchical structure to calculate and minimize many different levels of prediction error, although illustrates the predictor as a box for the sake of simplicity. The prediction error usually appears to have a larger value in the early stage of development and is gradually minimized through sensorimotor learning. We suggest that this learning process and the process of executing the predicted action to minimize prediction error produce various cognitive behaviours ranging from non-social to social ones.


Cognitive development based on sensorimotor predictive learning

presents our theory of cognitive development: the top shows examples of cognitive behaviours to appear during early infancy, and the bottom illustrates two architectures for minimizing prediction error. Target behaviours include self–other cognition, goal-directed action, helping behaviour and so on, which are assumed to be acquired through sensorimotor learning. Higher cognitive abilities such as language use and decision-making are not yet incorporated in our current theory, which is discussed in more detail in. Of importance here is that despite different abilities appearing in infancy, they share a common mechanism based on predictive learning. The first mechanism shown in a is to update the predictor by minimizing self-produced prediction error, and the second mechanism shown in b is to execute a predicted action to minimize other-induced prediction error. Note that the two mechanisms are interlinked during development, although they are separately illustrated.


Updating the predictor to minimize self-produced prediction error

The first mechanism of predictive learning aims to update the predictor through sensorimotor experiences (a). Human infants are born with an immature predictor that produces a higher prediction error for all events. Although they show reflexes and body babbling as inherent abilities, a primary predictor cannot yet accurately anticipate the sensory outcomes. For example, infants at this stage would not even know how sensory signals represent their body (i.e. body image and body scheme) or how the body is segmented from the environment. Our theory suggests that updating the predictor through the minimization of enables infants to first recognize their body as sensory signals producing no or very small prediction error. Neonates, who are not supposed to have the ability to recognize their body yet, often gaze at their hands and feet, and even put them into their mouth, which provides multimodal perceptions of their body. These experiences allow them to refine the predictor by associating the executed action with the resultant state change, i.e. the change from to. Because an infant's own body usually reacts to his/her own action in a highly contingent manner, its prediction error is expected to approach zero over learning. Therefore, the ability to recognize one's own body is thought to develop through the refinement of the predictor.

The above process also leads to the development of self–other discrimination. Other individuals are recognized as weakly predictable entities—but not unpredictable owing to social relationship—whereas infants’ own bodies are perceived as highly predictable sensory signals after learning. Of interest here is that others’ behaviours are slightly beyond prediction but not too far from prediction in social contexts. Because they share the same environment with infants, their internal models are expected to be similar to those of infants, which produces moderate prediction error. We suggest that moderate prediction error continuously motivates infants to communicate with and learn about others to further minimize the error. Non-social objects, in contrast, exhibit different dynamics. Their predictability changes more drastically between predictable and unpredictable. Toys, for example, become highly predictable while being manipulated, whereas they are less predictable otherwise, or vice versa depending on their property. Neuroscience studies support this implication; the brains of monkeys appear to represent a tool in manipulation as a part of their body. It is presumed that no or a little prediction error generated by a manipulated tool allowed monkeys to extend their body representation. We suggest that infants come to be able to discriminate the self, other individuals (i.e. social entities) and objects (i.e. non-social entities) based on their predictabilities.

Other cognitive abilities that develop through the process of updating the predictor include goal-directed actions. Reaching for an object, manipulating it, and so on are considered as goal-directed. Piaget proposed six stages of sensorimotor development, in which the first three stages illustrate how infants acquire goal-directed actions. The first stage consists of simple reflexes. Infants from birth to one month are endowed only with limited capabilities such as reflexes (e.g. sucking and grasping). Their predictor cannot yet simulate the sensorimotor system, and thus infants of this age do not show any goal-directed actions. Reflexes, however, allow infants to accumulate sensorimotor experiences to refine the predictor. Their behaviour becomes accurate and intentional during the second and third stages of development, which correspond to 1–4 and 4–8 months old, respectively. These stages are named primary and secondary circular reactions according to Piaget, in which infants start reproducing actions that happened by accident but brought interesting outcomes. Infants at these stages seem to actively learn the predictor such that it properly simulates interesting events caused by their actions. As a consequence of this process, the predictor becomes able to intentionally produce actions induced by the current sensory state, which is observed as goal-directed actions.


Executing an action to minimize other-related prediction error

The second mechanism of predictive learning is to execute a motor signal estimated by the predictor (b). The predictor is employed not only to simulate one’s own action but also to predict actions performed by other individuals. In this case, the prediction error appears as a higher value even after learning, because behaviours of other individuals are less predictable as explained before. We suggest that primary forms of social behaviours emerge as a result of an execution of to minimize. When infants observe other individuals performing an action, the action and its outcome are perceived as and, respectively. In parallel with this, the predictor estimates a sensory state and a corresponding motor signal based on. Note that no action is executed by infants at t (see with diminished colour in b). An important assumption here is the correspondence between the self and others (i.e. the mirror neuron system) represented in the predictor. As the predictor is trained through the development of self–other cognition, it cannot differentiate the self from others in the early stage of development. The assimilated representation of the self and others, however, enables infants to recognize the observed actions performed by others as if these were their own actions. Executing the predicted action is thus expected to minimize.

We suggest that primary forms of social behaviours such as imitation and helping actions emerge based on the above mechanism. An increase in triggers execution of to minimize. Imitative behaviours are generated as soon as infants detect an increase in. Helping actions are also produced when infants detect a larger increase in. If other individuals fail in achieving a goal, starts increasing because of the discrepancy between the predicted goal state and the actual state. Therefore, infants try to minimize by executing their own action, which results in the predicted goal state. The infants’ behaviour then looks as if they help others achieve the goal although the infants do not have such an intention. Our theory indicates that infants’ social behaviour originates from the minimization of prediction error (i.e. non-social motivation) rather than from social motivation.


Predictive learning versus contingency learning

We emphasize advantages of predictive learning over contingency learning. Contingency learning has been suggested to play an important role in infant development, and computational models inspired by this view have been proposed to enable robots to develop like infants. We, however, suggest that predictive learning, which extends the concept of contingency learning, provides a more general and powerful architecture for cognitive development. Their differences are illustrated in, where two advantageous characteristics of predictive learning are highlighted: multistep prediction and multimodal prediction.


Multistep prediction

The first advantage of predictive learning is multistep prediction. Whereas contingency learning usually targets single-step prediction (i.e. t → t + 1), predictive learning is able to estimate multistep signals (i.e. t → t + 1 → ··· → t + Δt) by concatenating single-step prediction. a depicts a predictor, where the predicted signals are recurrently fed back to the predictor and finally the signals at t + Δt are obtained as output. A key mechanism that achieves this recurrent prediction is the estimation of motor signals. As the predictor learns to anticipate both the sensory and motor signals, they can be used as the imaginary input for the next time step t + 1. The output signals and are then used for further prediction, which results in multistep prediction. By contrast, a contingency learner shown in b learns to estimate only but not. Sensorimotor contingency was originally defined as lawful regularities between an executed action ai(t) and a sensory change from sj(t) to. Although it is possible to extend contingency learning to deal with multistep prediction, predictive learning provides a consistent explanation from non-social to social sensorimotor development, as described in.

Developmental studies supporting the importance of multistep prediction have been reported. For example, older infants exhibit the ability to predict the goal of others’ action quicker than younger infants. Our computational study demonstrated that this development can be achieved by extension of prediction length, which is triggered by improvement in learning accuracy. In the early stage of development, our system made fewer steps of prediction because of their lower prediction accuracy. Its resultant behaviours were thus similar to those observed in younger infants. The system then gradually increased the concatenation of prediction as learning progressed, which produced behavioural development as observed in infants. Limited capability of ASC to interpret others’ intention might also be attributed to their limited capacity for prediction. A detailed computational account thereof is given in §.


Multimodal prediction

The second advantage of predictive learning is multimodal prediction. As shown in b, a contingency learner normally deals with a single-modality signal according to the original definition. A relationship between the i-th motor signal and the j-th sensory signal is represented in a contingency learner although it can also be extended to deal with multimodal signals. A predictor, by contrast, can learn to estimate multimodal signals as depicted in a, where (1, …, Na) and (1, …, Ns) denote action and sensory modalities, respectively. All the signals are integrated in the predictor so as to mutually affect their prediction. That is, a signal is estimated based not only on sj(t) from the same modality but also on sk(t) (k ≠ j) from different modalities. This mutual prediction occurs between motor and sensory prediction as well as within each prediction.

The ability of multimodal prediction is also observed in infants, which is often termed multimodal integration. For example, infants can associate speech with the mouth movement of a person producing the speech (i.e. audio and visual integration) and visually recognize an object explored by their mouth (i.e. visual, tactile and proprioceptive integration). The McGurk effect, which is a well-known phenomenon demonstrating the interaction between hearing a voice and seeing a person speaking, is also observed in older infants. This evidence supports the advantage of multimodal predictive learning.


Case studies of computational modelling for robot cognitive development

This section presents case studies of computational modelling to support our theory. We previously demonstrated that robots equipped with predictive learning could acquire the capabilities of self–other cognition, goal-directed actions, helping behaviours and so on. The reasons for choosing these cognitive functions include the high level of interest that they have generated in developmental psychology, much behavioural evidence to compare with computational models, and their developmental diversity ranging from non-social to social cognition. It is also important to note that the development of these functions can be achieved by a common mechanism of predictive learning, although they seem to be less interconnected at behavioural levels. The details of these studies are described in papers, and only the key ideas and key findings of these studies are presented here to support out theory. Refer to the relevant papers for the details.


Development of self–other cognition

The ability to recognize the self and others develops through the update of an immature predictor, which corresponds to the first mechanism of predictive learning (a). One’s own actions are highly predictable, whereas others’ actions are less predictable. Hence, the predictor comes to be able to differentiate the sensory signals related to own actions and those related to others based on their prediction error. An important implication here is that a function such as the mirror neuron system emerges as a by-product of the above development. The predictor is expected to acquire the ability to predict not only one’s own sensorimotor sequences but also motor signals corresponding to observed actions generated by others.

a depicts our computational model proposed in. A robot learned a predictor by associating motor neurons (bottom) with visual representations (top) through interactions with a carer (see the image in b (left) for the experimental setting). The model employed associative learning in order to minimize prediction error. We suggest that associative learning be regarded as a type of predictive learning because both architectures acquire regularities in sensorimotor coordination. In the early stage of development, the robot had lower perceptual acuity similar to infants. Hand movements produced by the robot and by the carer could not be differentiated in the visual space despite their inherent differences with respect to time (i.e. temporal delay) and space (i.e. position in the robot’s camera image). As seen in a (left), visual clusters containing both the robot’s motion and the corresponding carer’s motion were associated with the relevant motor neurons because differences between them were not detectable. In the later stage of development, the robot improved in visual acuity and therefore differentiated visual clusters into two: one for the robot and the other for the carer. As seen in a (right), differentiated clusters came to be associated with the same motor neuron because they were originally contained in the same cluster. This developmental change from self–other assimilation to self–other discrimination enabled the robot to acquire a function such as that of the mirror neuron system. The experimental result shown in b (right) supports this. The association between (the columns) and (the rows) exhibited higher values along the two diagonal axes, which represented the same correspondence between the self and other as that in the mirror neuron system. Note that this representation was acquired only when the robot had perceptual development. Perceptual immaturity in the early stage of development enabled the robot to detect the self–other correspondence even if the carer did not always imitate the robot.

Our result sheds light on debates on the origin of the mirror neuron system. Meltzoff and Moore, on the one hand, proposed a hypothesis they termed active intermodal mapping. They suggest that infants are endowed with supramodal representation in their brain, where the equivalence between the self and others perceived in different modalities is examined. Heyes and colleagues, on the other hand, advocated an associative sequence learning theory. Their theory does not suppose an inherent ability to detect self–other equivalence and instead employs postnatal mapping between one’s own actions and those of others. Our model, which is based on predictive learning, bridges the gap between these contradicting hypotheses. It learns postnatally the correspondence between the self and others while leveraging the similarity between them that is emphasized by perceptual development. We thus suggest that our theory provides a unified computational account for the emergence of the mirror neuron system.


Hierarchical development of goal-directed actions

The second example is the development of goal-directed actions, which also appears through the process of learning the predictor as shown in a. Behavioural studies reported that infants exhibit a hierarchical representation of actions during imitation. If the goal of an action is salient, infants tend to imitate only the goal while ignoring the means (i.e. how to achieve the goal). If the goal state is not underlined or the means are highlighted conversely, they reproduce the whole process of an action. These findings indicate that the goal in most actions has a higher priority than the means owing to its saliency; thus, the goal tends to be selectively imitated by infants.

We hypothesized that differences in prediction error for the goal and means produce such hierarchical representation of actions. The goal, which is defined as the difference between the initial and final states, involves the largest change in an action; thus, the discrepancy between the goal and a current state produces the largest prediction error. By contrast, the means exhibits a smaller prediction error than the goal. As it corresponds to the sequential states through the whole action, its discrepancy from the current state appears smaller than the goal. This gap in the prediction error is hypothesized to lead to the hierarchical development of actions. A larger prediction error for the goal would be minimized first, and thus only the goal is imitated in early infancy. Then, a smaller error for the means is minimized after the error for the goal becomes small enough, resulting in the development of the whole action. Although other factors such as perceptual development in infants might also affect their performance of imitation, influences of such factors can consistently be accounted for by prediction error.

To verify the above hypothesis, we designed a reaching task for a two-link arm robot as shown in a (left). The task was to move the end effector of the robot from the initial position (init) to a target position (A or B) by following one of three predefined trajectories (0: straight trajectory, 1: sinusoidal curve, 2: sinusoidal curve with double frequency). There were thus six types of actions as the combinations of the two goals and three means. For the predictor of the robot, we adopted a recurrent neural network with parametric bias (RNNPB), as drawn in a (right). An RNNPB has the ability to learn multiple time series of signals by adopting the parametric bias (PB). The values for the PB are self-organized to differentiate multiple sequences through learning, while the connecting weights of the network are updated to minimize prediction error. Note that the goal and means do not need to be separately coded in the RNNPB, but their relative difference in the prediction error leads to the hierarchical development. For the current experiment, only the joint angles of the robot (θ1(t) and θ2(t)) were used as the motor and proprioceptive signals. Sensory signals from other modalities (e.g. vision) can be integrated as additional input/output signals, which would not affect our hypothesis. The simplified setting allowed us to systematically analyse the developmental process observed in the RNNPB.

b shows the learning process of the six actions: the self-organized PB values (top) and the output of the network (bottom) after 10 000 (left) and 200 000 (right) training iterations. A close analysis of PB values enabled us to investigate the internal representation of the actions. The most important finding is that the RNNPB exhibited hierarchical development of actions, as observed in infants. After 10 000 iterations of training, the RNNPB differentiated only the goals but not yet the means. As seen in b (left), the six circles with a triangle inside separated only into two groups: (A0, A1, A2) on the right and (B0, B1, B2) on the left. The first group corresponded to the actions directed to the goal A, whereas the second corresponded to the actions directed to B. The output of the RNNPB (A0 and A2 as examples) also reproduced only the goal of the actions but not the trajectories yet. After 200 000 iterations of training, the RNNPB finally differentiated the six actions as shown in b (right). The six circles separated from each other while maintaining the relationship between the goal-relevant clusters. The output of the network accurately imitated both the goal and means. This result suggests that predictive learning reproduces not only resultant behaviours but also their developmental dynamics observed in infants.


Emergence of helping behaviour

The third example is the emergence of helping behaviour. In contrast to the previous two studies, which focused on the process of updating the predictor, this experiment demonstrated how a predicted motor signal can be used to generate primary social behaviour such as helping (i.e. the second mechanism shown in b). Developmental studies revealed that helping action is observed in 14-month-old infants. For example, if an experimenter drops a clothespin on the floor while hanging a towel, infants spontaneously approach the clothespin and hand it over to the experimenter. Importantly, infants show this kind of prosocial behaviour even without receiving any request (e.g. gesture and speech) or reward for their help. An open question was what motivates infants to help others.

We proposed a computational model based on predictive learning. Our key idea was that the process of minimizing prediction error by executing a predicted action results in helping behaviour. a shows the experimental setup, where the robot first learned to push a blue car and to cover a red marker by itself. b depicts the acquired predictor designed by a probabilistic model. The nodes and denote actions and sensory conditions, respectively. In this experiment, all the actions (e.g. reach for and push) were predesigned, and the goals of the actions were defined as the final state of action sequences. The probabilistic model indicates that the robot learned to move a car by first reaching for its side (A1) and then pushing it (A2), and to hide a marker by first reaching straight for it (A3) and then covering it (A4). Once the predictor was acquired, it could be applied to anticipate others’ actions. If other individuals successfully performed actions, the prediction error remained small and thus no action was executed by the robot. Only if they failed to achieve actions was an increase in the prediction error detected, which triggered an execution of the robot’s action. In the scene shown in a, an experimenter tried to push the car by extending his arm but failed to achieve it as the car was beyond his reach. Then the robot, which was observing the experimenter, detected an increase in the prediction error as shown in the lower right corner of a and was propelled to execute its anticipated action to minimize the error, which resulted in helping the experimenter.

The reason for the robot being triggered to minimize the error, although the action was originally performed by another person, is the mirror neuron system. As described before, the mirror neuron system is hypothesized to develop as a byproduct of predictive learning. Therefore, the robot in the early development, which cannot yet differentiate the self from others, tries to minimize prediction error regardless of the original actor. Such undifferentiated representation, however, makes it difficult for the robot to take another person’s perspective. The robot, for example, would pull a car towards its body instead of pushing it towards a person if the person tries to pull it towards himself. The issue of perspective taking has not been addressed in our current model, and it is known in developmental psychology that this ability develops later in infancy. Although further studies to address this issue are necessary, our current result supports our hypothesis that the development of proto-social behaviour originates in the minimization of prediction error.

Psychologists have proposed two hypotheses to account for possible motivations for infant help. The first hypothesis is called emotion sharing, which assumes infants’ ability to infer others’ intention and feeling (i.e. unobservable state). If infants observe failure in other people's actions, they try to please them by helping. The second hypothesis is called goal-alignment, which presupposes infants’ ability to recognize others’ action and its outcome (i.e. observable state). In this view, infants would take over someone else's goal as if it were the infants’ own goal if the other persons do not produce an expected result. Our theory based on predictive learning is analogous to the second hypothesis and moreover provides a biologically plausible account for the neural mechanism. In the future we aim to demonstrate more varieties of helping behaviours based on this hypothesis.


Autism spectrum condition caused by atypical tolerance for prediction error

The robot experiments have demonstrated the roles of predictive learning in cognitive development. However, they addressed only typical patterns of development, and behavioural diversity such as developmental disorders has not been discussed yet. This section presents our current hypothesis to account for ASC by extending the predictive learning theory.

ASC is a neurodevelopmental disorder, which is characterized by difficulties in social communication and preference for repetitive behaviours. People with ASC show weaker abilities to follow other people's gaze, to read others’ intention and emotion, etc. In addition to traditional research focusing on social behaviour, recent studies have been investigating atypical perception in ASC. Examples of their findings include hypersensitivity/hyposensitivity and local processing bias in perception, which are viewed as potential causes for behavioural characteristics of ASC. Frith and Happé and Ayaya and Kumagaya hypothesize that the way of precessing sensorimotor signals differs between ASC and typical development and thus causes communication difficulties between them. The brain is supposed to integrate incoming signals to recognize the world and to interact with it. It is suggested, however, that individuals with ASC have a diminished ability to integrate signals and/or a hyper-ability to process primitive signals, which results in dysfunctions in higher social cognition.

Inspired by the above hypothesis, we propose a computational account for the underlying mechanism of ASC. illustrates a conceptual model based on predictive learning. Let us assume that sensorimotor signals denoted by data points on the graphs are fed into the brain, and the internal model (i.e. the predictor) represented by lines is acquired by linear regression for the sake of simplicity. Here, the internal model includes any type and any level of cognition (e.g. motor control and perception) and is characterized by multiple properties such as hierarchy, accuracy, and so on. According to, people with ASC seem to have atypical tolerance for prediction error. a shows the internal model of typically developing (hereafter TD) people. They adopt a proper tolerance for prediction error and thus acquire an adequate internal model to perceive and act in the environment. Note that the model represented by multiple lines loosely fits the data points, indicating that TD people can easily adapt to environmental changes. In contrast, people with ASC obtain different internal models from those acquired by TD people. b shows two types of atypicality: a lower tolerance (the upper graph) and a higher tolerance (the lower graph) for predictive learning. A lower tolerance, on the one hand, generates a strictly fitting model with less adaptability. People with a lower tolerance are expected to be very sensitive to environmental changes because they are always surprised by changes and need to update their internal model to properly perceive the world. Such a characteristic would appear not only in their motor control but also in perception, so-called perceptual hypersensitivity. A higher tolerance, on the other hand, results in a loosely fitting model with less reactivity. People with a higher tolerance may not realize small changes in the environment and thus exhibit seeking behaviours for stronger stimuli. Their perceptual characteristic is viewed as hyposensitivity, which is another type of atypical perception.

Similar hypotheses have been proposed in the past few years. Pellicano & Burr presented a Bayesian explanation for ASC. Humans are thought to perceive the world as a consequence of inference based on sensory signals and priors. Their Bayesian account argues that individuals with ASC recognize the world more accurately and are less biased by previous experiences because of hypo-priors. This hypothesis was then interpreted from the viewpoint of predictive coding. People with ASC and without ASC share the same mechanism of predictive learning; however, those with ASC are hypothesized to have less strong prediction and/or higher weight for prediction error, which results in precise characteristics in ASC. Our hypothesis, compared to the above, addresses the two aspects of ASC, i.e. hypersensitivity and hyposensitivity. The former corresponds to the precision account investigated intensively in previous studies, whereas the latter is an opposite phenomenon less discussed before. A recent study suggests that hypersensitivity and hyposensitivity should be considered as two sides of the same coin. One can exhibit both hypersensitivity and hyposensitivity simultaneously, which implies that a coherent explanation that accounts for contradicting characteristics is necessary. Our hypothesis takes this point into account and provides a comprehensive explanation of ASC.

Another important suggestion here is that difficulties in social communication appear between TD and ASC, but not within ASC. Because people with and without ASC do not share internal models, they cannot easily predict each other's behaviours or intentions. In other words, TD people exhibit a lack of theory of mind towards ASC, as people with ASC do towards TD. This idea provides us with a new perspective; people are expected to be able to improve communication if they share internal models with some kind of help. To address this issue, we have been developing a head-mounted display system to simulate atypical perception in ASC. We analysed visual experiences of ASC and revealed causal relationships between audiovisual stimuli from the environment and atypical visual patterns perceived by ASC (e.g. higher contrast, lower acuity and dotted noise). Our simulator reproducing the causal relationships enables TD people to experience the visual world of ASC and thus share, although not exactly, internal models with ASC. We also identified neural and physiological evidence that supports our findings. Atypical perception seems to be produced not only at sensory levels but also at signal processing levels in the brain. We aim to investigate our hypothesis further by designing computational models of ASC.


Discussion

Sections and presented case studies of robot experiments and an extended theory for ASC. They demonstrate important roles of predictive learning in cognitive development but leave some open questions. This section summarizes our contributions and discusses open issues for further refinement of the theory.


Neural correlates of predictive learning

Recent studies in neuroscience have reported that multiple brain areas respond to prediction error detected in sensorimotor signals. Summerfield & Koechlin, for example, revealed that the inferior temporal gyrus shows increased activation in response to visual prediction error. Apps et al. found neural activities related to multimodal (visual-tactile) prediction error in the inferior temporal gyrus and the temporo-parietal junction. They suggest that prediction error minimization plays an important role in multimodal integration required for self-cognition. Blakemore et al. examined neural activities involving action. They found that the somatosensory cortex activates differently to a self-produced tickle and to an externally produced one. The tactile sensation in the former condition is more predictable (i.e. with lower prediction error) and thus induces weaker neural activation, whereas the sensation in the latter condition evokes stronger neural response owing to its lower predictability (i.e. higher prediction error). All these findings indicate the involvement of the sensorimotor cortex in predictive coding.

Our theory and computational models have not specified brain regions correlated to the predictor. Rather we have intended to model the predictor as a whole of the sensorimotor cortex. A reason is our focus on the process of cognitive development; our goal is to understand the underlying mechanism for development during early infancy. It makes us assume that functions of the infant brain are not yet clearly differentiated, unlike those in the brain of adults. For example, an imaging study of newborns shows activation of broader brain areas induced by tactile stimuli. Although our current models are very simple, in the future we plan to investigate how functionalities of the brain as well as cognitive abilities develop through sensorimotor predictive learning.

There is also debate on sensory prediction versus motor prediction as functions of the human brain. Wolpert et al., for example, suggest the prediction of motor signals as a function of the brain. Friston et al., in contrast, explain the fundamental mechanism as sensory prediction. To my knowledge, a comprehensive conclusion has not yet been reached. Our current model involves both sensory and motor prediction, and motor prediction plays important roles in explaining the development of mirror neuron systems and proto-social behaviours. Further investigations in neuroscience and computational modelling will be necessary to answer this question.


Developmental origin of predictive learning

How the function of predictive learning per se emerges based on dynamical neural activities is also an important question. Although behavioural evidence from young infants suggests the potential existence of such an ability in their brain, it is still controversial whether the ability is inherently embedded or acquired through learning during, for example, the fetal period. Recent advances in modelling of large-scale neural networks have a potential to provide insights into the developmental origin of predictive learning. Simulating microscopic neural activities allows researchers to investigate what kinds of neural functions emerge from the neural dynamics and how sensorimotor experiences influence the functional development. A dynamic neural network model embodied in a fetus simulator would also contribute greatly to uncovering the role of sensorimotor learning during the fetal period. Our future work includes integrating their findings into our theory to thoroughly explain development.


Towards a unified theory for cognitive development

The greatest contribution of our study is to have verified the key roles of predictive learning in cognitive development. Psychologists have presented many theories and hypotheses to explain their findings but separately for different behaviours. To my knowledge, only a few theories exist, such as the dynamical systems approach, which can consistently account for infant development. Many existing studies in cognitive developmental robotics have also proposed task-specific architectures for different behaviours. Although their computational models nicely demonstrated infant-like development in robots, the underlying mechanisms for the continuity and diversity in development have not well been explained. By contrast, our approach has partially overcome these problems; we have demonstrated that multiple developmental phenomena can be attributed to predictive learning. Besides the case studies presented in this paper, we have shown how the abilities of intention reading, emotion sharing and preferential looking develop based on predictive learning.

A neural network model to verify the hypothesis about ASC has also been proposed. Our latest results suggest that modifying model parameters related to the tolerance for prediction error produces different types of internal models, which correspond to TD and ASC. Moreover, ASCs with hypersensitivity or hyposensitivity can be reproduced with two extremes of model parameters. Nevertheless, we admit that our theory about ASC is still speculative and that further studies integrating neuroscience, cognitive psychology and computational modelling are necessary. For example, questions such as how differently (or similarly) the brain with or without ASC responds to prediction error, what types of prediction error the brain detects, and how differences in the neural activity affect behaviours should be addressed. Although several studies have addressed these issues, they show either neural or behavioural evidence that is not well linked yet. We believe that a computational approach such as presented in the paper has a potential to bridge the gap between neuroscience and cognitive psychology. Further studies tightly linking these approaches should be conducted to verify this hypothesis.


Conclusion

This paper has presented a computational theory for early cognitive development. We have emphasized the crucial role of predictive learning in multiple cognitive functions. Recent studies in neuroscience and cognitive science suggest that the human brain codes sensorimotor signals in a predictive manner. We extended this view and proposed two mechanisms that lead to cognitive development, i.e. updating an immature predictor and executing a predicted action. Our experiments using robots clarified the roles of predictive learning in early cognitive development. The first mechanism of predictive learning enabled a robot to recognize the self and other individuals based on their predictabilities, and to learn to produce goal-directed actions. Importantly, the function of the mirror neuron system emerged as a byproduct of this development. The second mechanism enabled a robot to produce primary social behaviours. By exploiting the mirror neuron system acquired in the predictor, the robot produced imitative actions and helping behaviour in response to actions generated by others.

Our future challenge is to investigate to what extent the predictive learning theory accounts for cognitive development. In terms of diversity of development, we presented our current hypothesis about ASC. Atypical tolerance for prediction error provides a plausible explanation for their perceptual and behavioural characteristics. The conceptual model shown in provides a good illustration as to why people with and without ASC have difficulties in social interaction. However, there is neural and physiological evidence regarding atypicality in sensory and brain structures in ASC. Our hypothesis cannot yet explain what neural structures are correlated with atypical function. It is also controversial whether atypicality in the sensory and brain structures leads to atypicality in their function or vice versa. To obtain better insights into the underlying mechanism, we aim to further investigate the influence of atypical tolerance on predictive learning.

In terms of continuity of development, we have thus far addressed cognitive behaviours appearing from the neonatal period to early infancy. We do not know yet whether higher social cognition such as language use and decision making is also acquired by predictive learning. Our speculation is that such cognitive abilities require hierarchical representation of sensorimotor signals using symbols. Inhibitory control would also be necessary for explaining actions that do not always minimize prediction error. Reward-based learning may give another important criterion for development. We thus aim at extending our theory to incorporate higher cognition.


Fusing autonomy and sociality via embodied emergence and development of behaviour and cognition from fetal period

Yasuo Kuniyoshi — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2019. PMC6452254, CC BY 4.0.

Human-centred AI/Robotics are quickly becoming important. Their core claim is that AI systems or robots must be designed and work for the benefits of humans with no harm or uneasiness. It essentially requires the realization of autonomy, sociality and their fusion at all levels of system organization, even beyond programming or pre-training. The biologically inspired core principle of such a system is described as the emergence and development of embodied behaviour and cognition. The importance of embodiment, emergence and continuous autonomous development is explained in the context of developmental robotics and dynamical systems view of human development. We present a hypothetical early developmental scenario that fills in the very beginning part of the comprehensive scenarios proposed in developmental robotics. Then our model and experiments on emergent embodied behaviour are presented. They consist of chaotic maps embedded in sensory–motor loops and coupled via embodiment. Behaviours that are consistent with embodiment and adaptive to environmental structure emerge within a few seconds without any external reward or learning. Next, our model and experiments on human fetal development are presented. A precise musculo-skeletal fetal body model is placed in a uterus model. Driven by spinal nonlinear oscillator circuits coupled together via embodiment, somatosensory signals are evoked and learned by a model of the cerebral cortex with 2.6 million neurons and 5.3 billion synapses. The model acquired cortical representations of self–body and multi-modal sensory integration. This work is important because it models very early autonomous development in realistic detailed human embodiment. Finally, discussions toward human-like cognition are presented including other important factors such as motivation, emotion, internal organs and genetic factors.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘From social brains to social robots: applying neurocognitive insights to human–robot interaction’.

Keywords: human-centred AI/robotics, embodiment, emergent behaviour, development, autonomy, sociality


Introduction

Human-centred AI/robotics are rapidly becoming important as the real-world application of AI/robotics is boosted by recent technological advances. Their core claim, also shared with related/similar concepts such as beneficial AI, human-friendly robotics and human–robot symbiosis, is that AI systems or robots must be designed and work for the benefits of humans with no harm or uneasiness.

In other words, the systems should be able to handle open-ended situations and tasks, reliably achieving effects in alignment with human values, safely and in a manner acceptable to humans. They should also be able to communicate with humans about self-behaviour/reasoning and human intention/values/emotion/feelings. And these capabilities must be unified and maintained even in unexpected circumstances beyond the range of pre-programming or pre-training. In short, achieving autonomy, sociality and their fusion at any time under any circumstances is fundamentally important for intelligent systems in the real world.

It has been pointed out over the past three decades that a robust (i.e. effective in a wide range of situations) intelligent system for the real world cannot be built by combining independent information processing units for recognition, action, decision-making, language, etc. This is mainly because the internal representations (i.e. symbols/numbers defined by the system designer to represent certain world/cognitive states and convey the input/output between the units) can mean different things to different units depending on various real-world situations, often leading to inconsistencies.


Embodiment

The early proposed solution was to build a robot system as a collection of parallel independent units all directly interfaced to the world through perception and action, without internal representations. The units are effectively integrated by interacting with the environment (surrounding world relevant to the system) through a shared body, in the sense that the outputs drive the body and its affecting objects, complying with physics and geometric constraints, entailing an integrated effect as well as consistent changes on the sensor inputs that in turn change the outputs.

Such characteristics of the body–environment system are called embodiment. It casts stable constraints on, and shapes, an open-ended interaction between the system and environment. A simple example is when you swing your arm, its postural trajectories can take infinite variations but always constrained by the distances between the joints. The constraints are orthogonal to the system–environment interaction in the sense that they do not specify individual states/actions but impose a set of conditions/relations that the involved states/actions and their temporal derivatives must always satisfy.

Therefore, the embodiment is important in dealing with open-ended interactions including unexpected ones, because it does not specify or depend on individual input/output like supervised learning of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) widely used as core components of modern deep learning AI systems. Moreover, when the embodiment of a robot is somewhat common with humans, it provides ‘sensibility’ to its type of behaviour in the sense that it complies with the partial common constraints with humans and therefore cannot be totally bizarre, in just the same way that we regularly make sense of dog behaviour. And embodiment even ‘shapes the way we think’. This sets the ground for fusing autonomy and sociality.


Development

The above early solution works for low-level behaviours like those of insects but is not likely to scale up to higher cognition such as thoughts and communication that certainly requires internal representations. The symbol grounding problem states the essential difficulty of always connecting such representations correctly to the real-world entities/events. However, researchers have pointed out that the problem may disappear if we look at the problem from the perspectives of natural evolution or ontogenetic development and have shown how representations and language can emerge from agent–environment/inter-agent interactions. Developmental robotics, aka. epigenetic robotics or autonomous mental development, attempts to model ontogenetic development of human cognition and behaviour through robots accommodating knowledge from developmental sciences.

Some important developmental events, such as acquisition of behaviour imitation capability, object knowledge/affordances (knowing what actions can be done about it), joint attention (attention shared with another), concepts and language have been modelled and demonstrated by robots. However, if we end up with independent learning models for different cognitive/behavioural functions, we will be stuck again with another integration problem similar to the one discussed at the beginning of this section. Therefore, it is very important to achieve continuous autonomous development in which the same system acquires one function after another from the very bottom up to high cognition. If this is realized with the integration of details on individual developmental events as referenced above, it will solve all the problems discussed so far. It will start from trivial sensory–motor interaction via embodiment and gradually acquire new/higher cognitive/behavioural functions up to human-like cognition while the entire system is in action, always assuring the integrity, consistency and grounding to embodiment: fusing autonomy and sociality.


From the beginning

A dynamical system view of human development emphasizes continuous autonomous development as a change within a complex dynamical system, emerging from many interactions occurring in real time. A divide and conquer, or reductionist approach does not work for such a target. As discussed before, functional decomposition or temporal decomposition (into individual developmental events) should be avoided. An alternative approach is to begin with the following unanswered question: Where and how does it start? This is crucial for constructing a single system capable of continuous autonomous development, as discussed above.

As the first-order approximation, the dynamical system aspect of continuous autonomous development can be viewed as an ‘autonomous’ dynamical system described by a fixed (time-invariant) differential equation with initial conditions, which are as yet unknown. Observing and analysing the temporal development of the system is one way to infer the governing equation. This may correspond to developmental psychology. Then the obtained hypothesis should be tested by running the hypothetical system and observing the result. In more general terms, we should hypothesize the minimum set of generative principles referring to developmental sciences, embed them in embodiment, let complex interactions take place, observe how the system develops and compare it with the target, i.e. human development, modify the starting set to reduce the observed difference and repeat the cycle. This approach, constructive developmental science, will provide us with a crucial understanding of the core principles driving the continuous autonomous development.

Since the equation will be high-dimensional and nonlinear, its temporal development will be very complex and can substantially deviate over time on errors and perturbations. This is also a good reason to look at the very beginning of the temporal development, the fetal period, in human development. The uterine environment, although very complex in reality, is still simpler and has fewer external perturbations (stimuli and interactions) compared to the outer world.


Emergence of sensory–motor interaction

The minimum starting set definitely includes embodiment. Then what is appropriate as the initial driving principle for generating various sensory–motor interactions? Commonly used methods are either predefined (or parametrized) ‘primitive’ actions or random motor signals for ‘motor babbling’. However, the former will generate only fixed or very limited interactions and the latter will be very inefficient owing to the vast variety of motor patterns to be explored. And neither one has the function of adapting to the dynamics of embodiment. What is desired is a single simplest mechanism/principle that has both explorative and adaptive functionality. A promising candidate, embodiment-coupled chaotic maps, is presented in the next section.


Somatosensory-guided early development to self–other cognition (a hypothesis)

Human behaviour and cognition start from the fetal period. Initially, the muscles are driven by the spinal circuit, in the way discussed above, evoking proprioceptive and tactile signals that are the fundamental sensory modality for embodied behaviour and cognition. Continuous autonomous development from such sensory–motor experiences to the cognition of self and other will be the minimum requirement for fusing autonomy and sociality. Saegusa et al. provide one such scenario with robotic experiments. In the following, we present a more detailed scenario with an emphasis on realistic human fetal/infant embodiment.

Initial prenatal environment: Simple and continuous sensory–motor correlation is provided by the amniotic fluid's resistance to moving body parts. Simple synaptic plasticity, i.e. Hebbian learning or STDP (spike-timing-dependent plasticity) can directly capture the correlational structure. Basic body map and motor control are acquired. Our model and experiments on this phase will be presented in §3.

Middle to term prenatal environment: As the fetal body grows, less free space is available in the uterus. The body movements are constrained by the uterine wall. The limbs frequently touch the wall, body and umbilical cord. When a limb swings to hit something, weak and continuous somatosensory signals owing to the fluid resistance are followed by a short blunt peak on hitting flesh. Learning this particular temporal structure can be done using the circuit learned in phase 1 above, and may serve as a basis for handling causality and prediction.The self-touch provides a special type of sensory patterns called ‘double-touch’: synchronized tactile signals from two different body parts. This can be learned in a neural layer receiving inputs from the previously established body map. Associated with motor signals, self-touch behaviour can be enhanced, leading to touch exploration of the fetus' own body. Integration of these gives rise to a body schema, a sensory–motor representation of self. And non-self objects (i.e. the uterine wall and umbilical cord) are assigned separate sensory–motor representations that become the basis for various object representations.

Postnatal environment: Drastically different sensory–motor patterns are provided. When a limb moves to hit something, no tactile signals are received while the limb is moving in the air, followed by an instantaneous peak on hitting an object, quite sharp for rigid ones. Treating this as a unified temporal pattern is rather difficult because temporally distant events have to be correlated. However, the proprioception (and vision) has a partially similar temporal structure to before (i.e. continuous during the movement). And it may facilitate the tactile correlation. Integration of tactile, proprioception, motor and also visual signals at another layer may lead to learning a unified representation of the event and reaching behaviour.More importantly, touching by other humans constitutes completely novel experiences. This provides tactile stimuli that are non-contingent with self-motor/proprioception signals. If the previous step 2 of sensory–motor learning is complete with predictive functionality, forming the basis of ‘sense of agency’, these novel stimuli present significant prediction errors. This evokes learning in the neural layer sending out the predictive signals from efference copy (of motor signals), which requires formation of a new circuit that feeds ‘phantom’ motor signals to the predictive circuit to cancel the errors. This may trigger the self–other distinction with regard to the switching of the input between efference copy and phantom motor signals, and a more complete sense of agency.The new circuit has to emulate the motor signals of the target person. It may be created first by ‘free-riding’ a part of the self-motor control/monitoring system because many of the necessary functions are there. This may be the mirror neuron system that treats self and others' action as identical, exhibiting primitive forms of motor imitation. Because it is crucial for achieving the goals of actions to discriminate the signals and models of the self and other, sense of agency is integrated with the models and goal representation, and further enhanced to form self-awareness.Eventually, the new circuit will be able to infer what the other person sees/feels and why they act in a particular way from observations and the model of self. This is a model of another person's mind, aka. theory of mind (ToM), which plays a core role in social cognition.


Emergence of embodied behaviour

As a single simplest mechanism that has both explorative and adaptive functionality, we proposed and have been investigating embodiment-coupled chaotic maps.

In, we reported a series of experiments on robots with each actuator (motor) driven by an output of a chaotic map of an input from a sensor embedded in the actuator (a). In this model, a chaotic map is represented by logistic function: f(x) = 1 − αx2, which generates a chaotic time series for 2 ≥ α ≥ 1.4011… when its output is fed as the input in the next time step and so on, starting from some initial value. The time series is not divergent but aperiodically oscillating. Also, the map has (quasi-)attractors that vary with α.

Our base model assumed no explicit signal interconnections among the maps. A limited amount of symmetric internal connections could be mixed in. The maps were effectively coupled together via body dynamics: the outputs of the maps drove the actuators whose effects were integrated into the body dynamics and affected the sensor readouts depending on each sensor location. Since the body physically interacted with the environment, the body–environment interaction was also integrated into the body dynamics and affect the coupling. The model was inspired by the work by Kaneko & Tsuda on coupled chaotic maps that exhibited various (partially) ordered states. Our model introduced embodiment as the coupling field that was temporally varying and nonlinear.

The robot (see b,c, for example) exhibited various emergent behaviour patterns such as legged locomotion (d) and even adaptation to an abrupt change in the environment structure such as avoiding a wall (e,f). The transients from the initial random movement to a regular locomotion and from wall hitting to a regular locomotion in a new direction were completed in just a few seconds (g). Note that the robots were provided with no explicit descriptions (programmes or pre-training results) of any part of the resulting behaviour. The internal connections are symmetric and do not specify any particular coordination. Therefore, the observed behaviour was emergent. The diversifying property of chaos and entrainment property by the (quasi-)attractors gave rise to spontaneous exploration and self-stabilization of various oscillatory modes of the body–environment system. The exploration and stabilization emerge as the intrinsic properties of the whole embodied dynamics without distinct functional components, learning or rewards.

Recently, Shim & Husbands greatly enhanced the generality and effectiveness of the framework by introducing sensory adaptation and dynamic order parameters. Der & Martius proposed an alternative framework using a novel synaptic learning mechanism with very similar aims.


Modelling fetal development

We have been modelling a human fetus in utero undergoing spontaneous sensory–motor interactions and learning. A learning and self-organizing neural network (the brain model) was embedded in a realistic physical model of the human fetal body in the uterus, driven to generate spontaneous movements in a similar way to the insect model presented earlier. In terms of sensory–motor interaction, the intrauterine environment is far less complex than the postnatal extrauterine (outside) environment, making it a comparably more feasible target of modelling and experimenting.

Yamada et al. report our current version of the model and initial experiments, summarized in the following.


Embodiment

A musculo-skeletal model of an average human fetus at 32 weeks of gestation is shown in a. It has 21 rigid bodies, 20 joints, 390 muscles with embedded proprioceptive receptors (spindles and Golgi tendon organs) and skin with 3000 tactile mechanoreceptors (Merkel cells). It was based on multiple sources of anatomical data including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data of historical specimens, CT scan data of skeleton replica and experimental data on the characteristics of the muscles and receptors. The accuracy of the model is particularly important as it defines the embodiment. The fetus body model was placed in a uterus model, an elastic damping membrane sphere filled with simulated amniotic fluid providing buoyancy and resistance to movements. In some of the experiments, the vision was simulated using simple camera models placed in the head providing 16×16 pixel images for left/right fields of view.

The model was placed in a physical dynamics simulator (Open Dynamics Engine). When signals were given to the muscles, they exerted forces according to the muscle dynamics model, driving the skeleton to generate bodily movements and giving rise to receptor responses such as muscle contraction/elongation and fluid resistance on the skin.


Spinal circuit

A minimum model of the spinal circuit consisting of α and γ motor neurons, sensory interneurons and neural oscillators was constructed (b). A neural oscillator is a nonlinear oscillator represented with Bonhoeffer–van der Pol (BVP, or FitzHugh–Nagumo) equation. It is widely used to model the central pattern generator (CPG) in the spine and/or brainstem of vertebrates generating regularly repetitive movements such as locomotion, swimming and respiration. It is also known that a coupled nonlinear oscillator system exhibits chaotic behaviour in a range of conditions. And we confirmed that the model can be used as a biologically realistic replacement of the chaotic map presented in the previous section. An important point is that unlike other work using CPGs, we deliberately avoided any cross-muscle interconnections. Each muscle was driven by a corresponding neural oscillator and the receptors embedded in the muscle fed back signals to the neural oscillator. The sensory–motor dynamics of multiple muscle-circuits were coupled via embodiment in the same way as the chaotic map-driven robots in the previous section.

When the spinal circuit model drove the musculo-skeletal model, a variety of spontaneous bodily movements, or emergences of embodied behaviour, were observed (video). The validity of the resulting movements (limb trajectories) was confirmed by comparing multiple features with those of the human fetus in literature, in terms of Lyapunov exponents, fractal property (long-range correlation), phase-synchronization indices, participating body parts and their movement directions.


Cortical model

Signals from sensory interneurons in the spinal circuit were fed to the model of the cerebral cortex (c). Leaky integrate and fire (LIF) spiking neuron model with STDP, a standard model of a biological neuron, was used. A network of 2.6 million neurons, the number of excitatory neurons being five times that of inhibitory, with 5.3 billion synaptic connections was placed on the surface (grey matter with undulations) of a three-dimensional model of cerebral cortex with random local connection and cortical connectivity based on MRI and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) data of 15 preterm human neonates. This version had no grey matter layer structure, area-specific characteristics or subcortical structures. The somatosensory and visual signals were fed into corresponding areas of the primary sensory cortex.

The validity of the model was confirmed by comparing multiple statistical and dynamical features of the spontaneous (resting state) activity without inputs, in terms of lognormal firing rate distribution, excitation–inhibition firing rate balance, greater depolarizations of the average membrane potentials relative to the resting potentials, correlations between structural and functional connectivity across cortical regions and responsiveness to single spikes. In some of the earlier experiments, we adopted a different, simpler cortical model that will be described in §3f.


Experiment on body map acquisition

The integrated model was run for 1000 s in each learning session. After each session, the cortical responses were examined by stimulating all body parts and their combinations. For comparison, an identical fetus model was placed on a flat plane, simulating an extreme version of preterm birth, for the same experimental procedure. We obtained clear results in which the cortex learned in the normal condition exhibited strong and well segregated (body-part wise) responses, which contrasted with much weaker unsegregated responses in the ‘preterm’ (extrauterine learning) version (d).

This contrast was clearly owing to the different structuring of sensory information. When the fetus moved slowly in the fluid, the movement of each body part took place often independently, resulting in lower somatosensory correlations between the body parts, and the continuous fluid resistance on the moving limbs entailed higher correlation within each of them. On the other hand, when moving in the air, the continuous tactile correlation owing to fluid resistance disappeared. And when moving on the flat plane, a movement of one body part often affects the other, such as when a leg pushes against the ground plane, the ground reaction force on the back of the trunk changes. In summary, the modularity and stability of the correlational structure of the somatosensory signals are higher in the uterus, allowing the cortex to learn a clearly segregated body representation. This fills in the first step of the hypothetical developmental scenario presented earlier.


Experiment on multi-sensor integration

Multi-modal sensory integration is an important step in early cognitive development. Developmental studies suggest a possibility that somatosensory learning during the fetal period is an important prerequisite for achieving integration in the postnatal period. In order to test this hypothesis, we examined visual–somatosensory multi-modal responses in our embodied brain models.

After learning under the two conditions in the same way as the first experiment, the cortical models were transplanted on to identical bodies whose parameters were set to 40 weeks' gestational age and laid on the flat plane. This was to simulate neonates, one of which underwent intrauterine learning and another, extrauterine. A multi-modal sensory input was generated from the arm movement in front of the eyes. The synchronized visual, proprioceptive and tactile signals were fed to the cortical models and the responses were examined. A significantly stronger multi-modal response was observed in the cortex that learned in the uterus. This supports the hypothesis that intrauterine learning facilitates postnatal multi-sensory integration, which serves as the basis for further cognitive development.


Closed-loop experiments

In the above experiments, the cortex was passively learning somatosensory/visual inputs. No cortical motor control was assumed because of the immature myelination of the cortico-spinal tract at the target gestational age.

However, learning sensory–motor loops is essential for continuous development. In the uterus, the nervous system of a fetus first learns the sensory–motor patterns arising from its spine-driven movements. It then starts to induce its output, modifying the movement patterns and generating new sensory–motor patterns for further learning. This can be the basic process contributing to the motor development observed with human fetuses.

In order to examine such a process, closed-loop experiments were carried out with an earlier version of our fetus model. In this version, the body model was much simpler and less accurate, and the nervous system adopted a continuous non-spiking neuron model. Full connections (many to many) from the cutaneous tactile receptors to the α motor neurons and neural oscillators were introduced with Hebbian learning as a coarse generic model of spinal learning. We investigated whether the following well-known events observed with human fetal motor development emerge in our sensory–motor learning model without explicit programming/training: (1) increase in ‘jerky’ (with high acceleration–deceleration) limb movements, (2) increase in hand–face contacts, (3) the two events occur in this order. The experimental results were summarized as follows.

Significant increase in jerky limb movements was observed. Comparing the model with a human-like tactile receptor distribution, i.e. dense on face/hands/feet but coarse elsewhere, with a non-human distribution (uniform), the former exhibited significantly more increase. This was because the higher tactile density on the hand gives rise to much stronger tactile–muscle correlation during arm movement than the uniform case, resulting in a stronger positive feedback loop.

Significant increase in hand–face contacts was observed. The human-like tactile distribution case exhibited significantly more increase compared to the non-human distribution case. Again, this was because the former case provided a very strong correlation between the high-density tactile sensation from both the hand and face and the muscle activation pattern for the hand–face contact.

Event 1 consistently preceded event 2 throughout the systematic change (tripled) of connection gains from the tactile receptors to α motor neurons.

The above results suggest (1) the embodied sensory–motor learning loop can reproduce some of the early fetal movement characteristics; and (2) it also partially accounts for the emergence of the global developmental order. The reason for the emergence of such order would be the following: (1) the hands often came near the face in the natural fetal posture imposed by the muscle arrangement and their natural lengths, and (2) the increase in jerky limb movements increased the possibility of the hands actually hitting the face. It is important to note that our model reproduced the development of at least two distinct behaviour patterns continuously on a single system without explicit mechanisms or conditions specific to each. As discussed before, this is a necessary condition for a valid model of development.


Further issues toward human-like cognition

The above model fills in the very beginning part, with a precise human-like embodiment, of the entire developmental scenario constructed by developmental robotics discussed earlier. So far, our discussions have been focused on sensory–motor interactions. However, there are also other very important factors, such as motivation, emotion, interoception, autonomic nervous system and genetic factors.

Intrinsic motivation (IM), which is generated within an agent and independently of external rewards, is typically defined as a tendency to prefer exploratory actions that have outcomes that are neither too predictable nor too unpredictable, with a predictive power that is increased by learning the outcomes. Experiments showed that a system endowed with IM can exhibit continuous development through different cognitive stages, suggesting it as an important core mechanism for driving continuous autonomous development.

Emotion is particularly important in the context of our discussion because it provides the basis of the value system, an essential component of sociality. Here again, the similar developmental approach to that discussed earlier would be necessary to reveal the principles for general and robust systems. The emotional system is grounded on interoception of internal organs and the autonomic nervous system that controls them. Although there have been numerous studies on modelling human emotion for AI/robots, most of them do not address such deep structures. A few exceptions are WAMOEBA project, which constructed robotic emotion based on a self-preservation function defined in terms of battery-level, heat, etc. and internal robotics, which presented evolutional models of basic drives such as hunger/thirst, pain, illness and emotional circuit. But neither accounted for continuous development in detailed human embodiment.

It naturally follows from our earlier discussion that we should start from a fetus model with internal organs, autonomic nervous system and more detailed subcortical circuits, exploring emergence and development of emotion, which is an extremely challenging and cumbersome endeavour. If it is realized, it can be a testbed for the comprehensively integrated view of early human development toward social cognition, which integrates the autonomic nervous system, interoception, sleep, motor control, exteroception, emotional system and others into a hypothetical model of the developmental process from the early fetal period to emergence of social functions such as empathy, and how they may be disrupted resulting in autism spectrum disorder (ASD).

Another important issue is the emergence of human qualities such as morals. A recent work showed that even preverbal human infants (6 and 10 months) exhibited a sense of morality. This suggests a possibility of the emergence of human morality being partially grounded on early sensory–motor and emotional development. If such a process can be modelled, it can suggest how to embed morality and humanity as generative principles deep at the base of an intelligent system, not as a superficial rule-based or data-based mechanism with limitations discussed earlier. Together with the approaches discussed before, this will provide a crucial means to realize human-centred AI/robots.

Needless to say, genetic factors play crucial roles in human development. Vast amounts of knowledge on cognition-related genes have been accumulated. Some of the genetic constraints are already reflected indirectly as structures and parameter settings of the body and nervous system of our model. Precise modelling of genetic effects will require a comprehensive gene network model, possibly extended from an early work, and a molecular-level physiological model to be integrated into our current model. Before that, abstracted causal rules on environmental or activity-dependent effects on the body and nervous system can be incorporated. Testing their effects on the embodied interacting/developing model may provide new insights about the impact of the target genes in the context of behaviour and development.


Data accessibility

This article has no additional data.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

This article has no additional data.


Preterm birth in evolutionary context: a predictive adaptive response?

Thomas C Williams, Amanda J Drake — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2019. PMC6460087, CC BY 4.0.

Preterm birth is a significant public health problem worldwide, leading to substantial mortality in the newborn period, and a considerable burden of complications longer term, for affected infants and their carers. The fact that it is so common, and rates vary between different populations, raising the question of whether in some circumstances it might be an adaptive trait. In this review, we outline some of the evolutionary explanations put forward for preterm birth. We specifically address the hypothesis of the predictive adaptive response, setting it in the context of the Developmental Origins of Health and Disease, and explore the predictions that this hypothesis makes for the potential causes and consequences of preterm birth. We describe how preterm birth can be triggered by a range of adverse environmental factors, including nutrition, stress and relative socioeconomic status. Examining the literature for any associated longer-term phenotypic changes, we find no strong evidence for a marked temporal shift in the reproductive life-history trajectory, but more persuasive evidence for a re-programming of the cardiovascular and endocrine system, and a range of effects on neurodevelopment. Distinguishing between preterm birth as a predictive, rather than immediate adaptive response will depend on the demonstration of a positive effect of these alterations in developmental trajectories on reproductive fitness.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Developing differences: early-life effects and evolutionary medicine'.

Keywords: preterm birth, early life effects, predictive adaptive response, evolution


Introduction

Prematurity (delivery at a gestational age of less than 37 weeks) affects 11% of live births worldwide. The sequelae of preterm birth constitute a significant public health problem, with preterm birth complications responsible for 35% of neonatal deaths (in the first 28 days of life) worldwide, and contributing to 50% of all deaths in this age group. In addition to death in the neonatal period, preterm birth is associated with a range of longer-term physical and neurodevelopmental consequences such as moderate/severe cognitive impairment, motor impairment and cerebral palsy. It leads to an estimated annual 106 million disability-adjusted life years, and thus places a significant burden on parents, carers and health systems. Why preterm birth should be so common (up to 18% of all live births in countries such as Malawi), despite the fact that the consequences can be so catastrophic, remains unclear.

In this review, we will outline the hypotheses that have been advanced that place the phenomenon of human preterm birth in an evolutionary context. After discussing these, we will focus specifically on addressing the hypothesis that preterm birth may, in some circumstances, be a predictive, adaptive, response to adverse in utero conditions for the fetus. In order to do so, we start by situating preterm birth in the context of low birthweight (LBW) and the Developmental Origins of Health and Disease (DOHaD). Following this, we locate preterm birth in intra-species perspective, and examine the range of gestations likely to have been viable prior to the advent of modern medical interventions. We discuss whether some of the known triggers for preterm birth fit within an evolutionary framework, and the evidence that suggests that preterm birth may form part of a suite of predictive responses to an adverse in utero environment. We conclude by examining the limitations of the data, and ask whether prematurity should be best seen as an immediate, or predictive, adaptive response.


Could preterm birth represent an adaptive response to adverse conditions?

The null hypothesis for preterm birth having any adaptive significance is that it represents a pathophysiological response to triggers such as systemic or intra-uterine infections, or the endothelial dysfunction associated with diseases such as pre-eclampsia. From this perspective, preterm birth could be seen as a pathological process that has no evolutionary context or implications.

Another argument that has been put forward is that preterm birth has no adaptive advantage for the fetus, but that premature delivery, associated with a low chance of survival for the fetus, instead allows a mother to prioritize her own survival, and increase her chances of having a subsequent, more successful pregnancy.

A more nuanced alternative to this is that preterm delivery may provide an immediate adaptive advantage to either the fetus or the mother, but that the length of gestation is likely to represent the outcome of a trade-off, for both the fetus and mother, between the benefits and costs of continuing a pregnancy. It has long been recognized that for many sexually reproducing species, and in particular for non-human primates, at certain points during gestation and early life there is likely to be conflict between the interests of the mother and the fetus/infant, in relation to both the length and amount of parental investment. This idea has been further developed by Haig, who argues that a fetus throughout its existence is likely to want to maximize parental investment, initially through the longest gestation possible, at least while in utero conditions are more favourable than those after delivery. However, throughout gestation a mother's reproductive decisions are more likely to be influenced by a trade-off between the chance of a fetus surviving birth and thus transmitting maternal alleles, and the fitness costs of continuing a gestation beyond an optimal duration (for the mother), particularly during the final weeks, which are associated with the deposition of subcutaneous fat in the fetus and substantial energetic investment from the mother.

Thus, faced with adverse intra-uterine circumstances, a fetus may choose to trigger delivery (as is seen with intra-uterine infection or with growth restriction) prematurely; conversely, beyond a certain point in gestation for a mother in adverse circumstances, preterm birth may represent the chance to optimize the chance of survival for her offspring. Within this framework, ‘human developmental plasticity enables the alignment of offspring developmental trajectory with maternal phenotype’ [p. 332].

A final possibility, which we examine in detail in this paper, is that preterm birth may form one of a suite of predictive adaptive responses (PAR) to an adverse environment: the information provided by the maternal niche to the fetus about the ex utero environment leads to changes in developmental trajectories appropriate to this environment.


The PAR hypothesis

The PAR hypothesis refers to ‘a form of developmental plasticity in which cues received in early life influence the development of a phenotype that is normally adapted to the environmental conditions of later life’ [p. 2357]. A classic example has been described in the freshwater crustacean Daphnia pulex. If a predatory midge is present in the environment antenatally, the offspring develop a spiked helmet and long pointed tail, which provide protection against the midge, but are associated with reduced reproductive success if the predators disappear before reproductive age is attained. A PAR is also documented in voles (Microtus pennsylvanius), where pups born in the autumn have thicker coats than those born in spring; the cue to produce a thicker coat is provided by hormonal signals from the mother before birth, determined by day length.

A possible example of a PAR in humans is seen in cases of kwashiorkor and marasmus, both forms of malnutrition, where the development of each disease was associated in Jamaican children with different birthweights. Those with marasmus had a lower birthweight than those with kwashiorkor, but were also less likely to die during an acute episode of malnutrition, suggesting a possible in utero-induced PAR appropriate to the low-nutritional conditions that had induced their birthweight; these individuals also showed persistence of differences in metabolic control into adulthood.


Predictions for preterm birth as part of a PAR

Placing LBW in evolutionary context, Gluckman and co-workers have argued for phenotypic adaptations to adverse in utero conditions as an adaptive developmental response. They hypothesize that the capacity to alter the trajectory of development, and thus the mature phenotype, in response to environmental influences, may lead to increased chances of survival and reproduction. These adaptive responses may be immediate—that is, challenges to which an individual must respond immediately—or predictive, where fitness is enhanced by matching the phenotype better to the anticipated environment. The conditions that a fetus is responding to are represented by the mother's phenotype, who in this view acts as an ‘integrating transducer of environmental information’ [p. 88].

In this theoretical framework, preterm birth forms part of a suite of potential developmental trajectories in response to a perceived deprived environment and a predicted uncertain life course. Preterm birth, together with small birth size and reduced investment in tissues such as nephrons and muscle, forms part of the adjustments to ensure survival to birth. It is associated with an altered reproductive strategy, and is also related to adjustments to resist threatening and difficult environments: an altered hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, altered behaviour, increased insulin resistance and a propensity to store fat.

To examine whether preterm birth could be seen as a PAR, we first discuss initial findings showing that early life exposures correlate with later cardiometabolic outcomes, and the place of preterm birth within these cohorts. We then examine the data available from which to infer preterm birth rates in the pre-industrial context in which most of human evolution has taken place. Having outlined the evidence base available for the subsequent section, we move on to examine specific aspects of the PAR hypothesis in relation to preterm birth.


Preterm birth and low birth weight

It has been recognized since the first half of the twentieth century that early life exposures might have an influence on outcomes in later life. However, it was Barker and colleagues who first explicitly linked birthweight to the risk of adverse outcomes in adulthood. They studied a cohort of 7991 men born in Hertfordshire, England from 1911 to 1930, and found an inverse association between birthweight and risk of death from heart attack or stroke, with the effect most marked in those with a birthweight of less than 2.5 kg. Subsequent studies have confirmed these findings in both high- and low-income settings. Over time these findings crystallized into the DOHaD hypothesis: the idea that the ‘risk of developing some chronic non-communicable diseases in adulthood is influenced not only by genetic and adult lifestyle factors but also by environmental factors acting in early life’ [p. 1733].

While in most contemporary settings gestational age is calculated using the date of the start of the last menstrual period (LMP), or in higher-income locations ultrasound measurements, birthweight was used throughout much of the twentieth century to identify infants born preterm. In 1919, prematurity was defined as a birthweight of less than 2500 g. This somewhat arbitrary weight cut-off was formalized in a 1935 meeting of the American Association of Pediatrics, and in 1948 by the First World Health Assembly. Thus, many of the initial studies looking in historical cohorts at the relationship between birthweight and later adverse outcomes did not distinguish between LBW owing to prematurity, and LBW in infants born at term (at a gestation of 37 weeks or more) owing to poor fetal growth. A 1928 study from the USA (contemporaneous with the birth of members of the Hertfordshire cohort) states that of a group of infants with a birthweight of less than 2500 g, 72% were ‘premature’, suggesting that a significant proportion of the high-risk individuals in the Hertfordshire cohort were born preterm. More recently, a study examining the annual 18 million LBW (defined as less than 2500 g) infants born worldwide estimated that 41% were preterm, again showing a significant overlap in the LBW group between preterm infants with a gestationally appropriate birthweight, and LBW term infants.

It is therefore likely that many of the cohorts used to analyse the long-term consequences of LBW comprise a heterogeneous population of preterm infants with and without growth restriction, and term infants with growth restriction (for definitions of these terms).

For example, in 18 cohorts included in a meta-analysis examining the long-term effects of birthweight on ischaemic heart disease, only five accounted for gestational age. Thus, rather than being a special case within the group, preterm birth is a significant contributor to LBW, and the findings for those born preterm have implications for the DOHaD hypothesis as a whole.


Defining preterm birth: do other species show preterm birth, and what are the limits of viability?

An important point is whether survival following preterm birth is likely to have an evolutionary context, as without modern medical support death rates for preterm infants are high. The first question that arises is whether preterm birth is unique to humans—that is, is the distribution of gestations at which live births occur wider than in other species? A cross-species comparative study using a cut-off of less than 92.5% of the mean gestation (equivalent to less than 37/40 weeks in humans) found evidence of a similar distribution of relative gestational ages in which live births occurred in a number of non-human primates. Another study found that if preterm birth was defined as 2 s.d. below the mean (equivalent to gestation of less than 36 weeks in humans), 16% of chimpanzees could be classified as having been born preterm. The authors of the comparative study conclude that many mammals give birth before the ‘optimal period’, and thus modulation of birth timing may be a way in which individuals can adapt reproductive behaviour to environmental conditions; this would be in keeping with Haig's concept of trade-offs during gestation. This has been explicitly tested in sheep, a commonly used animal model for human preterm birth, where severe malnutrition during pregnancy leads to a shortening of mean gestation (by 6%), whereas moderate malnutrition leads to lengthening of gestation in some study subgroups.

The second key question is at what gestation infants are viable without any medical intervention. The importance of this intervention at extremely early gestations (extremely preterm) is starkly demonstrated by the difference in survival rates for gestations of 28–32 weeks in high-income countries (approx. 95%) compared with those in low-income countries (estimated at 38.6% for the first 7 days of life in a multi-centre study from 2010). In a historical setting, a 1902 paper, before the advent of modern intensive care, states that ‘everyone accepts the survival of an infant at seven months' (i.e. equivalent to 30 weeks) [p. 1197]. A 1955 study, before the widespread introduction of invasive mechanical ventilation, found survival through the neonatal period for gestations as low as 25 weeks, and survival rates through the neonatal period of roughly 50% for birth at 30 weeks. Similarly, while mortality is high, studies in low-income settings such as Malawi with minimal medical infrastructure for preterm infants show that neonatal survival rates for infants with a birthweight of between 2000 and 2500 g are 95%, with rates of approximately 50% for those born at a birthweight of 1000–1500 g (roughly equivalent to a gestational age of approx. 30 weeks). In both developed and developing settings, the majority (approx. 85%) of preterm births are classified as moderately preterm (32 to less than 37 weeks), where in general survival is high and often no medical input is required. A meta-analysis of data from low-income countries suggests that the risk of neonatal death in this group is only twice that of the baseline population neonatal mortality rate. In summary, while mortality clearly increases with birth at earlier gestation, survival is possible even at very early gestations and likely at moderate prematurity.


Preterm birth as a response to adverse life conditions

Locating preterm birth as part of a predictive adaptive response implies that it could be triggered by an adverse maternal environment. The aetiology of preterm birth includes a heterogeneous range of causes, some specific to a modern medical context. Deliveries may be medically expedited for maternal diseases such as pre-eclampsia, or following evidence of maternal ascending infection (chorio-amnionitis); infection in itself may act as a trigger to preterm birth. However, the most common group of preterm births occur owing to the spontaneous onset of labour in the absence of clear pathological precipitating factors. A number of associations with spontaneous preterm birth have been identified, including race, a personal or family history of preterm delivery and markers of maternal stress such as anxiety or depression, low maternal socioeconomic and educational status, and low maternal body mass index (BMI).

Recent studies examining the relationship between maternal BMI and gestational duration show an association between lower pre-pregnancy maternal weight and a higher risk of giving birth prematurely after spontaneous onset of labour. High levels of maternal stress are also linked to an increased risk of LBW, shown by studies looking at birth outcomes after natural disasters. Mothers experiencing high levels of psychological or social stress, or exposed to challenging conditions such as poor housing or poverty, are also at a higher risk of giving birth prematurely. Another marker of maternal wellbeing is socioeconomic status (SES)—it is recognized in humans and non-human primates that it is not necessarily absolute living conditions, but those relative to other individuals in a social group that can be determinants of physical and psychological wellbeing. Lower SES is a recognized risk factor for preterm birth in humans, and studies of African American women have found that experiences of racial discrimination also appear to be an independent risk factor. Relative status might play a causal role in the chance of giving birth prematurely: a series of studies in the USA examining the consequences of changing SES on the risk of preterm birth showed that an intra-generational fall in SES was associated with a greater risk of preterm birth, with risk increasing with the degree of downward economic mobility, while a rise in SES was associated with a decrease in risk.


Preterm birth and reproductive life histories

We discuss above how spontaneous preterm birth occurs in response to a wide variety of triggers, and could be part of stereotyped response to adverse life conditions. Adverse early life conditions have also been associated in some females with an acceleration in the timing of puberty and an earlier age at menarche (age at first menstrual period). Setting this in a life-history context, it has been argued that across species there is commonly an association between earlier age at sexual maturation and reduced adult body size, and that this earlier age at maturation is associated with conditions during which there is a high risk of predation or death. Studies of females who are born small or exposed to intra-uterine or infant stress show an earlier age at menarche, with severe family stress having a similar effect. Based on these findings, Gluckman et al. argue that ‘based on the principles of developmental plasticity it becomes an appropriate response to accelerate the tempo of maturation in expectation of a shorter life expectancy’ [p. 120].

We conducted a systematic review to ask the question: does length of gestation affect the timing of puberty?. We identified 16 studies of variable quality, of which 14 measured age at menarche. Of these, eight reported earlier menarche in preterm females, five found no difference and one showed later menarche in those born preterm. The largest study, involving a total of 2748 preterm females and 73 972 term controls, showed that those born preterm achieved menarche a median of 0.07 years earlier than those born at term, a finding in keeping with those of James et al.'s review as a whole. A meta-analysis of studies that included a mean and standard deviation showed a mean age at menarche of 12.5 years for those preterm, and 12.6 years for those born at term, with overlapping 95% confidence intervals (electronic supplementary material, figure S1), suggesting that if there is a true biological effect of prematurity on age at menarche it is likely to be subtle.


Preterm birth and long-term phenotypic changes

Preterm birth can be associated with a range of cardiovascular, metabolic and psychological/behavioural modifications that extend into adulthood, even for individuals born at gestations close to term. One systematic review found that preterm birth was associated with a significantly higher systolic and diastolic blood pressure, potentially owing to factors such as reduced total nephron number. However, the evidence for other markers of cardiovascular health is less consistent: some studies showed changes in intima-media thickness (an early sign of atheroma formation, and a risk for later atherosclerosis) in preterm infants, while others showed no difference in features such as arterial stiffness, another risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Evidence for an association between preterm birth and long-term changes in glucose and insulin metabolism is again inconsistent. One large review reported an association in early childhood between reduced insulin sensitivity (a risk factor for Type 2 diabetes) and preterm birth, but a reduction of the strength of this association in later childhood and adulthood. For adiposity, a meta-analysis identified a significant increase in low-density lipoprotein in infants born preterm, but no significant difference in adult BMI. For these cardiometabolic complications, there appears to be a strong modulating effect of infant nutrition, with preterm individuals who gain weight rapidly shortly after birth being more likely to develop features linked to an increased risk of the metabolic syndrome in later life.

In terms of mechanisms, studies suggest that induced changes in ‘epigenetic’ modifications including DNA methylation and histone modifications might be one mechanism by which adverse early life circumstances translate into phenotypic changes in adulthood. For example, altered DNA methylation has been reported in preterm infants at loci related to post-natal growth such as insulin-like growth factor 2. Another pathway by which preterm birth may exert long-term phenotypic change is through long-term effects on the HPA axis, for which altered activity is associated with a number of cardiovascular risk factors in adulthood. Indeed, preterm infants have altered plasma cortisol levels in the first 2 years of life. However, all studies examining cortisol metabolism in preterm infants are limited by the major confounding factor of maternal antenatal glucocorticoid administration (given to improve neonatal outcomes at a wide range of gestations). Thus, it is difficult to disentangle any effects of prematurity on the HPA axis from those resulting from exposure to large doses of synthetic glucocorticoids in the perinatal period.

A final way in which preterm birth might influence the adult phenotype is through psychological/behavioural changes—the hypothesis of the predictive adaptive response being that early exposure to an adverse environment leads to longer-term behavioural changes as an adaptation to predicted ongoing adverse conditions. In animal models, prenatal factors such as stress or toxicological exposures have been associated with the development of specific behavioural phenotypes. Preterm birth is associated with a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia and anxiety/emotional disorders. In addition to these severe sequelae, there is evidence for those born at a range of gestations of a ‘preterm behavioural phenotype’, characterized by inattention, anxiety and social difficulty. The findings of a spectrum of milder changes in association with preterm birth are consistent with the idea that adversity in infancy or childhood may lead to stereotyped psychological/behavioural responses. For example, a large cohort study looking at childhood adversity (CA) and the risk of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) showed a dose–response relationship between the number of CA events and the risk of being diagnosed with ADHD.


Limitations of the evidence

What do the inconsistent findings outlined above imply for the theory of preterm birth forming part of an adaptive response to adverse life circumstances? An important consideration is that the evidence with which we are examining the hypotheses is inadequate. The assessment of gestational age is fraught with difficulty: the studies referenced in this review will have used different methods to determine this exposure (birthweight, self-recalled date of LMP or ultrasound assessment). In addition to the information bias inherent in the assessment of gestation, the clinical syndrome of preterm birth is heterogeneous. While the spontaneous onset of labour is the most common single cause of preterm birth, factors precipitating early labour (such as infection or poor intra-uterine growth) may themselves be detrimental to the chances of immediate survival and later normal development and thus act as confounders. Equally, medical developments have led to both the delivery of infants at very early gestations, and survival at these gestations, so that studies looking at the consequences of preterm birth include a large proportion of individuals who in the past would not have survived infancy. Searching for evidence of an evolutionary process in a population with a heterogeneously defined exposure and a large number of confounders, even if preterm birth were to form part of a predictive adaptive response, might inevitably lead to conflicting and inconsistent results.


Can prematurity be seen as a PAR, or are other explanations more persuasive?

Drawing together the evidence, it appears that spontaneous preterm birth occurs commonly in humans, and can be triggered by a range of environmental factors. There are a number of associated longer-term phenotypic changes: not a marked temporal shift in the reproductive life-history trajectory, but potentially a re-programming of the cardiovascular and endocrine system, and effects on neurodevelopment. These, in the context of rapid weight gain, an obesogenic diet or other adverse life circumstances may lead to detrimental consequences for individuals.

So should preterm birth be seen mainly as a disease process, rather than one with any evolutionary consequences? The high global prevalence of preterm birth and the relatively high survival rates at gestations of greater than 32 weeks, even in low-income settings, would argue against this. However, the rapidly increasing mortality rates with decreasing gestation would suggest that the idea of preterm birth as an adaptation to an adverse environment is probably best examined in those born at moderately preterm gestations.

It is therefore possible that preterm delivery serves distinct purposes at different stages of gestation. What are now considered (thanks to the advent of modern technology) to be gestations at borderline viability and extremely preterm birth may be an outcome that prioritizes maternal survival, and primarily adaptive for the mother. An adaptive response for the fetus might be more relevant at later gestations, at which infant survival is more likely, and early delivery with adaptation to an adverse environment is the best possible outcome. Here prematurity could be seen as adaptive, but mainly in the immediate sense. Faced with adverse circumstances, preterm birth might form part of a strategy to enhance the chance of survival, but the consequent lack of investment in skeletal muscle, nephron number, body size and neuronal tissue is the inevitable, and detrimental, cost of responding to these conditions while ensuring survival. The long-term consequences of these immediate compromises may well be deleterious, but as outlined earlier, preterm birth offers a greater chance of survival than continuing a pregnancy in a compromised in utero environment. This view is consistent with Hales and Barker's proposal of an adaptive trade-off with relation to birthweight: LBW or premature delivery is associated with higher rate of survival in adverse early life circumstances, but the consequent reduction of investment in, for example, nephron number or capillary density may later on in life lead to increased predisposition to cardiovascular disease.

Ultimately, validation of the predictive adaptive response as a plausible explanation for the phenotypic changes seen in response to adverse early life conditions will depend on the demonstration of positive effects on reproductive fitness accruing from an alteration in developmental trajectories, as seen in examples of the PAR in Daphnia or voles. Pointers towards this may come from clinical studies looking at the outcomes of early nutrition for preterm infants. It is known that excessive catch-up growth in this group (i.e. a mismatch between predicted and actual post-natal environments) can have detrimental consequences for the cardiometabolic health of these infants in later life, suggesting better outcomes for those who are appropriately matched to later environments. However, as we have highlighted throughout this review, high-quality datasets correlating gestation at birth with high granularity life trajectories, in the presence and absence of nutritional and other stresses, are currently lacking, limiting our ability to judge whether there may be long-term positive effects as a consequence of any early life programming.


Conclusion and public health implications

Preterm birth is a common, and potentially highly deleterious, complication of many pregnancies. Risk factors associated with preterm delivery correlate with adverse life conditions for mothers, which can take the form of nutritional, social or psychological disadvantage. In common with LBW, preterm birth appears to be sometimes, but not always, associated with a suite of phenotypic changes that may represent maladaptation to unexpected environmental conditions, or may instead be simply maladaptive in any context. As our understanding of the aetiology of spontaneous preterm birth is incomplete, and our ability to respond to the often devastating post-natal consequences of prematurity remains limited, focusing on the known preventable causes of preterm birth appears the most tractable approach at present to this substantial public health problem.


Data accessibility

This article has no additional data.


Authors' contributions

T.C.W. and A.J.D. jointly conceived the review and drafted the manuscript. Both gave final approval for publication.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

This article has no additional data.


How decision makers can use quantitative approaches to guide outbreak responses

Oliver Morgan — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2019. PMC6558558, CC BY 4.0.

Decision makers are responsible for directing staffing, logistics, selecting public health interventions, communicating to professionals and the public, planning future response needs, and establishing strategic and tactical priorities along with their funding requirements. Decision makers need to rapidly synthesize data from different experts across multiple disciplines, bridge data gaps and translate epidemiological analysis into an operational set of decisions for disease control. Analytic approaches can be defined for specific response phases: investigation, scale-up and control. These approaches include: improved applications of quantitative methods to generate insightful epidemiological descriptions of outbreaks; robust investigations of causal agents and risk factors; tools to assess response needs; identifying and monitoring optimal interventions or combinations of interventions; and forecasting for response planning. Data science and quantitative approaches can improve decision-making in outbreak response. To realize these benefits, we need to develop a structured approach that will improve the quality and timeliness of data collected during outbreaks, establish analytic teams within the response structure and define a research agenda for data analytics in outbreak response.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Modelling infectious disease outbreaks in humans, animals and plants: epidemic forecasting and control’. This theme issue is linked with the earlier issue ‘Modelling infectious disease outbreaks in humans, animals and plants: approaches and important themes’.

Keywords: decision-making, outbreaks, infectious diseases, modelling


What is decision-making for outbreak responses?

The process of decision-making during outbreak responses is not well described. Decision makers are responsible for selecting the types and composition of public health interventions, directing the deployment of staff and logistical capacities, summarizing key messages to communicate to professionals and the public, forecasting future response needs, and establishing strategic and tactical priorities along with their funding requirements. However, making leadership decisions during an outbreak responses can sometimes feel like operating in a ‘data-free’ zone, especially at the start of an outbreak when there may be little epidemiological information available or when the causative agent is not yet known. Decision makers may also contend with an incomplete understanding of the cultural or political context where the event is occurring, uncertainty around the impact and relative advantage of different disease control measures, or delays in reports of operational information from on-the-ground responders.

In the absence of sufficiently complete and timely data, decision makers usually draw on experiential knowledge from previous outbreaks, partially from their own experience, but also through consulting disease experts who are also knowledgeable about the published and unpublished literature. While this is a pragmatic approach to bridging the data void, there are some drawbacks. There can be considerable variation in the recommendations from disease experts because they do not all have the same level of experience, have different interpretations of the published and unpublished data and may have differing abilities to apply data for decision-making in new outbreaks. A second limitation is that the ‘expert opinion’ approach is not explicit about what the key variables or factors are that need to be taken into account when making decisions, which in turn makes it hard for non-disease experts to engage in the decision-making process; decision makers must therefore have ‘faith’ that the disease experts are right. A third limitation is that experts often put a lot of emphasis on one scientific discipline, such as epidemiology or virology, usually occluding other important disciplines like anthropology, behaviour change, economics, etc. In the end, it is left to decision makers to rapidly synthesize data from different experts across multiple disciplines, bridge data gaps as best they can and translate epidemiological analysis into an operational set of decisions for disease control: this is what makes leadership in outbreak responses so challenging.

Over the last 10 or so years, there has been considerable progress in the use of analytic approaches to support decision makers in the control of infectious diseases. There are many examples of decision support using statistical modelling from disease control programmes such as vaccination, TB control and prevention of HIV. There have also been many important examples of analytic approaches to help decision makers during outbreak responses. A particularly high-profile example of this was the forecasting of the West Africa Ebola outbreak by Meltzer et al., which was a key factor in the decision of the US government to deploy its military to Liberia to support outbreak control activities. However, despite some notable successes, we continue to fail to apply analytic approaches systematically in outbreak responses. This is largely because decision makers themselves have not clearly described what support they need. In this article, I define what decision makers need and how analytic approaches can be systematically used to support them for better decision-making during outbreak responses.


Quantitative approaches needed for decision-making in outbreak responses

Quantitative approaches cover a large number of different aspects of working with data, including data management, visualization, statistical analysis, modelling, machine learning (ML) and geospatial analysis. Applying quantitative approaches to decision-making for outbreak responses has the potential to overcome many of the limitations mentioned above by assisting decision makers to use available data optimally. Formulating decisions more explicitly also helps engage multiple stakeholders in the decision-making process and aids communication to interested parties and the public.

While decision-making for outbreak responses is a highly iterative process, it is helpful to characterize how analytic approaches could help in distinct phases of outbreak responses. summarizes three phases of outbreak responses: investigation, scale-up and control. A fourth phase of enhanced surveillance once the outbreak is over could also be defined, but the tools are the same as for routine surveillance outside of a response and so I have not included it here. The investigation phase is the earliest part of a response and can be characterized as having the greatest uncertainty in terms of understanding the epidemiology of the outbreak. During this phase, case–patient data may be limited and collected retrospectively for patients who have died or recovered. Data visualizations are the most helpful for decision makers during this phase, giving an early indication of the extent of the outbreak. It may be possible to do some preliminary statistical modelling to understand the transmission dynamics and make limited forecasts with parameters from previous outbreaks. Hypotheses about the epidemiology that may need testing are often identified in this phase. The scale-up phase is inherently operational, with significant effort going into deployment of teams, logistics and establishing systems. Implementing robust data collection systems is the critical enabling step for analytics during the scale-up phase. The systems that get established in this phase, however imperfect, often endure to the end of the response. Input from data scientists can improve the data collection, and cleaning and data linkage systems, using tools such as R and Python to automate much of the data management work. More granular data collected in this phase can facilitate further statistical modelling and response planning. The control phase is the longest part of a response and is characterized by an increasingly sophisticated response. Strong monitoring and ongoing improvements in control interventions best characterize the control phase. Modelling can be particularly helpful in designing control strategies, as well as gaining yet further insights into disease transmission, such as through analysis of genetic sequences of pathogens. Testing hypotheses about risk factors is also most likely to be achievable in this phase, which in turn should inform the composition of interventions. Using data visualization tools for response monitoring dashboards is invaluable to decision makers so they can quantitatively track the quality of response operations and adjust the response accordingly.

As can be seen from, many quantitative approaches can be applied during more than one of the response phases. For the following discussion, I have therefore summarized the broad categories of quantitative approaches for outbreak response as: improved quantitative methods for epidemiological descriptions of outbreaks; investigations of causal agents and risk factors; tools to assess response needs; identifying and monitoring optimal interventions or combinations of interventions; and forecasting for response planning.


Epidemiological descriptions of outbreaks

At the heart of epidemiology is the description of disease by person, place and time. An iconic example of this is the investigation of cholera in London conducted by John Snow in 1854, which is now considered to be the first modern epidemiological investigation. Good descriptive epidemiology is extremely powerful for decision makers as it can quickly guide the direction of an outbreak response. In fact, in many instances, descriptive analysis alone is sufficient for guiding disease control efforts in the early phase of an outbreak and more sophisticated analysis sometimes only provides marginal gains for decision makers, often because the results are usually available too late to be operationally relevant.

Tools for visualization of public health data beyond the traditional person, place and time epidemiological descriptions are developing extremely quickly, especially within the R environment. The presentations of Hans Rosling are a great example of how visualizations and animations of data can be very powerful ways of interrogating and communicating data; in a recent example, for the response to an outbreak of Ebola virus in North Kivu, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), we used R to create dynamic transmission chain diagrams that allowed decision makers to interact with the data in many different ways. Further development of R packages could improve how we look at not just cases, but also contacts and perhaps other risk factor data. For the Ebola outbreak, we also created animations that not only increased our understanding of how the outbreak was spreading along major road networks; additionally, we were able to include data about community resistance to show how resistance was concentrated in some communities or families, which drove further transmission. These visualizations helped decision makers adjust interventions to screen travellers along major road networks, prepare healthcare providers in towns and cities where cases might travel to recognize and report patients with suspected Ebola virus disease (EVD), and to pinpoint community engagement efforts.

Another aspect that can be assisted with better approaches and tools is the management of data from responses. Optimal decision-making depends on high-quality data available in a timely fashion: poor quality data may result in the wrong decisions and slow data availability means that data are unavailable during the operationally relevant time window. Unfortunately, the complexities of data management are often underestimated and sufficient numbers of people and specialists dedicated to data management are frequently absent during emergency responses. Data management for outbreak responses is increasingly complex as larger quantities of different types and formats are collected, often requiring linkage between many different data collection systems, such as surveillance systems, clinical data, laboratory diagnostics, contact follow-up and so on. Additionally, data may be collected in many different locations and using different data collection systems. Faster, more reliable data management can speed-up the generation of good descriptive summaries and other analyses, and by extension decisions. Data science tools such as R and Python can automate and reduce time for data cleaning, management and preparation, which often consume a considerable amount of time for epidemiologists. Imputation and matching algorithms can also be used for filling data gaps, which are common during outbreak investigations, as well as faster and more robust merging of datasets without unique IDs, which is still an unfortunately common occurrence. During the 2014–2016 West Africa Ebola outbreak, considerable data cleaning was needed before the estimation of transmission parameters by Imperial College, the WHO Collaborating Center for infectious disease modelling. The Imperial College team was able to set up robust data cleaning routines for data management and the ongoing analytic work throughout the outbreak. However, despite this example, decision makers rarely invest sufficient resources for robust data management on the ground during emergency responses, which consequently limits further analytic work by others.


Investigations of causal agents and risk factors

Epidemiological approaches to investigating the link between outbreaks and causative agents or exposures have traditionally relied on estimates of effect determined from study designs such as cohort studies, case–control studies and derivatives of these designs such as case–case studies, quasi-experimental methods and spatio-temporal analyses. While these analytic designs remain foundational for epidemiologists, advances in data science and analytic approaches enable other data sources to be incorporated in our epidemiological assessment of disease outbreaks and other health emergencies. For example, the growing availability of whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data, aided by the development of technology that enables WGS in the field, means that the relatedness of pathogen variants is increasingly being used to understand transmission dynamics in concert with other epidemiological information. This can be particularly advantageous when self-report data from patients about exposures and contacts are not available, incomplete or inaccurate. Working with WGS data is computationally intensive, requiring the processing of large volumes of data and the application of sophisticated data processing and analytic methods, which extend beyond the capacities of most epidemiologists and require input from data science.

ML is another potential tool for outbreak responses, although practical uses for outbreak analysis are still in their infancy. ML has been used to analyse prognostic risk factors for EVD outcomes, with the ability to account for missing data, which could be helpful for decision makers who wish to consider interventions that limit the impact of outbreaks. ML has also been used as an efficient way to estimate disease transmission dynamics, which would be especially helpful when managing an outbreak of a new pathogen or variant. The World Health Organization (WHO) currently employs ML for detecting signals about new public health events from vast amounts of online data, using the Epidemic Intelligence from Open Sources (EIOS) platform, applying natural language processing to process, categorize and assemble data. It is possible that these applications could be extended to analyse data from social media, purchasing patterns, travel data and qualitative data from other sources to gain greater insights into behavioural risk factors for outbreak control. In the future, ML could also be helpful for analysing large datasets from large or complex non-health sector data sources that may help us understand transmission risk factors, such as mobile phone data for movement patterns or remote sensing data for environmental exposures. Combining these data sources with the analysis of other epidemiological data can increase our understanding of outbreaks.


Response needs

Effective outbreak responses require good logistical planning to ensure that the correct materials are available at the right time and in the right locations. Critical logistical requirements include medicines, vaccines, laboratory reagents, staff, physical infrastructure such as acute care beds, personal protective equipment, accommodation for staff, vehicles and so on. In addition to the quantity of supplies needed, the location about where to deploy supplies may also be critical. Underestimate the needs and people may die and the outbreak may be poorly controlled. Overestimating response needs may increase costs and resources that are deployed, potentially depriving other outbreak responses of vital supplies. Take too long to determine the needs and supplies may arrive late, retarding disease control measures and resulting in increasing needs beyond initial assessments. Clearly, avoiding these shortcomings in logistical planning is especially difficult when there is uncertainty about the magnitude and evolution of an outbreak. By improving the accuracy and timeliness of quantitative estimates of an outbreak, the provision of supplies and medical services can optimize outbreak responses.

Decision makers can understand response needs through effective cooperation between disease modellers, operational planners and on-the-ground response teams. During the response to a large diphtheria outbreak in 2017 among the Rohingya displaced population in Cox's Bazar, Bangladesh, Médecins Sans Frontières, the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and WHO used epidemiological data collected by field teams to model the size of the outbreak and to estimate the necessary number of acute care beds and medical teams required to control it. Quantitative approaches were also used during the West Africa Ebola outbreak to estimate isolation bed capacity. A clear process for estimating response needs is also important for communicating budget requirements to donors as well as prioritizing allocation of resources such as vaccines when supply is limited.


Optimizing interventions

There are many different interventions used for managing outbreaks. These include vaccination, isolation of infectious patients, use of medicines such as antibiotics, airport screening, improving water supply, laboratory diagnostics, community mobilization and so on. Optimizing interventions is not only important for reducing disease transmission as quickly as possible, but also to avoid unnecessary use of scarce resources such as medical supplies, funds, or deployment of skilled personnel. It is also important to consider optimal locations for interventions to be deployed, such as laboratories or specialist treatment facilities, or the timing or sequence of interventions.

Modelling approaches have been used to optimize vaccine policy for disease prevention programmes, such as the introduction of human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine. Similar approaches have been applied for reactive vaccination interventions for outbreak control. For example, during 2018 in Yemen, the planning for oral cholera vaccination used modelling approaches in combination with epidemiological data from the outbreak in 2017 to select the optimal combination of districts to control the outbreak. During the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, modelling was used to consider how newly developed rapid diagnostic assays could be used to improve disease control; this is likely to be an especially helpful application of quantitative methods considering the increasingly rapid pace of technological development for diagnostics, vaccines and therapeutics. During the 2018–2019 Ebola outbreak in North Kivu, DRC, modelling was used to consider how, under different security scenarios, outbreak control interventions could be optimally combined (WHO 2018, unpublished data). From an operational perspective, the application of quantitative methods to optimize interventions needs to incorporate contextual information into quantitative analyses, so that constraints, such as security limitations, local political considerations or access restrictions for logistical planning such as damaged roads and bridges, are taken into account. This can be done with analysts working closely with decision makers and other responders to iteratively refine analyses, which is probably most effectively achieved by having one of the analytics team deployed to the response operations on the ground.


Forecasting

Understanding the evolution of an outbreak is important for logistical planning, optimizing interventions and evaluating the effectiveness of existing interventions. There has been considerable investment of energy in developing approaches for infectious disease forecasting. However, there is still limited evidence of how such forecasts contribute to improved decisions for outbreak management. Part of the challenge is that despite the advances in outbreak forecasting, the uncertainty in the forecasts continues to be too big to use as a basis for operational decisions, especially early on in an outbreak. Another challenge is the disconnect between those producing forecasts and decision makers; the link between the two professional communities is often limited or non-existent. This leads to modellers making forecasts that decision makers may not be aware of or do not understand. Establishing better connections between these professional communities requires ongoing collaboration and joint training. RECON (the R Epidemics Consortium) is an excellent example of an initiative that brings modellers, statistical programmers and emergencies responders together. An example of this type of collaboration is published in this journal special issue and shows how modelling the end tail of an Ebola outbreak can be used for public health decision-making.

Yet, another challenge for decision makers is that there is a proliferation of modelling groups producing forecasts, sometimes using aggregated data published in situational reports performed independently from the responding organizations. Decision makers can find it difficult to know how to handle multiple forecasts, especially as any one of the approaches is not necessarily superior. An evaluation framework to assess multiple forecasts and their robustness, such as including validation or sensitivity analysis, may be helpful for decisions makers. Different forecasts may also complicate decision-making when divergent forecasts are used by different responding agencies or published in the media. Finally, even when forecasting models are well constructed, they may not address operationally relevant issues for decision makers. For example, there may be insufficient data for forecasts to be produced at operationally relevant geographical levels; in addition to knowing if an outbreak is going to get bigger, decision makers also need to know where the increase will occur. Understanding what data are needed by modellers may help on-the-ground response teams adjust their data collection approaches accordingly.


Future opportunities and challenges for improved decision-making during outbreaks

We need a greater understanding of what decisions are made and how they are taken during outbreak responses. Data about decision-making could be captured prospectively as a response progresses or we could use an after-action review to evaluate the decision-making process. Retrospective reviews of previous outbreaks conducted with the relevant decision makers could also generate additional insights. With a better knowledge about decision-making, we could further develop a framework for decision-making along the lines of the one presented in this paper. Using our framework, we can simultaneously develop our understanding of what analytic approaches could help decision makers and what data need to be collected by the field teams.

Writing a data collection plan might be a useful approach so that field teams and others providing remote support to the response can work in concert to ensure that decision makers and analysts have the most useful data in a timely way. In addition, having a data collection plan might help with properly resourcing data management in the field, which will address some issues of timeliness and quality of data. An analytics team should also be convened and at least one member should be assigned to work with key decision makers to help understand their needs and to facilitate communication of the outputs of the analytics team. Also, another member of the analytics team should be deployed to the field to work with decision makers on the ground and to understand important contextual factors. An analytics team should be recognized as a distinct entity from the epidemiology team because epidemiologists are involved in field activities such as case finding, surveillance, training and so on, and rarely have dedicated time to focus on analytic tasks. Over the medium term, a research agenda is needed, based on our decision-making framework, to focus partnerships with academic and other groups on the development of new decision-making approaches. In particular, further work on incorporating social science approaches for behavioural risk factors should be prioritized.

Here, I describe how data science and quantitative approaches can improve decision-making for responses to outbreaks of diseases that affect people. However, the approaches that I discuss can equally be applied to outbreaks of animal and plant diseases. Nonetheless, to realize the benefits of quantitative methods for decision-making, an explicit approach is needed within the incident management system to drive improvement in the quality and timeliness of data collection, to ensure that there is a dedicated analytic team, and to promote understanding and use of analytic outputs by decision makers.


Data accessibility

This article has no additional data.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

This article has no additional data.


Theories of Error Back-Propagation in the Brain

James C.R. Whittington, Rafal Bogacz — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2019. PMC6382460, CC BY 4.0.

This review article summarises recently proposed theories on how neural circuits in the brain could approximate the error back-propagation algorithm used by artificial neural networks. Computational models implementing these theories achieve learning as efficient as artificial neural networks, but they use simple synaptic plasticity rules based on activity of presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons. The models have similarities, such as including both feedforward and feedback connections, allowing information about error to propagate throughout the network. Furthermore, they incorporate experimental evidence on neural connectivity, responses, and plasticity. These models provide insights on how brain networks might be organised such that modification of synaptic weights on multiple levels of cortical hierarchy leads to improved performance on tasks.


Deep Learning and Neuroscience

In the past few years, computer programs using deep learning have achieved impressive results in complex cognitive tasks that were previously only in the reach of humans. These tasks include processing of natural images and language, or playing arcade and board games,. Since these recent deep learning applications use extended versions of classic artificial neural networks, their success has inspired studies comparing information processing in artificial neural networks and the brain. It has been demonstrated that when artificial neural networks learn to perform tasks such as image classification or navigation, the neurons in their layers develop representations similar to those seen in brain areas involved in these tasks, such as receptive fields across the visual hierarchy or grid cells in the entorhinal cortex,. This suggests that the brain may use analogous algorithms. Furthermore, thanks to current computational advances, artificial neural networks can now provide useful insights on how complex cognitive functions are achieved in the brain.

A key question that remains open is how the brain could implement the error back-propagation algorithm used in artificial neural networks. This algorithm describes how the weights of synaptic connections should be modified during learning, and its attractiveness, in part, comes from prescribing weight changes that reduce errors made by the network, according to a theoretical analysis. Although artificial neural networks were originally inspired by the brain, the modification of their synaptic connections, or weights, during learning appears biologically unrealistic,. Nevertheless, recent models have demonstrated that learning as efficient as in artificial neural networks can be achieved in distributed networks of neurons using only simple plasticity rules,. These theoretic studies are important because they overrule the dogma, generally accepted for the past 30 years, that the error back-propagation algorithm is too complicated for the brain to implement,. Before discussing this new generation of models in detail, we first provide a brief overview of how the back-propagation algorithm is used to train artificial neural networks and discuss why it was considered biologically implausible.


Artificial Neural Networks and Error Back-Propagation

To effectively learn from feedback, the synaptic connections often need to be appropriately adjusted in multiple hierarchical areas simultaneously. For example, when a child learns to name letters, the incorrect pronunciation may be a combined result of incorrect synaptic connections in speech, associative, and visual areas. When a multi-layer artificial neural network makes an error, the error back-propagation algorithm appropriately assigns credit to individual synapses throughout all levels of hierarchy and prescribes which synapses need to be modified and by how much.

How is the back-propagation algorithm used to train artificial neural networks? The algorithm is trained on a set of examples, each consisting of an input pattern and a target pattern. For each such pair, the network first generates its prediction based on the input pattern and then the synaptic weights are modified to minimise the difference between the target and the predicted pattern. To determine the appropriate modification, an error term is computed for each neuron throughout the network. This describes how the activity of the neuron should change to reduce the discrepancy between the predicted and target pattern. Each weight is modified by an amount determined by the product between the activity of the neuron it projects from and the error term of the neuron it projects to.A conventional artificial neural network consists of layers of neurons, with each neuron within a layer receiving a weighted input from the neurons in the previous layer (A). The input layer is first set to be the input pattern and then a prediction is made by propagating the activity through the layers, according to Equation 1.1, where xl is a vector denoting neurons in layer l and Wl − 1 is a matrix of synaptic weights from layer l − 1 to layer l. An activation function f is applied to each neuron to allow for nonlinear computations.During learning, the synaptic connections are modified to minimise a cost function quantifying the discrepancy between the predicted and target patterns (typically defined as in Equation 1.2). In particular, the weights are modified in the direction of steepest decrease (or gradient) of the cost function (D). Such modification is described in Equation 1.3, where δl+1 is a vector of error terms associated with neurons xl+1. The error terms for the last layer L are defined in Equation 1.4 as the difference between the target activity t and the predicted activity. Thus, the error of an output neuron is positive if its target activity is higher than the predicted activity. For the earlier layers, the errors are computed according to Equation 1.5 as a sum of the errors of neurons in the layer above weighted by the strengths of their connections (and further scaled by the derivative of the activation function; in Equation 1.5 · denotes element-wise multiplication). For example, an error of a hidden unit is positive if it sends excitatory projections to output units with high error terms, so increasing the activity of such a hidden neuron would reduce the error on the output. Once the errors are computed, each weight is changed according to Equation 1.3 in proportion to the product of the error term associated with a postsynaptic neuron and the activity of a presynaptic neuron.

Although the described procedure is used to train artificial neural networks, analogous steps may take place during learning in the brain. For example, in the case of the child naming letters mentioned above, the input pattern corresponds to an image of a letter. After seeing an image, the child makes a guess at the name (predicted pattern) via a neural network between visual and speech areas. On supervision by his or her parent of the correct pronunciation (target pattern), synaptic weights along the processing stream are modified so that it is more likely that the correct sound will be produced when seeing that image again.


Biologically Questionable Aspects of the Back-Propagation Algorithm

Although the algorithmic process described above appears simple enough, there are a few problems with implementing it in biology. Below, we briefly discuss three key issues.


Lack of Local Error Representation

Conventional artificial neural networks are only defined to compute information in a forward direction, with the back-propagating errors computed separately by an external algorithm. Without local error representation, each synaptic weight update depends on the activity and computations of all downstream neurons. Since biological synapses change their connection strength based solely on local signals (e.g., the activity of the neurons they connect), it appears unclear how the synaptic plasticity afforded by the back-propagation algorithm could be achieved in the brain. Historically, this is a major criticism; thus it is a main focus of our review article.


Symmetry of Forwards and Backwards Weights

In artificial neural networks, the errors are back-propagated using the same weights as those when propagating information forward during prediction. This weight symmetry suggests that identical connections should exist in both directions between connected neurons. Although bidirectional connections are significantly more common in cortical networks than expected by chance, they are not always present. Furthermore, even if bidirectional connections were always present, the backwards and forwards weights would still have to correctly align themselves.


Unrealistic Models of Neurons

Artificial neural networks use artificial neurons that send a continuous output (corresponding to a firing rate of biological neurons), whereas real neurons use spikes. Generalising the back-propagation algorithm to neurons using discrete spikes is not trivial, because it is unclear how to compute the derivate term found in the back-propagation algorithm. Away from the back-propagation algorithm, the description of computations inside neurons in artificial neural networks is also simplified as a linear summation of inputs.


Models of Biological Back-Propagation

Each of the above-mentioned issues has been investigated by multiple studies. The lack of local error representation has been addressed by early theories by proposing that the errors associated with individual neurons are not computed, but instead the synaptic plasticity is driven by a global error signal carried by neuromodulators,. However, it has been demonstrated that learning in such models is slow and does not scale with network size. More promisingly, in the past few years, several models have been proposed that do represent errors locally and thus more closely approximate the back-propagation algorithm. These models perform similarly to artificial neural networks on standard benchmark tasks (e.g., handwritten digit classification), and we summarise several of them in more detail in the following sections.

The criticism of weight symmetry has been addressed by demonstrating that even if the errors in artificial neural networks are back-propagated by random connections, good performance in classification tasks can still be achieved,. This being said, there is still some concern regarding this issue. With regard to the biological realism of neurons, it has been shown that the back-propagation algorithm can be generalised to neurons producing spikes and that problems with calculating derivatives using spikes can be overcome. Furthermore, it has been proposed that when more biologically realistic neurons are considered, they themselves may approximate a small artificial neural network in their dendritic structures.

There is a diversity of ideas on how the back-propagation algorithm may be approximated in the brain, however, we review the principles behind a set of related models, that have substantial connections with biological data while closely paralleling the back-propagation algorithm. These models operate with minimal external control, as they can compute the errors associated with individual neurons through the dynamics of the networks. Thus, synaptic weight modifications depend only on the activity of presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons. Furthermore, these models incorporate important features of brain biology, such as spike time-dependent plasticity, patterns of neural activity during learning, and properties of pyramidal neurons and cortical microcircuits. We emphasise that these models rely on fundamentally similar principles. In particular, the models include both feedforward and feedback connections, thereby allowing information about the errors made by the network to propagate throughout the network without requiring an external program to compute the errors. Furthermore, these dynamics, as well as the synaptic plasticity, can be described within a common framework of energy minimisation. We divide the reviewed models in two classes differing in how the errors are represented, and we summarise them in the following sections.


Temporal-Error Models

This class of model encodes errors in the differences in neural activity across time. The first model in this class is the contrastive learning model. It relies on an observation that weight changes proportional to an error (difference between predicted and target pattern) can be decomposed into two separate updates: one update based on activity without the target present and the other update with the target pattern provided to the output neurons. Thus, the error back-propagation algorithm can be approximated in a network in which the weights are modified twice: during prediction according to anti-Hebbian plasticity and then according to Hebbian plasticity once the target is provided and the network converges to an equilibrium (after the target activity has propagated to earlier layers via feedback connections). The role of the first modification is to ‘unlearn’ the existing association between input and prediction, while the role of the second modification is to learn the new association between input and target.Temporal-error models describe learning in networks with recurrent feedback connections to the hidden nodes (A). The rate of change of activity of a given node is proportional to the summed inputs from adjacent layers, along with a decay term proportional to the current level of activity (B). As the network is now recurrent, it is no longer possible to write a simple equation describing how the activity depends on other nodes (such as Equation 1.1 in); instead, the dynamics of neurons is described by the differential Equation 2.1, where denotes the rate of change over time of xl (all equations in this figure ignore nonlinearities for brevity).In the contrastive learning model, the weight modifications based on errors are decomposed into two separate changes occurring at different times. To understand learning in this model, it is easiest to consider how the weights connecting to the output layer are modified. Substituting Equation 1.4 into Equation 1.3, we see in Equation 2.2 that the weight modification required by the back-propagation algorithm can be decomposed into two terms. The first term corresponds to anti-Hebbian plasticity that should take place when the output activity is predicted based on the input propagated through the network. The second term corresponds to Hebbian plasticity that should take place when the output layer is set to the target pattern. O’Reilly demonstrated that in the presence of backward connections, the information about the target pattern propagates to earlier layers, and an analogous sequence of weight modifications in the hidden layers also approximates a version of the back-propagation algorithm for recurrent networks.In the continuous update model, the output nodes are gradually changed from the predicted pattern (x3|¬t) towards the target values (t), as shown for a sample neuron in D. Thus, the temporal derivative of output activity is proportional to (t − x3|¬t), that is, to the error on the output (defined in Equation 1.4). Hence, the weight modification required by back-propagation is simply equal to the product of presynaptic activity and the rate of change of the postsynaptic activity.

Although the weight modifications in the contrastive learning model involve locally available information, implementing them biologically would require a global signal informing the network which phase it is in (whether the target pattern influences the network or not) as that determines whether the plasticity should be Hebbian or anti-Hebbian. It is not clear whether such a control signal exists in the brain. This concern can be alleviated if the determination of learning phases is coordinated by information locally available in the oscillatory rhythms, such as hippocampal theta oscillations. In these models, the neurons in the output layer are driven by feedforward inputs in one part of the cycle and forced to take the value of the target pattern in the other.

The complications of separate phases have been recently addressed in the continuous update model, where during training the output neuron activities are gradually changed from the predicted pattern towards the target. In this case, the rate of change of the output units is proportional to the error terms. Consequently, the weight modification required by the back-propagation algorithm could arise from local plasticity based on the rate of change of activity. Although the continuous update model does not involve two different learning rules during prediction and learning, it still requires a control signal indicating whether the target pattern is present or not, because plasticity should not take place during prediction.


Explicit-Error Models

In this section, we describe alternative models that do not require control signals but as a trade-off have more complex architectures that explicitly compute and represent errors.

It has been recently noticed, that the error back-propagation algorithm can be approximated in a widely used model of information processing in hierarchical cortical circuits called predictive coding. In its original formulation, the predictive coding model was developed for unsupervised learning, and it has been shown that when the model is presented with natural images, it learns representations similar to those in visual cortex. Predictive coding models have also been proposed as a general framework for describing different types of information processing in the brain. It has been recently shown that when a predictive coding network is used for supervised learning, it closely approximates the error back-propagation algorithm.

An architecture of a predictive coding network contains error nodes that are each associated with corresponding value nodes. During prediction, when the network is presented with an input pattern, activity is propagated between the value nodes via the error nodes. The network converges to an equilibrium, in which the error nodes decay to zero and all value nodes converge to the same values as the corresponding artificial neural network. During learning, both the input and the output layers are set to the training patterns. The error nodes can no longer decrease their activity to zero; instead, they converge to values as if the errors had been back-propagated. Once the state of the predictive coding network converges to equilibrium, the weights are modified, according to a Hebbian plasticity rule. These weight changes closely approximate that of the back-propagation algorithm.Predictive coding networks include error nodes each associated with corresponding value nodes (A). The error nodes receive inhibition from the previous layer and excitation from the corresponding value nodes and thus compute the difference between them. The value nodes get feedforward inhibition from corresponding error nodes and feedback from the error nodes in the next layer. In the predictive coding network, the value nodes act as integrators, so they add their input to their current activity level.During prediction, when the network is presented only with an input pattern, the information is propagated between the value nodes via the error nodes. As the output layer is unconstrained, the activity of error nodes converges to zero, because the value nodes change their activity until the feedback they send to their corresponding error nodes balances the feedforward inhibition received by error nodes. At this state, the left side of Equation 3.1 is equal to 0, and by rearranging terms (C), we observe that the activity of value nodes is equal to the weighted sum of value nodes in the previous layer, exactly as in artificial neural networks [Equation 1.1 with].During learning, when the network is presented with both input and target patterns, the activity of error nodes may not decrease to zero. Learning takes place when the network is in equilibrium. At this stage the left side of Equation 3.2 is equal to 0, and by rearranging terms (D), we observe that the activity of error nodes is equal to a weighted sum of errors from the layer above, bearing the same relationship as in the back-propagation algorithm [Equation 1.5 with]. At convergence, the weights are modified according to Equation 1.3, which here corresponds to Hebbian plasticity dependent on the activity of pre- and postsynaptic neurons.

An important property of the predictive coding networks is that they work autonomously: irrespective of the target pattern being provided, the same rules for node dynamics and plasticity are used. If the output nodes are unconstrained, the error nodes converge to zero, so the Hebbian weight change is equal to zero. Thus, the networks operate without any need for external control except for providing different inputs and outputs. However, the one-to-one connectivity of error nodes to their corresponding value nodes is inconsistent with diffused patterns of neuronal connectivity in the cortex.

A solution to this inconsistency has been proposed in several models in which the error is represented in dendrites of the corresponding neuron,. In this review article, we focus on a popular model called the dendritic error model. This model describes networks of pyramidal neurons and assumes that the errors in the activity of pyramidal neurons are computed in their apical dendrites. In this model, the apical dendrites compare the feedback from the higher levels with a locally generated prediction of higher-level activity computed via interneurons.

An easy way to understand why such an architecture approximates the back-propagation algorithm is to notice that it is closely related to predictive coding networks, which approximate artificial neural networks. Simply rearranging the equations describing the dynamics of predictive coding model gives a description of a network with the same architecture as the dendritic error model, in which dendrites encode the error terms.The architecture of the dendritic error model is shown in A. In this network, the activity is propagated through the layers via connections between pyramidal neurons. The errors in the activity of pyramidal neurons are computed in their apical dendrites.The relationship between predictive coding and dendritic error models can be established by observing that substituting the definition of error nodes from the predictive coding model, Equation 3.1, into Equation 3.2, produces Equation 4.1, which describes the dynamics of pyramidal neurons in A. The right side of Equation 4.1 consists of four terms corresponding to various connections in the figure. The first is simply a decay, the second is a feedforward input from the previous layer, the third is a feedback from the layer above, and the fourth term is a within layer recurrent input. This last term has a negative sign, while pyramidal neurons are excitatory, so it needs to be provided by interneurons. If we assume that the interneurons have activity il = Wlxl, they need to be connected with the pyramidal neurons via weights Wl.The key property of this network is that when it converges to the equilibrium, the neurons with activity xl encode their corresponding error terms δl in their apical dendrites. To see why this is the case, note that the first two terms on the right of Equation 4.1 are equal to −δl according to the definition of Equation 3.1. At equilibrium, the two last terms in Equation 4.1 must be equal to δl (so that the right-hand side of Equation 4.1 adds up to 0), and it is these two terms that define the input to the apical dendrite. As the errors δl are encoded in apical dendrites, the weight modification required by the back-propagation algorithm only involves quantities encoded in pre- and postsynaptic neurons.Appropriately updating weights between pyramidal and interneurons is more challenging. This is because the interneurons must learn to produce activity encoding the same information as the higher-level pyramidal neurons. To allow training of the interneurons, the dendritic error model includes special one-to-one connections to the interneurons from corresponding higher-level pyramidal neurons (black dashed arrows in A).

As the error term is now encoded within a neuron’s compartment, the update of weights between pyramidal neurons required by the back-propagation algorithm corresponds to local synaptic plasticity. Error information can be transmitted from the apical dendrite to the rest of the neuron through internal signals. For example, a recent computational model proposed that errors encoded in apical dendrites can determine the plasticity in the whole neuron. The model is based on observations that activating apical dendrites induces plateau potentials via calcium influx, leading to a burst of spikes by the neuron. Such bursts of spikes may subsequently trigger synaptic plasticity,.

Although the dendritic error network makes significant steps to increase the biological realism of predictive coding models, it also introduces extra one-to-one connections (dotted arrow in) that enforce the interneurons to take on similar values to the neurons in next layer and thus help them to predict the feedback from the next level. Furthermore, the exact dynamics in the dendritic error model are much more complex than that given in, as it describes details of changes in membrane potential in multiple compartments. Nevertheless, it is important to highlight that the architecture of dendritic error networks can approximate the back-propagation algorithm, and it offers an alternative hypothesis on how the computations assumed by the predictive coding model could be implemented in cortical circuits.


Comparing the Models

Given the biological plausibility of the above-mentioned models, in this and the coming sections, we compare the models in terms of their computational properties (as more efficient networks may be favoured by evolution) and their relationships to experimental data (summarised in).


Computational Properties

For correct weight modification, the temporal-error models require a mechanism informing whether the target pattern constrains the output neurons, while the explicit-error models do not. However, as a trade-off, the temporal-error models have simpler architectures, while the explicit-error models need to have intricate architectures with certain constraints on connectivity, and both predictive coding and the dendritic error model include one-to-one connections in their network structure. As mentioned, there is no evidence for such one-to-one connectivity in the neocortex.

The models differ in the time required for signals to propagate through the layers. To make a prediction in networks with L layers, predictive coding networks need to propagate information through 2L − 1 synapses, whereas the other models only need to propagate through L − 1 synapses. This is because in a predictive coding network, to propagate from one layer to the next, the information must travel via an error neuron, whereas in the other models the information is propagated directly to the neurons in the layer above. There is a clear evolutionary benefit to propagating information via fewer synapses, as it would result in faster responses and a smaller number of noise sources.

In the dendritic error model, for errors to be computed in the dendrites, the inhibitory interneurons first need to learn to predict the feedback from the higher level. Thus, before the network can learn feedforward connections, ideally the inhibitory neurons need to first be pre-trained. Although it has been shown that the feedforward and inhibitory weights can be learned in parallel, learning in the dendritic error model may well be slower as the reported number of iterations required to learn a benchmark task was higher for the dendritic error model than for contrastive learning and predictive coding models. Such statements, however, should be taken with reservations as not only were simulations not necessarily comparable but also computations in standard von-Neumann computers may not be representative of computations in biological hardware.


Relationship to Experimental Data

The models differ in their predictions on whether errors should be explicitly represented in neural activity. In particular, the predictive coding model includes dedicated neurons encoding errors, and the dendritic error model suggests that errors computed in dendrites may trigger bursts of firing of pyramidal neurons, while in temporal models there is no direct association between error and the overall activity level at a given time. In line with the explicit-error models, increased neural activity has been observed when sensory input does not match the expectations encoded by higher-level areas. For example, responses of neurons in the primary visual cortex were increased at brief intervals in which visual input did not match expectation based on animal movements. An increase in neural activity when expectations about stimuli were violated has also been found with fMRI. Further details are discussed in several excellent reviews,. The two explicit models differ in predictions on whether errors and values are represented by separate neuronal populations or within the same neurons. Experimental data relevant to this question have been reviewed in an excellent chapter by Kok and de Lange. Although they conclude that there is ‘no direct unequivocal evidence for the existence of separate populations’, they discuss several studies suggesting preferential encoding of errors and values by different neurons. For example, in a part of visual cortex (inferior temporal cortex), the inhibitory neurons tended to have higher responses to novel stimuli, while excitatory neurons typically produced highest response for their preferred familiar stimuli. Kok and de Lange point that these responses may potentially reflect error and value nodes, respectively.

Each model accounts for specific aspects of experimental data. The models based on contrastive learning rules have been shown to reproduce neural activity and behaviour in a wide range of tasks. The learning rule in the continuous update model (in which the synaptic modification depends on the rate of change of the postsynaptic neuron; A), can be implemented with classic spike-time-dependent plasticity (B). In this form of plasticity, the direction of modification (increase or decrease) depends on whether the spike of a presynaptic neuron precedes or follows the postsynaptic spike. C shows the effect of such plasticity in a case when the postsynaptic neuron increases its firing. If the postsynaptic spike follows the presynaptic spike, the synaptic weight is increased (pink area), while if the postsynaptic spike precedes the presynaptic spike, the weight is decreased (yellow area). If the postsynaptic neuron increases its firing rate (as in the example), there will be more postsynaptic spikes in pink than in yellow area on average, so the overall weight change will be positive. Analogously, the weight is weakened if the postsynaptic activity decreases (D). In summary, with asymmetric spike-time-dependent plasticity, the direction of weight change depends on the gradient of a postsynaptic neuron activity around a presynaptic spike, as in the continuous update model.

The relationship of spike-time-dependent plasticity to other models requires further clarifying work. Nevertheless, Vogels and colleagues demonstrated that a learning rule in which the direction of modification depends on activity of neurons in equilibrium (E), as in the predictive coding model, can arise from an alternate form of spike-time-dependent plasticity. They considered a form of plasticity where the weight is increased by nearly coincident pre- and postsynaptic spikes, irrespectively of their order, and additionally the weight is slightly decreased by each presynaptic spike. The overall direction of weight modification in this rule is shown in F. Such a form of plasticity may exist in a several types of synapse in the brain. G illustrates that with such plasticity, the weights are increased if the intervals between pre- and postsynaptic spikes are short, which is likely to occur when the two neurons have high activity. When the postsynaptic neuron is less active (H), the short intervals (pink area) are less common, while longer intervals are more common (yellow area), so overall the weight change is negative. In summary, with symmetric spike-time-dependent plasticity the direction of weight change depends on whether the postsynaptic neuron activity is above or below a certain level (which may correspond to a baseline level typically denoted with zero in computational models), as in the predictive coding model.

The dendritic error model describes the computations in apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons and features of cortical micro-circuitry such as connectivity of a group of interneurons called the Martinotti cells, which receive input from pyramidal neurons in the same cortical area and project to their apical dendrites. Furthermore, there is some evidence that inhibitory interneurons also receive feedback from higher areas in the cortical hierarchy.


Integrating Models

The above-mentioned comparison shows that each model has its own computational advantages, accounts for different data, and describes plasticity at different types of synapses. It is important to note that the cortical circuitry is much more complicated than any of the proposed models’ architectures. Therefore, the models presented above need not be viewed as competitors but may be considered as descriptions of learning in different motifs of more complex brain networks.

Different classes of models may be more suited for different tasks faced by brain networks. One task engaging the primary sensory areas is predicting the next value of sensory input from the previous ones. A recent modelling study suggests that primary visual and auditory cortices may use an algorithm similar to back-propagation while learning to predict sensory input. This study demonstrated that the temporal properties of receptive field in these areas are similar to those in artificial neural networks trained to predict the next video or audio frames on the basis of past history in clips of natural scenes. In such sensory prediction tasks, the target (i.e., the next ‘frame’ of sensory input) always arrives, so the temporal-error models may be particularly suited for this task, as there is no need for the control signal indicating target presence.

The explicit-error models are suitable for tasks where the timing of target pattern presentation is more uncertain. Although the predictive coding and dendritic error networks are closely related, they also exhibit a trade-off: the predictive coding networks are slow to propagate information once trained, while the dendritic error networks are slower to train. It is conceivable that cortical networks include elements of predictive coding networks in addition to dendritic error motifs, as the cortical networks include many other interneuron types in addition to the Martinotti cells and have a much richer organisation than either model. Such a combined network could initially rely on predictive coding motifs to support fast learning and, with time, the dendritic error models could take over, allowing faster information processing. Thus, by combining different motifs, brain networks may ‘beat the trade-offs’ and inherit advantages of each model.

Furthermore, predictive coding models may describe information processing in subcortical parts of brain networks that do not include pyramidal cells and thus may not be able to support computations of the dendritic error model. Indeed, it has been recently suggested how the predictive coding model can be mapped on the anatomy of cerebellum, and the model may also describe aspects of information processing in basal ganglia, where the dopaminergic neurons are well known to encode reward prediction error in their activity.

As the brain networks may incorporate elements of different models, it is important to understand how individual models relate to each other and how they can be combined. Such insights have been revealed by a recently proposed framework called equilibrium propagation,. Here, it was noticed that the dynamics of many models of neuronal networks can be defined in terms of the optimisation of a particular function. This function is known as the network energy. For example, recurrently connected networks of excitatory neurons, such as the temporal-error models, under certain assumptions converge to an equilibrium in which strongly connected neurons tend to have similar levels of activity. Indeed, they minimise a function that summarises the dissimilarity in the activity of strongly connected nodes, called the Hopfield energy. The predictive coding networks are also known to minimise a function during their dynamics, called the free energy. The free energy has a particularly nice statistical interpretation, as its negative provides a lower bound on the log probability of predicting the target pattern by the network, (in case of supervised learning, this probability is conditioned on the input patterns). Since the dendritic error models have approximately similar dynamics as the predictive coding models, all models reviewed above can be considered as energy-based models described within the equilibrium propagation framework.

The framework also prescribes how synaptic weights should be modified in any network that minimises energy, and the weight modifications in the reviewed models indeed follow this general rule. Importantly, the framework can describe learning in more complex networks, which could include the elements of the different models. For any network for which an energy function can be defined, the framework describes the plasticity rules of individual synapses required for efficient learning.

Nevertheless, the form of energy function minimised by a network may influence its performance. So far, the biologically plausible networks that perform best in a handwritten digit classification task are those that minimise energies analogous to the free energy. The superior performance of networks minimising free energy may stem from the probabilistic interpretation of free energy, which ensures that the networks are trained to maximise the probability of predicting target patterns.


Concluding Remarks

This review article has not been exhaustive of all current biological models but nevertheless has described main classes of recent models; those that represent errors temporally and those that represent them explicitly, as well as a framework unifying these methods. These theoretic results elucidate the constraints required for efficient learning in hierarchical networks. However, much more work needs to be done both empirically and theoretically, for example, on how the networks scale to larger architectures, as well as linking theory to neurobiological data (see Outstanding Questions).

It is crucial to map the models implementing efficient deep learning on biological networks in the brain. In particular, mapping the nodes in the model on distinct cell types in the cortex may be a fruitful route to identifying their computational function. The framework of equilibrium propagation (or its future extensions) may prove particularly useful in this endeavour. Based on known patterns of connectivity, models could be defined and their energy function formulated. The framework could then be used to predict properties of synaptic plasticity that could be compared with experimental data, and the results of such comparisons could be iteratively used to improve the models.Are biologically plausible deep learning implementations robust to the lack of symmetry between the feedforward and feedback connections? The four models reviewed use symmetric feedforward and feedback weights. In these models, both sets of weights are modified during learning, and the plasticity rules maintain the symmetry. As mentioned, such symmetry does not exist in brain networks, so it is important to continue investigations into whether biologically plausible networks still perform robustly without weight symmetry.How can researchers make biologically plausible deep learning implementations scale? Although the above-mentioned models perform well on some tasks, it is unclear whether they scale to larger problems. This is in part due to the multiple iterations required to update node activity via network dynamics. The number of iterations required does not currently scale well for larger networks. Further work optimising this process is required if high depth networks are to be trained.How can efficient learning of temporal sequences be implemented in biological networks? The models reviewed above focus on a case of static input patterns, but the sensory input received by the brain is typically dynamic, and the brain has to learn to recognise sequences of stimuli (e.g. speech). To describe learning in such tasks, artificial neural networks have been extended to include recurrent connections among hidden units, which provide a memory of the past. It is important to extend the models reviewed above for learning through time.How can the dynamics of neural circuits be optimised to support efficient learning? This question can be first studied in models of primary sensory areas predicting sensory input from its past values. In such tasks, the dynamics will play an important role, as networks need to generate their predictions at the right time to compare it with incoming sensory data.


Cognitive Control of Escape Behaviour

Dominic A. Evans, A. Vanessa Stempel, Ruben Vale, Tiago Branco — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2019. PMC6438863, CC BY 4.0.

When faced with potential predators, animals instinctively decide whether there is a threat they should escape from, and also when, how, and where to take evasive action. While escape is often viewed in classical ethology as an action that is released upon presentation of specific stimuli, successful and adaptive escape behaviour relies on integrating information from sensory systems, stored knowledge, and internal states. From a neuroscience perspective, escape is an incredibly rich model that provides opportunities for investigating processes such as perceptual and value-based decision-making, or action selection, in an ethological setting. We review recent research from laboratory and field studies that explore, at the behavioural and mechanistic levels, how elements from multiple information streams are integrated to generate flexible escape behaviour.


A Wide Range of Complexity in Escape Behaviours

Escape is an instinctive defensive behaviour that has evolved to avoid harm from predators and other threats in the environment. Animals that fail to escape from imminent threats will suffer reduced fitness, catastrophically in the case of death, but also in the case of injury, for example owing to reduced ability to forage for food or weakening in social status. Evolution has produced many different expressions of escape behaviour that reflect aspects such as biomechanics, the nature of the threat, local ecology or individual history, and which range from simple to extraordinarily complex. At one end of the spectrum, animals might escape a fast-approaching predator by moving away with reflex-like actions, such as the ‘jack-knife’ tail flip in crayfish and the C-start escape in fish,. At the other end, successfully escaping from threats can require cognitive processes, including using memory and deciding between alternative options. For example, animals escaping in complex environments need to use knowledge of refuge locations and escape routes, and prey escaping from a pursuing pack of predators must dynamically compute escape strategies and trajectories,. In addition, one of the most important components of escape behaviour are economic trade-offs because escaping from a foraging patch incurs a potential loss of resources that escape decisions should take into account for optimizing fitness in the long term,. The computation of escape behaviour therefore integrates information from various streams, which creates the flexibility necessary for animals to survive in dynamic environments, and produce escapes that minimize reaction time in response to imminent threats, or that maximize success by considering as much information as possible. This information can be extracted at the time of the encounter (e.g., the nature of the threat and the current state of the environment), derive from prior experience (e.g., expectation about the outcome of the escape action), and also arise from internal signals of the state of the animal, such as hunger or anxiety.

The ability to robustly trigger escape in a stimulus-dependent manner, together with the potential for investigating it in conditions that require different levels of cognitive complexity, make escape behaviour a powerful ethological model for systems neuroscience and mechanistic studies of cognition. Classic ethological field work has revealed many principles of escape at the behavioural level, whereas laboratory studies aiming to understand the neurophysiology of escape have traditionally focused on fast stimulus-escape reactions, such as jumping escapes in locusts and flies,. There is thus a gap between our understanding of the biological mechanisms of escape and the complex behaviours displayed by animals escaping in natural environments. However, recent advances in behaviour monitoring and recording techniques in freely moving animals promise to bridge this gap, and open the way for understanding how neural circuits implement the cognitive processes that control escape behaviour. Here we review evidence that escape is a flexible behaviour under cognitive control, as well as some of the currently known underlying neural mechanisms (see further references in the supplemental information online). We consider three time points: threat detection, escape initiation, and escape execution. In addition to structuring escape into separate control points, this division generalizes to classes of problems that the brain must solve when computing any behaviour, namely classifying sensory information, selecting, and then executing flexible actions, and further underscores the power of using escape behaviour as a model for systems neuroscience.


Threat Detection

The first step in the computation of escape behaviour is to evaluate sensory information to identify whether a threat is present. This is a classification operation where sensory stimuli are sorted into threatening or not-threatening, and includes a perceptual component (is the stimulus there?) and a value component (is it threatening or not?). Animals must detect, identify, and evaluate threats based on sensory features such as shape, size, speed, or smell. For most animal species there are stimuli that innately carry negative valence, which is essential for surviving and escaping from predators without needing to rely on prior exposure to learn that they are threatening. This can be implemented through the evolution of dedicated channels with specialised sensory detectors, which activate defensive circuits and lead to stereotyped behaviour. For example, the rodent olfactory system has a circuit specialised for the detection of chemical substances emitted by other species, kairomones, where the receptors are located in the vomeronasal organ and connected to the hypothalamic defensive system via the amygdala. Similarly, a subset of cells in the visual system increase their firing rate in response to dark expanding stimuli, which signal approaching objects on a collision course and elicit defensive responses without prior experience, even in human infants. These cells can be found across the animal kingdom, probably reflecting the strong selective pressure for a collision-avoidance system. In vertebrate species, the optic tectum (OT) and its mammalian homologue, the superior colliculus (SC), are conserved regions in the midbrain for detecting and integrating threats,. While the role in defensive behaviour is perhaps the least well understood for the SC in mammals, neural activity recordings have revealed looming-sensitive cells, and activity manipulations can both impair or elicit defensive behaviours,. For innately threatening sensory stimuli that are simple and unimodal, the microcircuitry and computational mechanisms of threat integration in the OT/SC are starting to be uncovered, and place these midbrain circuits at the core of threat processing.


Previous Predator Encounters Modify Threat Perception and Escape

Although reflex-like stimulus–response couplings are important for survival, the evaluation of threats should be flexible enough to adapt to dynamic contingencies, and be modulated by expectations arising from experience and prior beliefs. For example, prey should adjust their behaviour based on the frequency and outcome of past encounters with predators, and adapt to the current level of predatory risk. In theoretical terms this is equivalent to a prior – at high predation risk, the threshold for detecting or reacting to threats should be lowered, and raised for low predation risk. Such flexible adaptation has been demonstrated in laboratory and field studies, where animals quickly learn to suppress escape responses if they are repeatedly presented with innately threatening stimuli but no adverse outcome occurs, presumably to minimise costs associated with unnecessary escape responses. In animal studies, the most common way to determine whether a stimulus is threatening is to observe behaviour, and therefore it is sometimes not possible to distinguish whether adaptations take place at the stimulus classification stage or at the point of action selection (see below). The process of habituation to a threatening stimulus can be strongly context-dependent and stimulus-specific, whereas the time course of its acquisition and persistence is variable across stimuli, contexts, and species,. This high level of flexibility suggests that there is no single underlying mechanism for escape habituation, but rather, that it is composed of multiple distinct processes operating at different levels in the same animal,. Although the neural mechanisms of escape-behaviour adaptations are mostly unknown, they have been suggested to arise from changes in inhibitory or neuromodulatory tone in crustaceans,. It will be interesting to consider whether behavioural habituation to innate threats is purely non-associative or whether it can also be shaped by associative processes, similar to inhibitory learning during conditioned fear extinction. In mammals, threat-detection circuit elements such as the SC receive both top-down cortical as well as strong neuromodulatory input, and are therefore well-positioned to implement escape habituation through cognitive control.

Across species, experience with threats can also lead to heightened sensitivity to future stimuli. Many animals respond to repeated approaches from predatory threats by increasing the probability of escape and escape vigour in subsequent encounters, decreasing escape reaction times, and changing tactics. These changes in escape performance are thought, at least in part, to be under cognitive control, and appear to adapt escape behaviour to higher levels of predation risk. The detection of predatory stimuli in one sensory modality can also cause sensitization in others, as evidenced by the increase in behavioural and olfactory neuron sensitivity observed in moths after brief exposure to bat calls. Classically, such generalization of sensitization is related to a global state of increased arousal and stress,. In lizards, for example, sensitisation is correlated to increased corticosterone levels, which regulate stress responses, and blocking corticosteroid elevation renders lizards unable to adapt their reaction in response to repeated predator exposure. In mice, stress exposure has been shown not only to decrease the response latency to looming visual stimuli but also to increase the duration of freezing. It will be interesting to understand which mechanisms of escape sensitisation are specifically cognitive, such as faster categorization of predatory threats through learning, and which arise from global mechanisms such as stress.

Habituation and sensitisation are two opposite adaptation strategies, and whether an individual responds to repeated threat encounters with one or the other is likely to depend on factors such as the initial perceived threat-level of the stimulus and the frequency of encounter, and in fact both can occur in the same animal on different timescales,.


Associative Learning Expands the Ability To Detect Threats

In addition to updating innate processes for classifying sensory stimuli as threats, surviving encounters with predators should also lead to learning new associations between features of the sensory space that might predict future encounters. This has been extensively investigated in the laboratory, where associative learning can be easily triggered by pairing a noxious stimulus such as a foot shock with a neutral stimulus. These Pavlovian threat conditioning protocols usually trigger freezing, and have been one of the main paradigms for studies of fear learning mechanisms,. In more naturalistic scenarios, relying on the experience of pain to learn new associations would be a dangerous strategy, and animals are also capable of performing such associations by computing temporal and contextual coincidence between innately threatening stimuli and neutral cues. For example, cyprinid fish detect an innate danger signal released from injured conspecifics, which they can associate with sensory cues of novel predators. Interestingly, prey can generalize their acquired predator recognition to similar but novel species, and continuously update their recognition templates,. Animals also learn to avoid locations associated with predation: ants are able to form a generalized memory of their predators’ pit traps after escaping a single time, and mice show risk assessment and escape behaviours when exploring an arena in which they previously encountered threats,.

In mammals, the circuits for encoding predator cues and predator context-specific memories are not as well understood as those that process simple aversive stimuli such as foot shocks. Overall, they seem to involve the same core associative-learning circuit elements of the basolateral amygdala, hippocampus, and distributed cortical regions, but with the additional integration of threat-instructive signals from networks such as the medial hypothalamic defensive system. It will be particularly interesting to understand how learned associations feed into innate threat-detection and escape decision centres, such as the midbrain, to inform escape and other defensive behaviours.


Vigilance and Active Risk Assessment Enhance Threat Detection

In addition to modulation from past experience, threat detection is also affected by the current state of the environment, and foraging animals often display threat-assessment behaviours that are flexibly adapted to the current environmental conditions, to improve risk analysis. For example, birds that engage in sentinel behaviour to protect foragers from predators, such as pied babblers, start epochs of guarding sooner and for longer periods in higher grass (reduced visibility) and in high wind (reduced audibility), during which they adopt a raised position to scan for danger and communicate alarm signals. Wallabies are similarly more vigilant at higher wind speeds, indicating that decreased availability of auditory, visual, and olfactory cues is actively compensated for by an increase of attention. This allocation of resources to threat detection, such as attention and vigilance, emphasises that threat detection is an active process. In fact, immediately upon detecting a threat, most animals interrupt ongoing behaviours and freeze – a behaviour that aids risk assessment by allowing animals to update information about the local environment, for example to compute the likelihood of threat presence, and to estimate and evaluate the threat risk in comparison to the benefits of not fleeing (e.g., proximity to a food source),.

It is interesting to consider that key areas for threat detection and expression of defensive behaviours, such as the SC and amygdala, are also involved in the control of spatial attention and saliency maps,. This may suggest that threat detection is fundamentally a process similar to others that link salient events in sensory space with actions – for threat and escape this link may be innate, and modified through experience.


Escape Initiation

After a sensory stimulus has been detected and valued as being a threat that requires immediate action, the escape circuit should in principle be engaged as soon as possible, and evolution has shaped neural circuits to ensure that this can be achieved. The Mauthner cell is perhaps the best-studied example – it receives direct synaptic input from the cranial nerve VIII carrying information from hair cells, and commands the initiation of fast C-start escape responses by projecting across the midline to activate contralateral motoneurons, allowing millisecond-long latencies between threat detection and escape start. In mice, the periaqueductal gray (PAG) circuit that controls escape initiation, receives monosynaptic input from the SC, which itself receives direct retinal input, thereby providing a short pathway between threat detection centres and escape initiation. However, escape initiation is often probabilistic and modulated by many variables. It has long been recognised that animals do not necessarily flee immediately once predators are detected, a point stressed by Ydenberg and Dill, who disputed much of the previous literature that equated escape initiation with threat detection. There are several processes that can account for the variable time period between detecting a threat and starting to escape, and which also control whether escape happens at all.


Decision Processes and Economics Control the Onset of Escape

Initiating escape can be the result of a decision-making process that requires integrating dynamic evidence about the threat, and decisions take time. Therefore, the escape reaction time should in part reflect the time over which decision-making processes occur, such as evidence accumulation. It is important to note, however, that even in this case reaction time does not necessarily reflect exclusively the time it takes to decide to escape: animals may have made a commitment to escape, but not initiated the action, such as during ambush encounters with a striking predator, where an animal waits to take evasive action until it is too late for the predator to adjust its trajectory. In addition, economic models of escape, supported by experimental evidence from field studies, suggest that animals escape only when the costs of remaining (e.g., the level of risk of injury or predation) are higher than the costs of fleeing (e.g., loss of foraging or mating opportunities),. An important variable in this computation is the internal state of the animal because it dictates the value of actions that compete with escape. Behavioural studies have shown a tight link between animals’ internal state − such as hunger or the receptive period of the sexual cycle – and their escape strategies,. Complementary studies on laboratory animals have begun to produce a detailed understanding of the circuits and mechanisms by which internal states and motivations control defensive behaviours (for details on hunger),. Current efforts to map motivational states onto distinct neuronal pathways and cell types will enable us to determine how different behavioural motivations compete, and shed light on how they act mechanistically to influence defensive decision-making.Hunger has a powerful and well demonstrated effect on behavioural choices and learning. For example, animals show a preference for food items that they have previously encountered in a hunger state over items that they ate while sated, even if the energetic value of both food items is the same. Defensive behaviours are no exception to the control of behavioural decisions by hunger, which has been shown to directly modulate escape in several species. Crayfish, for example, reduce the frequency of tail-flip escapes in response to overhead sweeping visual stimuli when they are fasted. In larval zebrafish, recent work has uncovered neural mechanisms that can explain how hunger decreases escape probability via changes in the visual processing of approaching stimuli in the optic tectum. In these animals, food deprivation inhibits the hypothalamic–pituitary–interrenal axis and increases the activity of serotonergic neurons in the raphe: this serotonergic input to the tectum then recruits cells that are tuned to small stimuli, causing an over-representation of food-like objects, which has been suggested to bias the choice to approach over escape,. Mice also display more risk-seeking behaviours when hungry, including spending more time in threatening environments. Recent laboratory studies have dissected the neural circuits for hunger in rodents, and have shed light on the nodes of these circuits that link hunger states to defensive behaviours. Notably, activation of a single, molecularly-defined population of inhibitory neurons in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus, AGRP+ neurons, can recapitulate the effects of hunger on defence, providing an exciting entry point for understanding behavioural choices in face of competing motivations, and the neural basis of instinctive value-based decisions.

Overall, the decision to initiate escape is not simply a threat but detection process, it is a computation that can integrate multiple external and internal variables, and currently we know very little about how the brain implements this process.


Environment and Threat Properties Control Escape Selection

Escape is only one of several possible actions in the defensive repertoire of most animals, and, for each encounter with a threat, the defensive action with the highest likelihood of success should in principle be chosen. The optimal choice depends on multiple factors about both the environment and the properties of the threat, which should be taken into account when selecting escape or alternative actions. A canonical defence alternative to escape is freezing behaviour, which has the main goal of avoiding detection. One of the most intriguing aspects of the selection between escape and freezing is that it is determined by knowledge of whether or not there is a shelter in the environment. This has been observed in lizards and several rodent species, which can learn about shelter existence in seconds and very quickly update their defensive strategy, (top left panel). In addition, in various animals including squirrels, the prey–predator distance that determines escape onset depends on the distance to refuge. This suggests that the escape initiation network is under the control of neural circuits that encode a spatial representation of the environment, which can gate escape initiation (but also control escape trajectories, see below). In rodents, the midbrain defence network receives direct synaptic input from many cortical areas that could convey this type of spatial information, but it is unknown which areas are relevant and how such control might be implemented.

Another factor known to control escape selection is the presence and value of a desirable resource. For example, when crayfish are close to a food source, they prefer to freeze in response to fast-expanding looming stimuli instead of escaping with a tail-flip. In this situation freezing is advantageous because a tail-flip moves the animal away from the food source and delays resumption of foraging. Another factor that can also carry information that dictates defensive action selection is the threat stimulus itself. Escape initiation from looming stimuli depends on the approaching object surpassing a critical visual angle or speed, and stimuli that slowly sweep overhead, mimicking a searching bird of prey, bias the choice of strategy towards freezing. In flies, a recent study has shown that walking speed controls the selection between freezing and fleeing, suggesting that the ongoing behavioural state of the animal can bias the choice of defensive behaviour.

In contrast to invertebrates, the neural implementation of defensive action selection in mammals is poorly understood. For learned threats in laboratory animals exposed to fear conditioning protocols, the central amygdala (CeA) is a critical node in controlling freezing behaviour through projections to the ventrolateral PAG (vlPAG), and recent evidence suggests that a competing population of CeA neurons is involved in selecting defence strategies such as escape or jumping, possibly through projections to the dorsal PAG (dPAG). For responses to innate threats, which do not necessarily rely on amygdala circuits, a similar winner-takes-all mechanism for selecting between escape or freezing could be implemented directly in the PAG, for example through mutual inhibition between the dPAG and vlPAG. In agreement with its crucial role in threat processing, activation of the medial SC (mSC) can evoke both escape and freezing behaviours, but it is not known how mSC activity is converted into one action or the other. Interestingly, a mSC projection to the lateral posterior nucleus of the thalamus appears to be important for mSC-evoked freezing responses, and it is possible that there are distinct threat-responding mSC cell populations that project predominantly to either the escape or freezing circuits.


Escape Action

Once the escape action has been selected, a key consideration is where to escape to. One of the simplest actions is to increase the distance from the threat by moving away from it. Escape responses in fish again provide an excellent example of such evasive action, where C-start escapes bend the fish with the head pointing away from the stimulus, followed by a second phase of swimming away. However, the success of the escape action will increase if it is sufficiently flexible to adapt to the properties of the threat, such as different predator strategies, and to the properties of the environment, such as the location of refuges and potential hazards.For the predator, successful predation includes at least five timepoints: detection, classification, approach, subjugation, and consumption. Correspondingly, prey are equipped with defence mechanisms that target termination of the interaction with the predator at each, or multiple, of these time points. Prey defensive behaviour therefore occurs within a framework set by the predator, and we believe that the predator’s perspective should be considered in studies of prey defensive decisions for two main reasons:(i) As prey behavioural responses are guided by the predator's current and expected actions, understanding the predator’s behaviour can help to infer and interpret the goals, strategies, order, and kinematics of prey behaviour,. For example, analysis of aerial pursuit trajectories, incorporating data taken from predator-mounted video cameras, has demonstrated how prey can terminate pursuit by using flanking turns that briefly withdraw the prey from the visual or acoustic field of view of the predator,. Defensive strategies can be highly complex in naturalistic predator–prey encounters. This is apparent in birds and mammals that display defensive signalling behaviours, such as communicating precise predator-related information to conspecifics, or deterring attack and pursuit by communicating their knowledge of a predator’s ambush location to the predator directly,. We should therefore appreciate that assays lacking interacting predators risk underestimating the natural behavioural repertoire of the prey, or misinterpreting the functions of particular behaviours.(ii) Many prey act as predators themselves, and evidence suggests that the computations for detection, sensorimotor transformations, and movements that underlie predation and evasion are sufficiently similar that both can be carried out by overlapping neural structures. For foraging animals, sensory cues that are very similar can arise from prey, predators, or harmless agents, and misidentification can carry considerable fitness costs. In the laboratory, visual cues such as small spots can elicit either approach or escape behaviour in zebrafish, frogs, and crabs, depending on their size and location in the visual field, while mice will approach and capture crickets, but freeze to similarly sized overhead visual stimuli,. In zebrafish, visual processing of prey-like stimuli has been localised to specific pretectal and tectal regions, suggesting at least partial circuit overlap in predator and prey detection and classification processes.Interestingly, despite their opposing goals, some of the movements required for predation and evasion are so similar that prey-capture behaviour of goldfish incorporates Mauthner-mediated C-starts, and it has been suggested that archer fish use Mauthner cells in predictive prey-capture turns. In rodents, the SC is involved in approach and prey-capture behaviours as well as defence. However, activity manipulations and lesions implicate the lateral subregion of the SC in approach and prey capture, whereas the medial subregion is more strongly implicated in defence and, interestingly, the two subregions possess partially segregated input and output connections in rodents,. Furthermore, several recent studies have begun to deconstruct the behavioural modules of hunting in mice by examining the role of specific projections to the PAG from the CeA, lateral hypothalamus, and medial preoptic area which can drive prey pursuit through projections to the mesenphalic locomotor region, whereas CeA to reticular formation projections evoke killing bites,. How all of these network elements interact dynamically to produce the successive stages of visually-guided predation is not yet clear; however, revisiting the dual, comparative study of predation and evasion using modern techniques should be a powerful paradigm for uncovering general principles of how the brain generates goal-directed behaviour.


Properties of the Threat Determine Escape Patterns

The most basic information to extract from the threat is its type and location, which can dictate the direction of escape not only for simple behaviours but also for more complex actions (top middle panel). For example, flies engage in flexible visually-controlled postural adjustments approximately 200 ms before take-off to direct escape initiation away from a looming stimulus, and during flight they perform fast banked turns away from the stimulus that dynamically adapt to the position of the fly in relation to the stimulus. Interestingly, some species introduce deliberate variability in both the initial direction of escape and the escape trajectory when moving away from a threat (bottom middle panel). For example, cockroaches have an unpredictable initial escape direction which, although directed away from the source of threat, falls within one of a few stereotypical directions, between 90° and 180° from the stimulus. Other species make continuously unpredictable movements during escape instead of optimising speed, which can increase survival, particularly when escaping from ballistic capture. Such unpredictability can be achieved by gait transitions, and by changes in speed and direction, as seen in the bipedal escape responses of jerboas, a hopping desert rodent.

Many species are capable of producing fast stereotyped escape, as well as slower and more variable responses that map onto distinct neural circuits, where the chosen type of escape depends on properties such as threat intensity and threat approach speed. In fish and amphibians this generally corresponds to eliciting a Mauthner system-mediated response, or Mauthner system-independent escape,. Recent work in larval zebrafish has shown that escape probability and direction are modulated by the speed of a visual stimulus, where looming that mimics a fast-approaching predator elicits ‘perfect avoidance’ turns of 180° and fast reaction times, whereas slow looming leads to less predictable responses with variable bend angles and reaction times. Similar behaviour is observed in crayfish, which engage in stereotyped, giant-fibre-mediated tail flips in response to abrupt threats, and flexible, non-giant-fibre-dependent tails flips directed away from the source of aversion or towards specific locations when facing a gradual threat. Flies also show threat-dependent flexibility of escape actions, performing either slow or fast take-offs in the early phase of escapes, thereby optimizing wing stability or speed, respectively,. This decision depends on the retinal angular velocity and size of looming stimuli, and information about each feature is conveyed to the giant-fibre escape circuit by a set of non-overlapping visual projection neurons. Similarly, crabs show flexibility in escape responses to looming stimuli, adjusting the speed of escape dynamically as a function of the expansion properties of the loom. Humans also seem to rely on two parallel escape circuits: one for quick decisions in the face of very imminent threats, via the PAG and midcingulate cortex, and another for response to nonimminent threats, involving the posterior cingulate and ventromedial prefrontal cortices as well as the hippocampus.

Recent neurophysiological and behavioural data show comparable response flexibility in mice exposed to expanding spots of different contrast. Although it is not clear whether mice display two distinct modes of escape, flight vigour is strongly modulated by threat salience, and excitatory cells of the deep mSC (dmSC) seem to encode a variable correlated with threat-stimulus saliency, which activates the dPAG network to initiate escape once dmSC activity exceeds a threshold. Activity of dPAG neurons strongly correlates with escape speed, and, as threat saliency increases, stronger activation of dmSC neurons leads to higher firing frequency in the dPAG, thereby suggesting a mechanistic link between threat-stimulus intensity and escape response vigour.


Knowledge about the Environment Controls Escape Execution

A crucial determinant of escape success is taking into account the spatial features of the local environment, such as routes to shelter and the presence of obstacles, which have been shown to modulate escape responses across phyla. In fish and frogs, the onset of C-start responses is sensitive to stationary obstacles: in open water the initial C-start angle is a function of the angle of the approaching threat, but when these animals are close to a wall their escape trajectories cannot be predicted from the threat-stimulus approach angle, and are instead biased away from the wall, even if the animal needs to turn towards the approaching threat (top right panel).

Many animals, including fish, lizards, and rodents, escape towards a known refuge. Shelter-directed escapes can be a navigational challenge because the shelter might not be immediately visible from the current location, and therefore require the computation of an escape route from the current position to a previously memorised location. In agreement, rodents do not need to see the shelter nor rely on proximal visual or olfactory cues to successfully escape to it, but instead use a rapidly formed and flexible memory of the shelter location,. Intriguingly, mice terminate escape when reaching the shelter location even after it has been moved, suggesting that shelter cues are also not necessary to stop escape, and that this instead might rely on the comparison of current position with a spatial location derived from other sources. In support of the notion that escape to shelter is a behaviour with the primary goal of reaching safety instead of simply moving away from threat, mice initiate escape with a head-rotation movement towards the shelter followed by an acceleration straight towards it, regardless of the initial position of the mouse and even if this means approaching the threat. The selection of refuge is influenced by several variables, including the safety value of the shelter, the distance and relative position of the predator, and competition for access, (bottom left panel).

In addition, the local social environment can also modulate escape behaviour. Schooling herring have uniform escape trajectories that are less flexible than the responses of solitary animals, and which decrease the likelihood of collisions, and even fast-response systems, such as the C-start in guppies, can exhibit similar dependency (bottom right panel). In crayfish, social hierarchy affects the excitability of the lateral giant (LG) escape circuit in a serotonin-dependent manner, causing reduced LG excitability in subordinate individuals, exclusively during conspecific interactions. This modulation biases subordinates to engage in slower, non-LG-mediated, flexible escapes, while dominant individuals retain their ability to execute fast, LG-mediated escapes in response to unexpected attacks. These findings suggest that neuromodulation might influence escape at multiple stages, from threat detection (see above) to escape execution.Congregating with conspecifics can be an advantageous antipredation strategy. As the number of potential prey increases, the chance that a given individual will be predated decreases through dilution and through the ‘confusion effect’ that hinders pursuit of single prey. Importantly, grouping can increase the speed and accuracy of predator-avoidance decisions, and reduce the time devoted to threat vigilance through increased probability of detecting predators.Foraging in a group can enhance threat detection in several ways. First, many animal species emit dedicated alarm signals to warn conspecifics of threatening situations. Various modalities of signals have been described, including chemical alarm signals and alarm calls. Alarm calls can carry information about the specific nature of a threat, such as the type and location of the detected predator, and can cause different responses in conspecifics: vervet monkeys tend to look up before initiating an escape following alarm calls elicited in response to eagles, whereas snake-elicited calls cause them to look down. Emitting alarm calls when faced with predators may have the added benefit of accentuating dilution and confusion effects, but can also attract the attention of a predator. It seems that animals can take this potential cost into consideration because they do not always emit alarm calls when faced with threat. Instead, sudden silence from conspecifics ceasing movement can function as a defence-inducing cue in rats, whereas crested pigeons preferentially flee from the sounds of escape take-offs of conspecifics versus routine take-offs. In conditions of reduced visibility, where the benefit of hearing an alarm call increases, starlings increase the frequency of calls, suggesting that there is a dynamic cost–benefit computation controlling alarm-call emission. A second means for increasing threat detection in groups is to observe the initiation of defensive behaviour by other individuals in the group. In some species of sparrows that emit little information about detected threat, individuals that do not directly detect threat infer it through the temporal profile of departures of other individuals from the flock.In addition to threat detection, being in a group setting also influences escape execution, which becomes extremely dynamic due to the additional navigation constraints imposed by the presence of nearby animals also trying to escape. Fish schools, which are thought to be primarily an antipredator adaptation, provide an excellent example of collective escape behaviour. Schools of sand eels can execute diverse coordinated escape actions such as split, join, or hourglass formation, and in herring the type of escape formation depends on the approach angle of the threat. For groups faced with predator-related decisions, it is likely that increases in apparent cognitive performance with group size are due to multiple mechanisms acting simultaneously, such as swarm intelligence and pool-of-competence effects, and that their relative contributions are context-dependent.


Concluding Remarks

Although escape behaviour may appear to be simple, there is overwhelming evidence at the behavioural level that much more is involved than simple feedforward sensorimotor transformations. For systems neuroscience, escape behaviour provides a powerful ethological paradigm for studying the neural basis of cognitive processes such as perceptual and value-based decision-making, or goal-directed actions. While escape is often perceived as a simple stimulus-reaction, the lack of apparent explicit deliberation should not be taken as an indication of a simple computational process. Escape might need to be implemented under strong timing constraints and favour short reaction times, but even very fast escape responses can integrate multiple variables such as spatial constraints of the environment and economic trade-offs. The difference with other actions might be that the results of the computations relevant for successful escape are cached and ready to use (pre-computed cognitive constructs) instead of being computed de novo on the spot. This raises interesting parallels with heuristics-based decision-making, which might rely on similar processes, and thus investigation of escape mechanisms might shed light on this important component of behaviour. Although the neurophysiological mechanisms of threat detection and escape initiation have been studied in detail in some species, we know very little about how cognitive control of escape is implemented at the mechanistic level (see Outstanding Questions). As new software tools for rigorous behavioural quantification in freely behaving animals become available, and are paired with high-density recordings of neural activity across multiple brain areas, our understanding of the neural basis of natural behaviours will increase at a fast pace. Most escape circuits receive projections from numerous telencephalic areas, and we anticipate that exciting advances in the field will come from investigating the intersection between cortical and subcortical circuits. This research avenue will improve not only our understanding of neural mechanisms of cognitive control of escape but, in doing so, will also advance our understanding of cortical function and cognition in general.How, and where in the brain, is the choice between escape and other defensive actions computed? Prey can exhibit multiple defensive behaviours that are flexibly selected as a function of environment and threat contingencies, but which neural circuits implement this action selection? Are models of action selection developed for learned actions valid for instinctive behaviours, or are there specialised ‘low-level’ modules for computing instinctive choice of defence actions? Do the basal ganglia play a role in escape behaviour? To what extent do the apparent defensive strategies rely on deliberative processes?How does the mammalian brain coordinate complex escapes? Fleeing to shelter may require navigation through complex environments and negotiation of obstacles or multiple route options, but where are these computations made? Can they be independently implemented by subcortical structures, or do they require coordination with cortical circuits? Where are variables that matter for escaping successfully encoded in the brain, and where are they integrated into escape decisions? Learning of these variables, such as shelter location, can be an extremely fast process, but how is this implemented at the neuronal and synaptic level?How are experience-dependent changes in escape behaviour achieved at a neuronal level? Are they implemented as ‘top-down’ cortical control over subcortical areas, or are the midbrain circuits underlying innate behaviours themselves plastic? Are changes such as threat habituation long-lasting or even permanent? How are prior beliefs and expectations about threat and escape encoded and updated, and how do they influence the core escape-circuit modules?


How Curiosity Enhances Hippocampus-Dependent Memory: The Prediction, Appraisal, Curiosity, and Exploration (PACE) Framework

Matthias J. Gruber, Charan Ranganath — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2019. PMC6891259, CC BY 4.0.

Curiosity plays a fundamental role for learning and memory, but the neural mechanisms that stimulate curiosity and its effect on memory are poorly understood. Accumulating evidence suggests that curiosity states are related to modulations in activity in the dopaminergic circuit and that these modulations impact memory encoding and consolidation for both targets of curiosity and incidental information encountered during curiosity states. To account for this evidence, we propose the Prediction, Appraisal, Curiosity, and Exploration (PACE) framework, which attempts to explain curiosity and memory in terms of cognitive processes, neural circuits, behavior, and subjective experience. The PACE framework generates testable predictions that can stimulate future investigation of the mechanisms underlying curiosity-related memory enhancements.


Understanding Curiosity as a Cognitive State

Curiosity is assumed to have a fundamental impact on learning and memory and thus has been a major topic of interest to educators. Although early research on curiosity primarily focused on curiosity described as a stable tendency to experience curiosity (i.e., trait curiosity), there has been increased interest in curiosity as a cognitive state (i.e., state curiosity),. Researchers generally describe state curiosity as a motivational state that stimulates exploration and information seeking to reduce uncertainty,. State curiosity resembles states that fall under the umbrella of ‘reward motivation’, in the sense that information that resolves uncertainty can be seen as having a value comparable with other rewards,. Although several recent reviews have highlighted the importance of state curiosity in learning, this nascent field currently lacks a theoretical framework that attempts to explain curiosity and memory in terms of cognitive processes and their underlying neural circuits.

In this Opinion article, we propose a framework that integrates emergent research on curiosity, drawing on a broad range of evidence and ideas from psychology, cognitive neuroscience, and systems neuroscience,. Specifically, we propose that the effects of curiosity and memory can be understood as emerging from a cycle that involves Prediction errors, Appraisal, Curiosity, and Exploration (PACE; Key Figure). This framework proposes that curiosity is first triggered by significant prediction errors that are appraised as an indicator of information that could be valuable in the future. This cycle enhances memory encoding through increased attention, exploration, and information seeking and enhances the consolidation of information acquired while in a curious state through dopaminergic neuromodulation of the hippocampus. The framework leads to testable predictions and provides a common reference scheme for future research on curiosity and its relationship with memory. Below, we start by briefly overviewing the behavioral evidence on how state curiosity enhances learning and memory. Subsequently, we lay out our arguments and speculations for each component of the PACE framework and synthesize the theoretical ideas along with the neuroscientific evidence that support our predictions.


What Is Curiosity and How Does It Influence Learning?

One key difference between state curiosity and states associated with reward motivation is that reward delivery is generally thought to motivate future behavior that leads to the same reward. By contrast, information that completely resolves uncertainty no longer motivates exploratory behavior. Therefore, curiosity motivates us to constantly seek new, unknown information,. Consistent with this idea, initial behavioral and fMRI studies on curiosity highlight that uncertainty is a key driver of curiosity,. Furthermore, the effects of reward and curiosity are not additive, and reward has been shown to undermine curiosity and its effect on memory,. Thus, curiosity can be seen as a motivational state that is at least partially distinct from states that motivate the acquisition of primary reinforcers.

Recent studies have demonstrated that curiosity significantly enhances learning and retention of information over time. Most studies that have addressed the relationship between curiosity and memory have used a trivia paradigm in which participants are tested on memory for the answers to trivia questions that elicit different levels of curiosity (see for an overview of the measurements of curiosity). These studies demonstrated that participants are better at remembering answers to questions that elicited high levels of curiosity,. Curiosity-related memory enhancements are evident in immediate, and delayed (i.e., 1 day to several weeks), memory tests, suggesting that curiosity might enhance both memory encoding and consolidation,. The effects of curiosity on memory for trivia answers does not seem to be driven by expertise or arousal, as studies suggest that curiosity-related memory enhancements are independent of the effects of prior knowledge, and the effects of emotional arousal on memory. In addition to enhancing memory in young adults, curiosity also enhances memory in healthy older adults, and in children and adolescents,.Curiosity ParadigmsThe currently dominant paradigm to elicit curiosity is a trivia paradigm in which participants encode trivia questions and their associated answers. For each question, participants usually rate their level of curiosity and confidence about knowing the answer to the trivia question. The ratings are obtained either during the encoding phase, or during a prescreening phase,. After an anticipation phase, the correct answer to the trivia question is usually shown at the end of the trial (but see for a 50% probability of presentation of the answer).In addition to the trivia paradigm that elicits epistemic curiosity, other paradigms have been recently adopted to examine perceptual curiosity and to better dissociate different processes underlying curiosity. For example, one study used blurred visual stimuli compared with clear visual stimuli to induce perceptual curiosity. After an anticipation period, 50% of the stimuli were shown as clear visual stimuli. To investigate the neural mechanisms underlying perceptual curiosity, stimuli that were preceded by their associated blurry version (blurry–clear stimuli) were contrasted with images that were presented in a clear version for the whole trial (clear–clear stimuli). Another recent curiosity study used a lottery task in which participants had to anticipate different levels of monetary rewards. The paradigm allows disentangling of how outcome uncertainty and information value contribute to curiosity.Curiosity MeasuresTo measure different degrees of curiosity during a state of curiosity, most studies have relied on participants’ self-reported subjective curiosity ratings,. Other studies have operationalized curiosity in a more objective manner by measuring willingness to wait for an answer, or to sacrifice rewards (e.g., water in nonhuman primate studies, limited tokens or money in humans), or by giving participants a choice of which stimuli they would like to experience,. In general, the available evidence suggests that subjective curiosity ratings positively correlate with objective curiosity measures that implicitly test curiosity via willingness to sacrifice scarce resources,. Furthermore, it has been suggested that eye-sensitive measures might be indicative of curiosity states. One study using eye tracking found that states of high curiosity, elicited by the presentation of a trivia question, were associated with participants’ anticipatory gaze toward the expected location of the answer (for an oculomotor exploration task to study curiosity in nonhuman primates). Another study showed that pupil dilations during a curiosity state are also predictive of the level of curiosity. In summary, ‘willingness to sacrifice resources’, eye gaze, and pupil dilations appear to be promising objective curiosity measures in addition to self-report curiosity measures to investigate the mechanisms underlying curiosity.

Although it might seem unsurprising that people are better at learning answers to questions that piqued their curiosity, the available evidence suggests that the curiosity-related memory enhancement spreads beyond the target of a person’s curiosity. For instance, studies have used a version of the trivia paradigm in which participants were incidentally exposed to faces as they anticipated the answers to trivia questions. Although the faces were irrelevant to the trivia answers, participants showed enhanced recognition of faces learned during high-curiosity states compared with faces learned during low-curiosity states,. Based on these behavioral findings of curiosity-related memory enhancements, psychological theories on curiosity, and initial neuroscientific evidence, we now lay out our arguments and speculations for each component of the PACE framework.


Context-Based Prediction Errors: A Potential Role of the Hippocampus

Prior knowledge enables people to make predictions about the environment and, conversely, prediction errors occur in situations where there is little prior knowledge (e.g., arriving in a novel place) or when events violate one’s expectations (e.g., arriving in a familiar place to find that the furniture has been rearranged). It has been proposed that the hippocampus forms cognitive maps that allow one to generate predictions based on past experiences in similar contexts and situations. Violations of hippocampally generated predictions (i.e., context-based prediction errors), in turn, were proposed to stimulate responses within a subpopulation of hippocampal neurons (termed the ‘misplace system’) that can potentially trigger exploration to resolve the uncertainty. Thus, the hippocampus can be seen as playing a role in stimulating curiosity.

There is reason to think that surprising or truly novel experiences elicit curiosity. For instance, humans tend to spend more time looking at novel than familiar objects or scenes, and novelty-induced exploration appears to depend on the hippocampus,. Importantly, one study using a scene-viewing task showed that individual differences in participants’ trait curiosity predicted how well participants visually explored the novel scenes. In addition, curiosity may be triggered by stimuli that are not novel per se, if they violate one’s expectations. For instance, people will spend time visually exploring parts of scenes that have changed relative to what they had previously seen, and this effect also depends on the hippocampus,.

In addition to curiosity-related visual exploration, when people await the presentation of information that resolves uncertainty, eye movement behavior might also depend on curiosity. Consistent with this idea, one study using the trivia paradigm found that participants oriented their gaze earlier toward the location of an answer if the answer was anticipated with high compared with low curiosity. In addition, individual variation in this earlier curiosity-triggered anticipatory gaze correlated with individual differences in trait curiosity. In summary, initial studies on curiosity using eye tracking indicate enhanced curiosity-based exploration and information seeking, which might be elicited by context-based prediction errors dependent on hippocampal functioning.


Information-Based Prediction Errors: A Potential Role of the Anterior Cingulate Cortex

Prediction errors are not limited to events in the outside world: a prediction error can also be triggered when an event violates one’s expectations about his or her knowledge on a particular topic (i.e., ‘information-based prediction errors’ or ‘information gaps’). In an early psychological theory of curiosity, Berlyne conceptualized the idea of information gaps in terms of cognitive conflict: ‘Conflicting elements or requirements often characterize the “problems” that start us off inquiring or experimenting or thinking’. Inspired by these theoretical ideas, neuroscientists proposed that the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is recruited during states of cognitive conflict. ACC activation, in turn, stimulates recruitment of regions in the lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) to direct actions to resolve the conflict,. Applying this concept to curiosity, we propose that the ACC might signal cognitive conflict when one is faced with an information gap and this can stimulate curiosity to find the necessary information to resolve the conflict.

Consistent with this idea, the large majority of fMRI studies on curiosity have reported activation in the ACC,. For example, whole-brain analyses demonstrate enhanced ACC activation elicited by high- compared with low-curiosity trivia questions, and by high compared with low perceptual uncertainty about an upcoming scene image. In addition, curiosity-related ACC activity seems to be evident in curiosity paradigms in which participants act on their curiosity and choose which stimuli that they would like to see,. For example, if participants are highly curious about the revelation of a magic trick that is also associated with receiving a potential electric shock, participants show increased ACC activity when they accept the risk to satisfy their curiosity about the magic trick. In addition, enhanced ACC activity seems to be evident when participants choose to see negatively valued information (i.e., morbid curiosity) compared with passively viewing the choice cue. Overall, these findings support the idea that the ACC might signal information gaps due to cognitive conflicts that can trigger curiosity.


Appraisal: A Potential Role of the Lateral PFC

In our framework, information- or environmentally triggered prediction errors might not be sufficient to trigger curiosity. Under certain circumstances these factors might have the opposite effect and induce anxiety. Relevant to this point, the hippocampus and ACC have been implicated in exploration but also in the inhibition of exploratory behavior during anxiety states,. If the hippocampus and ACC contribute to both curiosity-based exploration and anxiety-based behavioral inhibition, there must be an additional step that leads to curiosity and exploration.

We propose that prediction errors and information gaps trigger an appraisal process that determines one’s actions (i.e., inhibition or exploration) along with its subjective experience (i.e., anxiety or curiosity). Our framework proposes that such appraisal is supported by the lateral PFC. The importance of appraisal processes has been highlighted by behavioral studies suggesting that curiosity depends on the appraisal of one’s ability to resolve the challenges raised by the prediction error,. More specifically, the appraisal is needed to determine whether the current state of uncertainty reflects a potential threat and, if not, whether one has the skills, expertise, and resources needed to resolve the uncertainty,.

In this framework, a prediction error could trigger curiosity and exploration if one feels that one has the capability to resolve the uncertainty (i.e., appraisal of higher coping potential) or it could trigger anxiety and behavioral inhibition if one believes that one has no ability to cope with the prediction error (i.e., appraisal of low coping potential). For instance, imagine that you hear a loud sound while walking in an unfamiliar neighborhood. If you think you heard the sound of a cork popping with music in the background, you might respond with curiosity and seek out the source of the sound. Alternatively, if you think the sound was a gunshot, you might respond with anxiety and rush to a safe place. In a similar vein, a student who discovers an information gap as he completes a homework assignment might become curious if he focused on the value of the necessary information on a future test. However, he could become anxious and procrastinate if he instead interpreted the information gap as a sign of his incompetence and inability to understand the topic. In these examples, we can see how an appraisal of the current situation can determine the subjective and behavioral response to a context-based prediction error or information gap.

As noted above, theories of cognitive control propose that ACC-mediated conflict signals stimulate networks in the lateral PFC that select the responses that are needed to resolve the conflict,. Substantial evidence suggests that this function can be extended to appraisal processes that mediate emotional states and emotion regulation. We therefore propose that regions in the lateral PFC support appraisals that determine whether an individual will respond with curiosity in the face of uncertainty. Consistent with this idea, neuroimaging studies using the trivia paradigm have found that trivia questions associated with high compared with low curiosity showed enhanced activity in the lateral PFC potentially reflecting stronger appraisal for high- compared with low-curiosity questions,. Other curiosity studies also showed stronger lateral PFC activity when participants anticipated visual images with high compared with low uncertainty and when participants chose to reveal an image of an unknown scene. Perhaps contrary to the predictions of our framework, one study using the trivia paradigm showed that a context with highly surprising information reduced the increase of curiosity-related activation in the lateral PFC and the ACC. However, further research is needed to understand how temporally extended surprising contexts relate to the sparking of item-level curiosity states.


Curiosity Triggers Dopaminergic Neuromodulation

Substantial evidence suggests that curiosity motivates and energizes an individual to seek information to relieve that state,. There are many ways that this might occur and the evidence suggests that neuromodulatory systems are likely to play an important role. Regions in the lateral PFC that we proposed to support appraisal also provide input to the dopaminergic midbrain [substantia nigra/ventral tegmental area (SN/VTA)], the origin of dopamine release,. Thus, the lateral PFC is in a position to stimulate widespread dopaminergic neuromodulation, which, as we describe below, stimulates exploratory behavior and information seeking and enhances encoding and memory consolidation,.

Several models have suggested that dopaminergic neuromodulation enhances exploratory behavior along with the motivation to seek a reward,. In line with these ideas and related to curiosity, ample evidence in rodents highlights the role of dopamine during exploration and, in turn, its effect on memory consolidation,. For example, blockade of D1/D5 dopaminergic receptors during exploration of novel environments decreases the consolidation of new spatial maps, suggesting a causal link between exploration-triggered dopamine and memory consolidation. Also consistent with the idea that curiosity triggers enhanced information seeking, several studies have shown how nonhuman primates and humans have a strong preference for advance information-seeking,. That is, if individuals have the possibility of receiving advance information about the value of an upcoming reward, they have a strong bias to select the advance information even if this option is associated with sacrificing parts of the reward. Critically, in nonhuman primates, it has been shown that such information-seeking preference for advance information is associated with enhanced dopaminergic activity in the midbrain.

The research on the relationship between dopaminergic activity and information seeking/exploration dovetails with prominent curiosity theories that define curiosity as a state that stimulates active exploration and information seeking to reduce uncertainty and to close information gaps,. Consistent with these ideas, several fMRI studies have reported that curiosity enhances activity in striatal areas that heavily depend on dopamine release by the SN/VTA,. In particular, while some studies reported activity in the dorsal striatum, other studies showed activation throughout the striatum including the ventral striatum,. One study found that curiosity-related activity in the ventral striatum might be potentially related to the ‘tip of the tongue’ phenomenon, often reported as an intense feeling of ‘almost knowing’ the information and accompanied by very high curiosity. Critically, studies using the trivia paradigm revealed that the dopaminergic midbrain (SN/VTA) shows increased activity for high- compared with low-curiosity trivia questions,. Another study related to curiosity revealed increased activation in the SN/VTA and ventral striatum when participants anticipated gaining information about future favorable outcomes. In addition to dopaminergic activity during curiosity states, one study also found enhanced midbrain activity during the presentation of previously unknown answers.


Curiosity Enhances Hippocampus-Dependent Encoding and Memory Consolidation via Dopaminergic Neuromodulation

Studies on reward and dopamine have shown that dopamine leads to an immediate attentional bias toward stimuli that have an association with past or future rewards (‘reward-based salience’),. Consistent with this, one study (also reported above) using eye tracking has shown how curiosity increases such attentional bias. That is, states of high compared with low curiosity, elicited by the presentation of trivia questions, were associated with participants’ anticipatory gaze toward the expected location of the answer. Further evidence for the role of increased attention in curiosity comes from neuroimaging studies that have shown that curiosity elicits activity in frontal and parietal brain areas that support attention and cognitive control,.

In line with the findings that curiosity enhances attention and that dopaminergic activity can affect immediate learning, curiosity-related memory enhancements are evident when memory is tested immediately or after a short delay following encoding,. Neuroimaging research has demonstrated the positive influence of dopaminergic activity on curiosity-based learning. It has been shown that, when a high-curiosity trivia question is presented, curiosity-elicited activity in the ventral striatum and the hippocampus predicts curiosity-related memory enhancements for trivia answers. In addition, individual differences in curiosity-based activation in the SN/VTA and hippocampus along with SN/VTA–hippocampal functional connectivity predict the magnitude of curiosity-related memory enhancements for incidental face images that are presented during curiosity states. The findings are in line with the idea that curiosity enhances attentional and dopaminergic processes during learning that lead to immediate memory benefits.

In addition, prominent models and recent findings have suggested that dopamine especially enhances hippocampus-dependent consolidation,. Consistent with these findings, curiosity-based memory enhancement for trivia answers has been shown in 12- or 24-h overnight-delayed, and in 1–3-week delayed, memory tests, suggesting a role of enhanced memory consolidation for curiosity-related information. Furthermore, dopamine-related ‘tag-and-capture’ models suggest that novelty-mediated increases in dopamine availability enhance the retention of memories for events that occur before or after the novel event takes place,. These ideas and findings align well with recent findings in curiosity research that show enhanced retention of incidental material that was presented during high-curiosity states,. Consistent with the role of enhanced hippocampal consolidation via dopaminergic modulation, it has recently been shown that intrinsically regulated learning (potentially related to curiosity) engages SN/VTA–hippocampal processes and in turn promotes consolidation-related enhancements,.


How a PACE Cycle Influences Memory

Having laid out the proposed components of the PACE framework along with the supporting evidence, we are in a position to better understand how curiosity shapes learning and memory. As we have outlined, it becomes apparent that there is not a single factor that elicits curiosity and no single process through which curiosity affects memory. Instead, there are several factors that trigger curiosity and curiosity affects memory in multiple ways. In general, our framework provides a model of how external, context-based and internal, information-based prediction errors – supported by the hippocampus and ACC, respectively – stimulate appraisal in the lateral PFC. Such lateral PFC-related appraisal then leads to either anxiety/inhibition related to amygdalar processes or curiosity/exploration related to dopaminergic processes. If curiosity is sparked, curiosity enhances learning via increased attentional processes, and retention via enhanced memory consolidation,. The aspect of the PACE framework of how curiosity shapes learning and memory via dopaminergic functions is in line with theoretical models on how dopaminergic activity enhances hippocampus-dependent encoding and memory consolidation,. Importantly, the PACE framework extends these previous models and proposes how lateral PFC-related appraisal mediates how hippocampus- and ACC-related prediction errors trigger curiosity-related neuromodulation. Although our proposed framework focuses on state curiosity and its effect on memory, the individual components of the PACE framework might also be influenced by individual variation in trait curiosity.Although our framework focuses on state curiosity and its effects on memory, prior research has focused primarily on trait curiosity – the tendency to experience curiosity as a stable personality characteristic (for a review). Importantly, theories of curiosity have suggested a link between trait and state curiosity. That is, individuals who show higher trait curiosity engage in enhanced information seeking and curiosity-based exploration,. In line with this idea, recent experimental studies have also emphasized how individual differences in trait curiosity affect curiosity-driven exploration,. Within our framework, it is possible that the degree of involvement of the proposed PACE components might rely on individual variation in trait curiosity.For the context- and information-based prediction error components, it might be possible that individual differences in trait curiosity differently elicit hippocampus- and ACC-dependent prediction errors. Potentially consistent with this idea, the degree of curiosity-based exploration measured via eye movements, – potentially underlying hippocampus-dependent context-based prediction errors – has been shown to correlate with trait curiosity. In addition, the degree of information-seeking behavior in an experiment in which participants searched different Wikipedia articles also correlated with trait curiosity; specifically, the particular aspect of trait curiosity that is related to closing an information gap (i.e., deprivation sensitivity). Therefore, relationships between trait curiosity and curiosity-based behavior might rely on individual differences in the sensitivity to hippocampus- and ACC-related prediction errors.Regarding the appraisal component, appraisal of the current situation will depend not just on the current state of uncertainty but also on a person’s trait curiosity. It has been shown that individual differences in the strength of appraisal (i.e., how well a person can cope with the uncertainty) explains the individual differences in trait curiosity. That is, ‘curious people appear to be curious because they are more likely to appraise their ability to understand as high’ (see p. 108). Consistent with this finding, a series of experiments has shown that participants with high coping potential show higher curiosity/interest in complex novel products and inventions, suggesting that appraisal leads to curiosity only if the prediction errors seem manageable.Does the curiosity component, which triggers information seeking and exploration, potentially depend on individual differences in trait curiosity as well? Here, it might be relevant to consider that individual differences in the more general personality trait ‘openness to experience’ – which encompasses curiosity as a critical subcomponent – has been linked to dopaminergic functions,. This suggests that dopaminergic functions also extend to ‘cognitive exploration’. Consistent with this relationship between dopamine and cognitive exploration, it has been shown that the strength of a white matter connection between dopaminergic regions and the hippocampus, (i.e., via the fornix) correlates with the degree of trait curiosity.Regarding the final PACE component of how curiosity enhances memory, it has also been shown how trait curiosity enhances real-world learning,. For example, it has been shown that trait curiosity mediates the effect on learning during a medical training program. In addition, trait curiosity predicts academic performance even if the effects of intelligence and effort on academic performance are controlled.

Within our framework, a PACE cycle will be completed once uncertainty is resolved and curiosity is satisfied by closing an information gap. However, in many cases the presentation of the information that was associated with curiosity might elicit a further context- or information-based prediction error. In line with this idea, several studies using the trivia paradigm demonstrate how prediction errors triggered by the trivia answers themselves benefit memory,. Within our framework, we propose that such further prediction errors will start a new PACE cycle, which could then further benefit memory and promote knowledge acquisition.

Critically, new paradigms will need to be developed to test several predictions of the PACE framework. For example, future neuroimaging studies would need to investigate how active exploration and information seeking (rather than the passive awaiting of information associated with different levels of curiosity) enhances curiosity-related memory. Furthermore, it will be central to rigorously test the proposed role of each component within the PACE framework and how the proposed components functionally interact with each other in support of curiosity-based memory. In we outline the currently most relevant predictions of the PACE framework.Prediction Error Components Supported by Hippocampus and ACCLarger context- and information-based prediction errors elicit increased activity in the hippocampus and ACC, respectively.Recruitment of specific hippocampal regions depends on the functions along the longitudinal axis of the hippocampus (from gist-based to detailed information in the anterior to posterior hippocampus, respectively).The two types of prediction error are elicited in parallel but depending on the situation one type of prediction error may play a larger role than the other.Unexpected changes in the environment (e.g., surprise in the environment) relies more on hippocampus-dependent prediction errors.Information that elicits higher cognitive conflict (e.g., ambivalent information, incongruent information to prior knowledge) relies more on ACC-dependent prediction errors.To support successful appraisal, larger prediction errors result in stronger hippocampal–lateral PFC and ACC–lateral PFC coupling for context- and information-based prediction errors, respectively.Appraisal Component Supported by Lateral PFCEnhanced recruitment of lateral PFC in situations that require more appraisal (e.g., situations that introduce a choice or even a dilemma about whether to explore or to abstain from information).The lateral PFC will appraise information related to hippocampus- and ACC-dependent prediction errors and mediate the effect of prediction errors to elicit curiosity or anxiety.Individual differences in coping strategies affect lateral PFC-related appraisal and the subsequent elicitation of anxiety or curiosity. For example, appraisal in individuals with higher stress tolerance might be more likely to elicit curiosity than anxiety.Subpopulations and patients with suboptimal PFC functions rely less on appraisal in eliciting curiosity. Such suboptimal appraisal mechanisms may lead to altered curiosity (e.g., more inconsistent curiosity). For example, less developed PFC functions in children may lead to differences in curiosity (less mediated by appraisal and potentially more variable) compared with adults.Curiosity Component Supported by SN/VTA and StriatumExploratory behavior and eye movements related to curiosity are supported by activity in the ventral striatum and SN/VTA.The strength of lateral PFC–SN/VTA functional connectivity predicts the degree of curiosity and exploratory behavior. By contrast, lateral PFC–amygdala functional connectivity predicts whether appraisal leads to anxiety-related behavioral inhibition.Dopaminergic functions within the striatum and SN/VTA vary across individuals in the healthy population and are decreased in older adults and in certain clinical conditions (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, schizophrenia, depression, Alzheimer’s disease). Such alterations in dopaminergic functions lead to decreased levels of curiosity and exploratory behavior.Enhanced Encoding and Consolidation Component Supported by HippocampusCuriosity-related eye movements and exploratory behavior predict curiosity-based memory enhancements.While memory enhancements for curiosity target information (e.g., trivia answers) might depend on hippocampal processes both during encoding and during consolidation, memory enhancements for incidental information (i.e., unrelated information that is temporally contiguous to a curious state) depend more on enhanced consolidation than encoding processes.Individual variability in functional and structural connections between the hippocampus and dopaminergic regions predicts curiosity-based memory enhancements.Alterations in dopaminergic functions in subpopulations and certain clinical conditions (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, schizophrenia, depression, Alzheimer’s disease) decrease the positive effects of curiosity on hippocampus-dependent memory.


Concluding Remarks

In recent years there have been exciting developments in the study of curiosity and its impact on memory. Drawing from converging evidence in psychology and neuroscience, we proposed the PACE framework, which integrates theories about curiosity with existing models on prediction errors, appraisal, exploration, and the neuromodulation of hippocampus-dependent memory.

At this point, it is important to point out that we do not mean to imply that the above framework captures all of the relevant processes and experiences. Moreover, we are certain that the underlying neural substrates of curiosity-related memory enhancements are much more complex than what we have proposed. At the same time, the PACE framework provides a starting point for understanding how curiosity can influence memory by bringing together a wide range of findings and by specifying potential links across multiple levels of analysis (i.e., process, neural, behavioral, and subjective level). We believe that the PACE framework will be useful for the emerging research field of curiosity and memory to stimulate future research.

Understanding the neural mechanisms of how curiosity enhances learning is likely to be of interest in the rapidly expanding field of artificial intelligence, as it might be a critical approach to stimulate independent, curiosity-guided learning in artificial systems. Furthermore, future research on curiosity and memory has potentially far-reaching implications for education, that is, to guide policymaking and to inform teachers of how curiosity can be harnessed in the most effective way in the classroom. It would therefore be promising to test how laboratory-based findings on curiosity and memory translate to applied settings.What are the relationships between curious states and curiosity traits and how do they jointly or independently influence learning and memory?How does curiosity interact with post-information processes in support of learning (e.g., surprise, interestingness, novelty)?How does curiosity interact with emotional effects on memory?How does curiosity affect early and late memory consolidation during awake rest and sleep periods?What are the boundary conditions of curiosity-related memory enhancement for incidental information that is temporally contiguous to a state of high curiosity?How does curiosity affect learning and memory across the lifespan?How does curiosity influence memory in patients with memory impairments?Do curiosity-related memory enhancements depend solely on dopamine or also on other neurotransmitters (e.g., noradrenaline or acetylcholine, which have been proposed to support different types of uncertainty)?Can we translate laboratory-based findings on curiosity-related memory enhancements to the classroom and clinical settings?How can the findings on the neural mechanisms of curiosity-based learning be translated for artificial intelligence/robotics applications?


Prediction signals in the cerebellum: Beyond supervised motor learning

Court Hull — eLife, 2020. PMC7105376, CC BY 4.0.

While classical views of cerebellar learning have suggested that this structure predominantly operates according to an error-based supervised learning rule to refine movements, emerging evidence suggests that the cerebellum may also harness a wider range of learning rules to contribute to a variety of behaviors, including cognitive processes. Together, such evidence points to a broad role for cerebellar circuits in generating and testing predictions about movement, reward, and other non-motor operations. However, this expanded view of cerebellar processing also raises many new questions about how such apparent diversity of function arises from a structure with striking homogeneity. Hence, this review will highlight both current evidence for predictive cerebellar circuit function that extends beyond the classical view of error-driven supervised learning, as well as open questions that must be addressed to unify our understanding cerebellar circuit function.


The cerebellum as a neuronal prediction machine

More than simply a neuronal learning machine, the brain is a prediction machine. Across sensory and motor systems, growing evidence suggests that a key operating principle of the brain is to establish internally generated predictions that can be compared against feedback from the external world in order to guide anticipatory actions and perceptions (Keller and Mrsic-Flogel, 2018).

The cerebellum has long been thought to operate predictively to support motor control and motor learning (Wolpert et al., 1998). As originally proposed by Masao Ito, the cerebellum is hypothesized to utilize a predictive model that anticipates the expected outcome of motor commands in order to refine future movements (Ito, 1970; Ito, 1972). Indeed, decades of research have provided considerable support for this hypothesis (Ohyama et al., 2003), and revealed many of the circuit pathways (Apps and Garwicz, 2005) and mechanisms (Carey, 2011) that allow the cerebellum to predictively modify motor output. However, emerging evidence suggests that the role of the cerebellum in motor control may be more complex than previously appreciated (Medina, 2019). Moreover, it has also become clear that the cerebellum plays a much wider role in brain function than simply refining movements (Buckner, 2013; Leiner et al., 1986; Schmahmann, 1991; Sokolov et al., 2017; Strick et al., 2009). Recently, with advances in modern circuit approaches and the application of more diverse behavioral paradigms in animal models, several studies have shed new light on how cerebellar circuits function across a range of behaviors. In this review, I will highlight some of this progress with the goal of identifying key unifying principles and open questions that are necessary to understand the role of cerebellar processing across diverse motor and non-motor behaviors.


Classical perspectives on cerebellar learning

To refine movements based on the predicted the sensory consequences of action, the cerebellum must solve a credit assignment problem. Specifically, it must attribute deviations between actual and expected sensorimotor feedback to features of movement that occurred in the recent past. Classical models of cerebellar function argue that this problem is solved through a supervised learning rule instructed by inputs to the cerebellar cortex called climbing fibers (CFs, Albus, 1971; Marr, 1969). Supervised learning is characterized by teaching signals that can report whether or not expectations match outcomes (i.e. a yes or no signal). In the cerebellum, CFs are thought to instruct learning by signaling the occurrence of movement errors. These error signals are thought to correct future movement by generating large dendritic calcium spikes (so-called complex spikes, Cspks) in the output neurons of the cerebellar cortex, the Purkinje cells. In turn, Cspks can produce heterosynaptic plasticity on preceding inputs from another pathway, the mossy fiber (MF) to granule cell pathway. Because the MF pathway carries contextual information necessary for learning, such a plasticity rule has long been thought to provide a key substrate for generating cerebellar-dependent supervised motor learning.

This supervised learning rule works well to describe cerebellar activity in the CF and MF pathways during many behaviors, and provides a compelling model to explain how the cerebellum can modify certain movements. However, such supervised learning also requires that CFs have access to a complete menu of erroneous actions in order to provide accurate error-based feedback. This may be practical only for a limited set of behaviors, and particularly for those where the environment can directly indicate what the correct action should have been. In other words, this supervised learning rule is ideal when there is a yoked relationship between stimulus and action, as is common for many well-studied cerebellar-dependent behaviors. Eyelid conditioning provides an illustrative example of a cerebellar-dependent learning task that meets this criterion. In this behavior, animals learn to associate a neutral sensory stimulus with a delayed corneal airpuff that produces a reflexive eyelid closure. By responding via a hardwired neural pathway from the sensory periphery to the same corneal airpuff that produces a reflexive blink, CFs can accurately instruct a predictive eyelid closure according to the principles of supervised learning (Kim and Thompson, 1997; Medina et al., 2000).

In more complex motor behaviors without a fixed stimulus-action relationship, as well as many non-motor behaviors, it has been challenging to understand how such a supervised learning rule could provide an effective means for learning. In particular, in cases where the sensory information necessary for learning has no direct relationship to the movement that requires modification, or when the necessary sensory information is only applicable under a specific behavioral context, it is unclear whether or how CFs could generate such a supervised instructional signal. Indeed, there have been indications from behaviors that meet these criteria that cerebellar supervised learning models are not sufficient to describe CF activity. For example, during arbitrary visuomotor reaching tasks, CF-driven Cspks in Purkinje cells have been shown to reflect predictive signals that are not consistent with motor errors (Kitazawa et al., 1998; Streng et al., 2017). Instead, these studies have shown that Cspks can be predictive of task parameters such as reach destination, upcoming movement kinematics, or future position errors. Even during eyelid conditioning, recent evidence suggests that the cerebellum may be able to harness a wider range of distinct learning rules to modify behavior.


Predictive coding in climbing fibers

In a landmark study, Ohmae and Medina provided a new blueprint for how cerebellar circuits may operate to enable learning beyond a supervised context (Ohmae and Medina, 2015). By recording from the cerebella of awake mice locomoting on a treadmill during eyelid conditioning, the authors demonstrated that CFs could provide a different type of learning signal; namely, one that meets the criteria described by temporal-difference (TD) models of reinforcement learning. In a TD learning framework, teaching signals exhibit key properties that change both what and how a system can learn relative to a supervised learning framework (Sutton and Barto, 1998). Specifically, in TD learning, teaching signals are scalar, and vary according to current expectations. Indeed, the authors found that CF activity met this criterion, as Cspks were more probable in response to an unconditioned stimulus (US; i.e. corneal airpuff) that was unexpected than when the same stimulus was expected. Importantly, the probability of Cspks on unexpected US trials was higher than for expected US trials where no conditioned response (CR) was generated, suggesting that differences in sensory encoding of the US were not responsible for the differences in Cspk probability. These findings hence contradict what would be predicted by a supervised learning model, which would instead suggest the same Cspk probability on any trial type without a predictive eyelid closure to block the aversive corneal airpuff.

Another key feature of TD learning models is that teaching signals are modulated by experience to represent higher-order reinforcing stimuli. Again, CF activity met this criterion, as Cspks emerged in response to the conditioned stimulus (CS; i.e. an LED that reliably preceded the airpuff) after learning (See also ten Brinke et al., 2015). No such CS-related Cspk responses would be predicted in supervised learning models. In TD models however, these properties of teaching signals (scalar responses based on expectation and learned responses to higher-order reinforcing stimuli) allow the system to learn by trial-and-error exploration without the need for prior knowledge about a correct outcome (e.g. the final, correctly-executed learned movement). Such properties may be ideal to enable a cerebellar contribution to learning across a range of motor and non-motor behaviors, and in particular behaviors where learning is guided by predictions about upcoming reward.

The neural seat of reward-guided reinforcement learning has historically been considered to be the striatum, where projections from VTA dopamine neurons largely obey the principles of TD models to instruct synaptic plasticity and learning about reward-predictive events (Glimcher, 2011). Recent work has provided compelling evidence that the cerebellum may also contribute to reward-based reinforcement learning (Heffley and Hull, 2019; Heffley et al., 2018; Kostadinov et al., 2019; Larry et al., 2019). For example, two studies using calcium imaging to visualize Cspk activity in awake mice during operant learning tasks have now demonstrated that CFs can exhibit responses that are consistent with reward-based reinforcement learning signals (Heffley et al., 2018; Kostadinov et al., 2019). In each of these studies, mice were trained to execute a voluntary action cued by a neutral sensory stimulus in order to receive reward. In these behaviors, both groups found that Cspks can reflect actions or events that predicted upcoming reward in a scalar manner that was proportional to reward expectation. In addition, these studies found that Cspks also report violated expectations by signaling when an expected reward is not delivered. These results are not only consistent with reinforcement learning, but directly oppose the motor error hypothesis of CF activity. Specifically, because Cspk activity was generated in response to actions or events that accurately predicted upcoming reward (Heffley et al., 2018), this activity necessarily occurred when animals correctly executed movements rather than when movement was mis-executed.

It initially appears paradoxical that CF learning signals should occur in response to movements that result in reward, and thus do not immediately require modification. However, it is important to note that the reward-predictive Cspk responses associated with movement in these studies occurred in the learned condition, when the expectation that a specific movement or event would result in reward had already been established. At this timepoint, reinforcement learning principles suggest that Cspks should be used to drive second order conditioning. In other words, if a new stimulus and/or action emerged that reliably provided an even earlier predictor of reward, these CF-driven signals would be ideally situated to drive a higher order learned association to that new event.

Such a mechanism could enable the association of multiple actions in order to establish a fully coordinated movement. To date, cerebellar-dependent sequence learning has been demonstrated only when movement feedback signals are reinforced by exogenously stimulated CF activity (Khilkevich et al., 2018). These data provide an exciting proof of principle for how cerebellar learning can establish compound movements. However, it remains to be tested whether learned CF responses to conditioned stimuli can in fact support higher order conditioning and/or motor sequence learning. It also remains plausible that learned CF responses to conditioned stimuli can allow further modification of movement by other means, for example by directly modulating the activity of CbN neurons (Ten Brinke et al., 2019; Ten Brinke et al., 2017), or may serve a different purpose altogether by enabling cerebellar output to downstream brain regions. Testing such predictions will be crucial for understanding how learned, conditioned stimulus-driven CF signals are harnessed for modifying behavior.

Interestingly, while the Cspk signals reported in both Heffley et al. and Kostadinov et al. are consistent with reinforcement learning, they contrast in key ways with the Cspk patterns described by Ohmae and Medina. In particular, neither Heffley et al. nor Kostadinov et al. observed a decrease in Cspk activity when expected reward was not delivered. Instead, both studies reported elevated Cspk activity in response to defied expectations. Such responses are consistent with unsigned prediction errors, but not with the types of signed prediction errors typically associated with TD learning. The decreases in Cspk activity demonstrated by Ohmae et al. are ideal to promote extinction learning during eyeblink conditioning when the aversive conditioned stimulus is absent (Medina et al., 2002), and may therefore also be a hallmark of behaviors with fixed stimulus-action relationships. In contrast, the increased Cspk responses shown by Heffley et al. and Kostadinov et al. may promote exploration and new associations during behavior that requires flexible stimulus-action relationships. Hence, despite the commonality of learned Cspk responses to higher-order reinforcing stimuli across studies, it remains to be determined how specific task requirements and location within the cerebellum determine the CF response to violated expectations.


Origins of climbing fiber reinforcement learning signals

How might CF reinforcement signals be generated? The axons that form CFs originate from neurons in the inferior olive (IO). In many cerebellar-dependent behaviors, input to the IO that drives CFs and learning comes directly from the sensory periphery. For example, in eyelid conditioning, the corneal airpuff used as a US is transmitted to the IO via the trigeminal ganglion (Kubo et al., 2018; Swenson and Castro, 1983; Van Ham and Yeo, 1992), reliably triggering CF input to the cerebellum. This ‘hardwired’ pathway allows CFs to respond with high fidelity in a manner consistent with supervised learning based on the causal association between stimulus and movement. However, the IO also receives indirect input from both cortical and subcortical brain regions that may allow it to generate more complex teaching signals than can be produced by salient sensory input from the environment (Ten Brinke et al., 2019).

One such key source of input to the IO is the mesodiencephalic junction (MDJ) (De Zeeuw et al., 1998). This region of the midbrain is composed of multiple nuclei, some of which integrate cerebellar CbN output and project to either downstream neurons in the spinal cord (Keifer and Houk, 1994) or the IO (Onodera, 1984). Because cerebellar learning has been shown to produce new mossy fiber collaterals in the CbN (Boele et al., 2013; Kleim et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2015; Weeks et al., 2007), it has been speculated that such collaterals may convey information about learned conditioned stimuli to the MDJ, and in turn to the IO (Ten Brinke et al., 2019; Ten Brinke et al., 2017). In this model, mossy fiber pathways carrying learned information about conditioned stimuli could be indirectly translated to the IO via these new collaterals, producing instructive reinforcement learning signals in CFs. Notably, such an extended polysynaptic pathway may partly explain why CF signals related to conditioned stimuli tend to have longer latencies than the US-related CF signals that are translated more directly from the sensory periphery.

The MDJ also integrates descending input from sources that include cortical pyramidal tract neurons (Veazey and Severin, 1982). Such input likely allows the IO to represent higher order cortical computations, and is therefore a good candidate to transmit the types of reward prediction and TD-learning signals that have been shown recently.

The IO also receives inhibitory input, and contains some local interneurons, raising the possibility that local computations may also enrich the repertoire of CF responses (De Zeeuw et al., 1998). For example, the IO receives inhibitory input from the cerebellar nuclei (CbN) (Bengtsson and Hesslow, 2006). These inhibitory projections participate in extinction learning (Medina et al., 2002), but could also play a role in gating CF activity or sculpting responses to incoming excitation. For example, inhibitory inputs could decouple stimulus-action relationships resulting from peripheral IO inputs, enabling other pathways to dominate when learning requires information from other sources. Indeed, multiple studies have found that CF activity exhibits context dependence, and that sensory responses can be actively suppressed under certain behavioral conditions (Apps, 1999; Apps and Lee, 1999; Gellman et al., 1985; Horn et al., 1996; Kim et al., 1987). Whether inhibitory CbN projections play a role in such context-dependent IO suppression remains unclear. More broadly, it has remained challenging to establish any clear predictions about the influence of discrete pathways in generating CF learning signals, as there remains an incomplete description of inputs to the IO, as well as a limited understanding of when different pathways are active and how the IO integrates input to generate CF responses in vivo. Thus, a key step in understanding how CFs can produce complex teaching signals such as those necessary for reinforcement learning will be to establish a more detailed map of input to the IO, and to measure the behavioral contexts under which specific input pathways recruit CF activity.


Predictive coding in granule cells

To mediate cerebellar learning, the teaching signals carried by CFs are thought to instruct heterosynaptic plasticity at excitatory synapses from granule cells onto Purkinje cells. Thus, the information carried by granule cells crucially determines what the cerebellum can learn.

Classical models of the granule cell layer suggest that it serves a key role in pattern separation by expanding, sparsifying and decorrelating cerebellar input in order to maximize the number of unique representations that can be learned by Purkinje cells (Albus, 1971; Marr, 1969). Indeed, the sheer number of granule cells makes sparse coding models appealing, as these neurons are by far the most numerous in the brain, and significantly outnumber their presynaptic mossy fiber inputs (Eccles et al., 1967). Their activity has also been thought to be kept sparse by synaptic inhibition, which reduces the threshold and gain of granule cell responses to incoming mossy fiber input (Chadderton et al., 2004; Duguid et al., 2012; Mitchell and Silver, 2003). Beyond sparsity, the idea that the granule cell layer can decorrelate inputs has also been supported by observations that individual granule cells can pool inputs from different sources (Huang et al., 2013) and with different synaptic strengths (Chabrol et al., 2015).

In contrast with classic models, recent work has challenged the idea that granule cells generate sparse representations, and shown that they can instead exhibit dense and redundant responses during several behaviors (Giovannucci et al., 2017; Knogler et al., 2017; Ozden et al., 2012; Sylvester et al., 2017). Such results are surprising, and may suggest that it is necessary to rethink how the cerebellum forms unique sensorimotor associations. However, an alternative possibility is that some aspects of the original Marr-Albus models require revision. For example, pattern separation need not require sparse coding (Cayco-Gajic and Silver, 2019). In particular, as argued by Cayco-Gajic and Silver, pattern separation can be achieved without sparse coding if inputs are still expanded and decorrelated, allowing dense granule cell responses to effectively discriminate complex, high-dimensional inputs. It should also be noted, however, that the dense granule cell responses measured thus far have been largely observed during complex behaviors. In these cases, there are likely to be many sensorimotor patterns represented simultaneously. Thus, whether the cerebellar granule cell layer acts to sparsify discrete sensorimotor inputs, and what mechanisms the granule cell layer uses to generate unique representations, remains an open question.

Apart from how the granule cell layer processes incoming input, recent work has also extended our view of what the granule cells can represent. Previous work across many cerebellar-dependent learning paradigms had revealed considerable evidence that the granule cells encode the predictive context necessary for motor learning (Raymond and Medina, 2018; Sawtell, 2017). For example, in associative motor learning tasks, granule cells carry information about the predictive CS (Steinmetz et al., 1989), allowing Purkinje cells to develop learned responses to these inputs (Halverson et al., 2015; Hesslow and Ivarsson, 1994). Likewise, for adaptation learning paradigms such as vestibulo-ocular gain learning, the granule cells receive copies of learned motor commands, or so-called efference copies, that can provide a basis for predictive learning (Lisberger and Fuchs, 1978a; Lisberger and Fuchs, 1978b). Indeed, recent calcium imaging data further supports the idea that granule cells can represent efference copy information (Giovannucci et al., 2017). Using calcium imaging to measure the responses of granule cells across eyelid conditioning, Giovannucci et al. revealed learned representations of the conditioned eyelid closure that can match, or even precede the eyelid movement after learning.

To establish predictive contextual representations, granule cells appear to employ population codes that take advantage of input that is tuned to specific stimulus or kinematic parameters. For example, elegant in vivo recordings from rodents have revealed that granule cells can be narrowly tuned to movement features such as whisker position (Chen et al., 2017). By linearly encoding such features according to the properties of synaptic transmission from mossy fibers (Arenz et al., 2008; Duguid et al., 2012; Powell et al., 2015; Rancz et al., 2007), granule cells can effectively relay a population code to downstream Purkinje cells that faithfully represents precise features of upcoming movement kinematics (Chen et al., 2016).

Surprisingly, however, predictive coding in granule cells now appears to extend beyond the motor domain, and can also reflect cognitive predictions. Using both operant and Pavlovian tasks guided by reward reinforcement, Wagner and colleagues used calcium imaging to demonstrate that granule cells can develop non-motor predictions (Wagner et al., 2017). Specifically, this study revealed that granule cells can develop learned representations of both actions and stimuli that predict upcoming reward, with as many as 25% of the total recorded cells responding to reward, reward omission, or reward anticipation. That such predictions need not be exclusively related to movements is particularly exciting, and lends support to the idea that granule cells can provide a substrate for cerebellar learning that is not exclusive to motor control. If so, such predictions may be used by downstream targets in the neocortex and elsewhere for a variety of computations.


Predictive coding in purkinje cells

How do the various sensory, TD, and reward-prediction signals carried by climbing fibers combine with contextual information in the granule cells at the level of Purkinje cells to allow the cerebellum to evaluate and update its model of the world? Several elegant studies have now begun to reveal that the sodium-based action potentials of Purkinje cells (so-called ‘simple spikes’) can establish complex kinematic predictions about movement across diverse behaviors (Brown and Raman, 2018; Chen et al., 2016; Ebner and Pasalar, 2008; Herzfeld et al., 2015; Pasalar et al., 2006). Such data support the notion that the cerebellum can harnesses a type of predictive computation often termed a ‘forward model’. A forward model can be most simply conceptualized as an estimation of the immediate future based on a copy of the current motor command and current sensory information. A key virtue of such predictions is that they can be used as a more rapid substitute for external feedback (e.g. the sensory consequences of movement) to enable anticipatory actions. Such forward model predictions can also be compared with subsequent sensorimotor feedback to assess differences between expectation and outcome. When there is a mismatch, termed a ‘sensory prediction error’, the forward model can be updated via learning mechanisms (e.g. synaptic plasticity) in accordance with current conditions.

While CF input to Purkinje cells is typically considered to be the teaching signal necessary to update cerebellar forward models, there is also evidence that the granule cell pathway may carry feedback error signals (Popa and Ebner, 2018). Such error signals have been observed in the simple spiking of Purkinje cells in a manner that is independent of Cspks (Popa et al., 2012; Popa et al., 2017; Streng et al., 2018). These data imply that Purkinje cells can carry the necessary information for updating a cerebellar forward model without CFs in some cases. These results are also consistent with the finding that CF activity is not required for some forms of cerebellar learning (Ke et al., 2009; Kimpo et al., 2014), and may also support the idea that Cspks can serve alternate roles in some behaviors (Streng et al., 2017).

In cases where CF activity is strongly linked to learning, the primary model suggests that these signals serve to instruct long-term synaptic depression (LTD) of granule cell synapses onto Purkinje cells (Albus, 1971; Ito, 1972). This mechanism is appealing because Purkinje cells are inhibitory, and exhibit high convergence onto target neurons in the CbN that form the output of the cerebellum (Person and Raman, 2012). Thus, predictive cerebellar output from CbN neurons would be greatly facilitated by an appropriately timed disinhibition that could be achieved by reducing the simple spiking of Purkinje cells (Heiney et al., 2014).

Indeed, while current evidence suggests a role for plasticity of various types and at multiple sites in the cerebellar circuit (Boyden et al., 2004; Carey and Lisberger, 2002; Gao et al., 2012), there remains considerable evidence that CF-driven LTD, or at least CF-driven reductions in PC simple spiking, is involved with many forms of cerebellar learning (Ito et al., 2014). In particular, studies of learned eye movements have provided the most direct evidence to date for a causal link between Cspk-driven reductions in Purkinje cell simple spiking and learning (Herzfeld et al., 2018; Kimpo et al., 2014; Medina and Lisberger, 2008; Yang and Lisberger, 2014). This work has shown that Cspks are highly correlated with a depression of PC simple spiking and learning on a single trial basis. Moreover, these studies have made a key link between the duration of Cspks and learning, revealing that these signals are graded, likely due to graded presynaptic CF activity (Gaffield et al., 2019), in a manner that scales with the amount of single trial learning. These findings suggest the possibility that the duration of Cspks may be also be determined by behavior, with larger errors leading to longer duration or more probable CF input (Najafi et al., 2014; Najafi and Medina, 2013). Thus, further exploring the relationship between behavioral variability (e.g. error magnitude), CF activity, Cspks, and the depression of PC simple spiking will be crucial to understanding the links between learning and its underlying mechanisms. Moreover, while considerable evidence suggests that the depression of Purkinje cell simple spiking provides at least part of the necessary substrate for predictive cerebellar output, it remains necessary to make direct links between learning and LTD. Despite key efforts in this direction (Schonewille et al., 2011; Yamaguchi et al., 2016), conclusive tests of how LTD at PC synapses contributes to learning will require manipulations that are not only cell-type specific, but also temporally specific in order to overcome the complications of circuit compensation that are inherent to chronic genetic strategies.


Prediction signals in the cerebellar nuclei

At the level of the CbN, direct evidence to illustrate predictive cerebellar output has been somewhat limited. Clear examples had previously existed only for a small number motor behaviors with similar learning requirements. For example, during eyelid conditioning, CbN neurons become active to the conditioned stimulus to enable a predictive eyelid closure by activating downstream motor neurons (McCormick and Thompson, 1984). Until recently, however, there had been little evidence to support the idea of predictive cerebellar output during behaviors other than those that involve simple stimulus-action associations, and no clear neural data showing how cerebellar output might vary according to expectations associated with different sensory inputs.

By recording from the CbN of awake behaving primates, Brooks and colleagues showed that these neurons can dynamically track the difference between expected motor output and sensory feedback, consistent with the computation of sensory prediction error during voluntary head movements (Brooks et al., 2015). In particular, they found that CbN neurons responded to mismatches between expected and actual head movements on a trial-by-trial basis. Moreover, these prediction-dependent CbN responses were continuously updated with new learning. These results strongly suggest that cerebellar output can reflect the computation of a prediction error that results from comparing an internal model of the sensory consequences of active head movement with actual sensory feedback. Such data are thus consistent with the forward model hypothesis, and imply that the internal model’s prediction lies upstream of the CbN neurons, perhaps instantiated by the spiking of Purkinje cells. Notably, CbN neurons in this study were modulated in the same direction regardless of the direction of sensorimotor mismatch. Specifically, CbN neurons elevated their firing regardless of whether head movement was unexpectedly restricted, or unexpectedly released from restriction during extinction learning. Such unidirectional signaling of mismatch is likely appropriate to drive stabilizing vestibluo-spinal reflexes (Roy and Cullen, 2001; Roy and Cullen, 2004) and to ensure stable perception that accounts for self-motion (Dale and Cullen, 2019). It has remained challenging, however, to establish such causal relationships between CbN activity and behavior, as tools to selectively manipulate CbN neurons in a manner that accounts for ongoing behavior have not been available until recently.

To begin addressing the casual relationship between CbN activity and behavior, a recent study has used closed-loop optogenetic manipulations to alter the firing of CbN neurons during movement (Becker and Person, 2019). By both activating and inhibiting CbN neurons at different timepoints during skilled reaching, this study revealed that the activity of these cells contributes to predictively controlling the endpoint of reaches in real time. Specifically, the authors found that CbN output contributed unidirectionally to limb movement, adding velocity toward the body regardless of limb movement direction. These data suggest that the cerebellum can contribute at least part of the motor command necessary to regulate ongoing movements on a millisecond timescale, calibrating behavior even during steady state performance after learning has occurred. Notably, such CbN activity that persists after learning differs considerably from the patterns measured by Brooks and colleagues, where CbN output was abolished after learning (provided movement proceeded as expected). In absence of a clear distinction between the features of learning across studies such as these, it seems that we are only at the early stages of understanding how cerebellar output 1) contributes to motor control across diverse behaviors and learning paradigms, and 2) conforms to predictions about the implementation of cerebellar forward models. Thus, while forward model explanations have gained considerable support from behavioral studies in humans (Izawa et al., 2012; Morton and Bastian, 2006) and animals (Machado et al., 2015; Pasalar et al., 2006), it will be necessary to further probe the links between theory and newly emerging datasets. For example, it will be crucial to determine whether and how behavioral demands, cerebellar region, and downstream target area dictate the mode of cerebellar output. Such efforts will be challenged by the widening range of brain regions and behaviors and that the cerebellum contributes to, including those that are now recognized to involve complex cortical computations.


Cerebellar influence on neocortical predictive coding

Recently, studies focused on neocortical areas have suggested a cerebellar influence on downstream targets that is at least reminiscent of forward model predictions (Chabrol et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2018). In addition to descending rubrospinal pathways, the cerebellum is heavily connected to the neocortex disynaptically via the thalamus, including pathways to sensory, motor and premotor cortical areas (Kelly and Strick, 2003; Proville et al., 2014). To test how cerebellar output modulates motor-related cortical processing, Gao et al. examined how cerebellar output affects activity in the anterior lateral motor cortex (ALM). This neocortical region is involved in motor planning, and exhibits persistent ramping activity prior to movement that is necessary for accurate motor performance (Guo et al., 2014; Li et al., 2016). Remarkably, by optogenetically inhibiting cerebellar CbN neurons, Gao et al. found that cerebellar output was necessary for ramping activity in ALM during a motor discrimination task. Moreover, disrupting cerebellar CbN output impaired motor-based decisions by introducing a motor bias, but did not disrupt motor output per se. These results argue for a key role of cerebellar output in motor planning, and perhaps more broadly in predictive cerebral cortical computations across many domains.

CbN output to ALM may also reflect the expected outcome of motor plans. Similar to the results of Gao et al., Chabrol et al. found that cerebellar CbN output was necessary for ramping in ALM (Gao et al., 2018; Chabrol et al., 2019). However, this study focused on a more lateral region of the CbN, and revealed that the impact of cerebellar output on ALM was restricted to a behavioral context where a visual cue predicted the timing of upcoming reward. This result is in line both with evidence that the cerebellum establishes temporal predictions (Mauk et al., 2000), and that the lateral cerebellum may be especially involved in temporal predictions related to reward (Heffley and Hull, 2019; Heffley et al., 2018; Kostadinov et al., 2019).

Together, these ALM results are consistent with studies in non-human primates showing that neurons in the lateral CbN can exhibit predictive ramping responses during a delay period prior to movement (Ashmore and Sommer, 2013; Ohmae et al., 2017). While such CbN ramping responses have been implicated in action timing, it is reasonable to extrapolate that temporal signals of this type could be used by the neocortex for a variety of timing computations. Similar to delay-interval ramping, CbN neurons have also been shown to predictively represent the timing of periodic stimuli with oscillatory responses that increase prior to each stimulus presentation. Such responses appear to reflect temporal predictions rather than expectations about other stimulus features, as the same neurons preferentially signaled when temporal periodicity was unexpectedly violated (Kameda et al., 2019; Ohmae et al., 2013). Thus, it appears that the cerebellum can transmit various timing predictions to the neocortex, an idea that is borne out by the impairment of movement timing when the cerebellar thalamocortical pathway is selectively disrupted (Nashef et al., 2019). Notably, however, the cerebellar thalamocortical pathway projecting to primary motor cortex appears not to signal via anticipatory pre-movement ramping. Rather, motor cortical responses driven by this pathway exhibit transient excitation followed by a long-lasting recruitment of cortical inhibition (Nashef et al., 2018). While it is unclear how the CbN neurons projecting to the motor thalamocortical pathway fired in that study, the data are at least suggestive that predictive ramping activity is not the sole mode of cerebellar output to motor cortical areas during timing tasks.

Overall, these studies may point toward a forward-model explanation for how cerebellar output affects neocortical areas, as in each case the cerebellum appears to signal temporally-specific predictions about behavioral outcomes related to the function of these areas. However, much work remains to rigorously test this hypothesis, and will require a more complete understanding of the cerebellar computations involved in neocortical processing, as well as a clear description of how signals from discrete cerebellar output pathways act to sculpt neocortical activity.

Because the neocortex also feeds back to the same cortical targeting regions of cerebellum via the pons in a closed-loop manner (Kelly and Strick, 2003; Proville et al., 2014; Strick et al., 2009), it is likely that the predictions made by cerebellum are subject to ongoing refinement by descending feedback. Indeed, recent work has demonstrated that activity in the cerebellar granule cell layer becomes more correlated with neocortical activity as a function of learning in a goal directed task (Wagner et al., 2019). Thus, it will also be crucial to understand how these circuits bi-directionally modulate one another in a coherent manner to alter behavior (Siegel and Mauk, 2013).


Expanding roles for the cerebellum in behavior

Over the last several decades, there has been a growing appreciation that the cerebellum contributes to a wide range of non-motor processes (Schmahmann, 1991), including cognition (Kim et al., 1994), social processing (Van Overwalle et al., 2014), aggression (Reis et al., 1973) and emotion (Schmahmann and Caplan, 2006). In agreement with these findings, humans with cerebellar damage or disease often exhibit non-motor conditions, including autism spectrum disorders (Wang et al., 2014), deficits of language processing and vocal learning (Ackermann, 2008), schizophrenia (Mothersill et al., 2016) and temporal processing impairments (Ivry and Spencer, 2004). Such findings in humans provide a crucial starting place for identifying the specific cerebellar circuit pathways that contribute to non-motor behaviors, and for establishing testable hypotheses about how such circuits operate.

Indeed, motivated by such findings, Strick and colleagues have used transynaptic rabies tracing methods to elucidate several discrete pathways from the cerebellum to brain regions other than the motor cortex (Strick et al., 2009), including pathways to the basal ganglia via the thalamus (Bostan and Strick, 2018; Hoshi et al., 2005). Such connections support the idea that the cerebellum can participate in motivation and reward-driven behaviors. In agreement with this hypothesis, a key recent study has shown that the lateral cerebellum also has a direct, monosynaptic connection to the ventral tegmental area (VTA) in mice (Carta et al., 2019). Beyond demonstrating a functional connection from cerebellum to VTA, this study also provided evidence that this same pathway can positively modulate reward-driven behaviors, and is endogenously activated under social conditions. These data strongly suggest that the cerebellum contains, or has the ability to learn, information about rewarding stimuli. Such a model fits well with recent work showing reward-predictive Cspks across the lateral cerebellum during a classical conditioning task similar to those commonly used to study reward processing in striatal circuits (Heffley and Hull, 2019). If combined with contextual information from the mossy fiber pathway, such reward-predictive Cspks could effectively instruct cerebellar output to the VTA in response to reward-associated stimuli or actions. To evaluate such possibilities, a key next step will be to test how cerebellar learning modifies output to the mesolimbic dopamine system during goal-directed behaviors.

Following similar guidance, another recent study has identified a circuit pathway that provides a link between cerebellar output and vocal learning (Pidoux et al., 2018). Previous functional imaging work in humans has demonstrated cerebellar activation during both external (spoken) and internal (unspoken) speech (Ackermann, 2008). Moreover, children with cerebellar dysfunction can exhibit significantly delayed vocal learning (Ziegler and Ackermann, 2017). Based on these findings, Pidoux and colleagues used the songbird to identify a discrete circuit connecting the lateral cerebellum to a part of the avian basal ganglia required for song learning, and revealed that this circuit plays a preferential role in learned vocal timing (Pidoux et al., 2018). By identifying such a pathway, this study opens the door for targeted manipulations capable of revealing the relationship between cerebellar learning and speech production in vocal learning species.

Finally, another vital insight from human studies has come from the many observations that neurodevelopmental disorders, and particularly autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), strongly correlate with cerebellar damage during birth and mutations in cerebellar genes (Sathyanesan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2014). These insights have led to multiple studies in animal models showing that mutations in genes associated with ASDs can alter cerebellar circuit function (Baudouin et al., 2012; Behesti et al., 2018; Piochon et al., 2014; Tsai et al., 2012), and can also produce ASD-like phenotypes (Tsai et al., 2012). More recently, key studies have begun to reveal pathways from the cerebellum to frontal cortical regions that may mediate such deficits (Badura et al., 2018; Stoodley et al., 2017). Whether and how cerebellar dysfunction alters developmental processes in downstream brain regions, disorganizes activity in mature downstream circuits, or both, will be crucial to understanding the cerebellar role in disorders with significant cognitive components.

Together, such studies have highlighted the importance of using information gleaned from human studies of cerebellar activity and disease states to guide circuit based interrogations in animal models. However, as new work continues to emerge suggesting cerebellar contributions to a wide range of motor and non-motor behaviors, a key challenge will be to identify what common principles may link the role of cerebellar predictions across behaviors, or what properties of cerebellar computation may be unique to individual behaviors.


Conclusions and open questions

A meaningful understanding of how cerebellar circuits operate predictively must span multiple levels of inquiry, merging mechanistic insights at the cellular and synaptic level with functional explanations of how cerebellar computation modifies behavior. Thus, in considering a way forward, it can be useful to organize the question of what experiments are necessary according to a conceptual framework. As is frequently remembered (Diedrichsen et al., 2019; Keller and Mrsic-Flogel, 2018), Marr (1982) three levels of analysis provide such a framework. Termed ‘computational’, ‘algorithmic’, and ‘implementational’, these levels refer respectively to the problem that needs to be solved, the computation necessary to solve the problem, and the hardware tasked with implementing the computation.

At the level of computation, it would initially seem that the cerebellum is tasked with solving multiple problems, as it clearly contributes to both motor control and diverse cognitive processes. However, this information alone does not resolve the question of what specific problem the cerebellum is tasked with, as its discrete contribution to such diverse behaviors remains opaque. Indeed, the question of whether the cerebellum performs a so-called ‘uniform transform’ (Schmahmann, 1996) or exhibits ‘multiple functionality’ (Diedrichsen et al., 2019) has recently been addressed elsewhere (Diedrichsen et al., 2019). From the perspective of a circuit-based analysis of cerebellar computation, such distinctions cannot be made exclusively by evaluating changes in behavior in cases of cerebellar damage or disease in humans, or following manipulations that impair cerebellar output in animal models. Rather, to determine what computation(s) the cerebellum mediates, and whether they are behavior-specific, it will be necessary to measure 1) exactly what signals the cerebellum sends to different brain regions, and 2) how these signals combine with other inputs to modulate local processing. For example, if all cerebellar output signals are consistent with forward model predictions, they should reflect temporal or state estimations that anticipate the consequences of actions or thoughts in a manner that is relevant to the processing goals of the targeted brain region. However, cerebellar computation may not be restricted to the generation of a forward model, as other types of predictive models have also been proposed for cerebellar computation (Kawato, 1999). Moreover, there are reasons to suspect that cerebellar computation could vary across different phases of learning, allowing the cerebellum to implement different predictive models as synaptic plasticity mechanisms are engaged at different points in the circuit (Medina, 2011). Thus, because there remain several viable possibilities to describe cerebellar computation, and no defined expectation for what state estimates or command signals are necessary for behaviors whose read-out is less straightforward than movement, the goal of achieving a holistic understanding of cerebellar computation remains a significant challenge.

At the algorithmic level, current evidence suggests at least two different learning rules that the cerebellum can harness to predictively modify its inputs. If the cerebellum can utilize both supervised (Raymond and Medina, 2018) and reinforcement learning strategies (Heffley and Hull, 2019; Heffley et al., 2018; Kostadinov et al., 2019; Larry et al., 2019), it is necessary to understand 1) what are the specific behavioral conditions that determine which learning rule(s) are used, and 2) what are the circuit mechanisms and pathways the enable different learning rules? For example, can any cerebellar behavior motivated by reward consumption utilize CF reinforcement learning signals? And are these reinforcement learning signals computed in the inferior olive, or inherited from upstream brain regions? Such questions highlight the necessity for more detailed anatomical studies of cerebellar input and output pathways, and an understanding of what behaviors specifically engage different pathways.

If the cerebellum does exhibit multiple functionality, the learning rules used may also be area-specific, as it is clear that the cerebellum is functionally compartmentalized (Apps and Garwicz, 2005). Again, human imaging studies provide a crucial basis for generating circuit-based predictions about area-specific processing, and recent work has significantly extended our understanding of both what is processed in different parts of the human cerebellum (King et al., 2019), and where these regions project across the brain (Ramnani et al., 2006). However, caution is warranted in extending these observations to animal models, as the functional homology across species remains incompletely understood. To overcome this issue, further investigation of cross-species circuit homologies is necessary (Sugihara, 2018), as well as work that can clearly define input and output pathways across the cerebella of distinct species.

Finally, at the implementation level, the crystalline cellular architecture of the cerebellum has long suggested uniformity in the basic building blocks for executing cerebellar computation. However, there is also ample evidence that, despite this gross uniformity, there are many regional specializations that shape neuronal excitability, relative density of distinct cell types, molecular marker expression, and other circuit properties (Cerminara et al., 2015). Moreover, recent evidence suggests that unique cell types such as inhibitory interneurons may be selectively engaged to modulate learning (Gaffield et al., 2018; Rowan et al., 2018), and that well-studied plasticity rules thought to underlie learning may in fact be region specific, and tuned to different behaviors (Suvrathan et al., 2016). If plasticity rules differ according to behavior and/or cerebellar region, such findings raise the possibility that implementation may not be a fixed property of cerebellar circuits. At minimum, implementation it is likely to be flexible, as recent evidence has shown that cerebellar-dependent learning can be modulated by behavioral context (Albergaria et al., 2018). Thus, it will be critical to determine what mechanisms can alter the implementation of cerebellar processing. For example, in other brain regions, neuromodulators play a key role in flexibly altering neural circuit processing. And, while the cerebellum receives significant neuromodulatory input, we are only at the early stages of understanding how these systems modify cerebellar processing (Carey et al., 2011; Dieudonné and Dumoulin, 2000; Fleming and Hull, 2019).

To understand whether and how the implementation of cerebellar learning can differ, it will be important to move beyond single cell or single cell-type measurements. In particular, since learning is likely to involve multiple mechanisms across many sites, simultaneous, circuit-wide measurements are necessary, ideally across different behaviors and species to identify common principles. To achieve this, modern population level recordings based on calcium imaging or high-density electrode arrays will be indispensable in order to generate a holistic picture of how cerebellar processing is implemented.

Together, such measurements targeted across multiple levels of analysis will be essential to achieving a comprehensive, circuit-based understanding of how the cerebellum functions as a neuronal prediction machine. And, while the current paradigm shift beyond motor errors has added new complexity to our understanding of cerebellar circuit function, these experiments are sure to ultimately be rewarding.


Mechanisms of competitive selection: A canonical neural circuit framework

Shreesh P Mysore, Ninad B Kothari, Joshua I Gold, Joshua I Gold — eLife, 2020. PMC7239658, CC BY 4.0.

Competitive selection, the transformation of multiple competing sensory inputs and internal states into a unitary choice, is a fundamental component of animal behavior. Selection behaviors have been studied under several intersecting umbrellas including decision-making, action selection, perceptual categorization, and attentional selection. Neural correlates of these behaviors and computational models have been investigated extensively. However, specific, identifiable neural circuit mechanisms underlying the implementation of selection remain elusive. Here, we employ a first principles approach to map competitive selection explicitly onto neural circuit elements. We decompose selection into six computational primitives, identify demands that their execution places on neural circuit design, and propose a canonical neural circuit framework. The resulting framework has several links to neural literature, indicating its biological feasibility, and has several common elements with prominent computational models, suggesting its generality. We propose that this framework can help catalyze experimental discovery of the neural circuit underpinnings of competitive selection.


Introduction

Animals inhabit complex environments in which they routinely encounter multiple competing options. At every moment, they must select the most relevant or beneficial one, and execute the appropriate behavior. At an elemental level, selection among options to approach or retreat from a stimulus, and to fight or take flight, can impact the very survival of the animal. More generally, selection is an integral aspect of nearly all complex cognitive functions as well as everyday behaviors. Given the critical importance of the selection of one option among many available ones to adaptive behavior, how such competitive selection is implemented in the brain is a fundamental question in behavioral neuroscience.

In the literature, competitive selection has been considered in a variety of contexts including perceptual categorization, action choice, decision-making and attention. For instance, central to selective attention is the problem of identifying the next target among multiple stimuli to guide behavior (Knudsen, 2007; Moore and Zirnsak, 2017; but see also McMains and Somers, 2004; Cavanagh and Alvarez, 2005). Selecting the location of the most salient or the most behaviorally relevant stimulus while ignoring distractors (Bichot and Schall, 1999; Bichot et al., 2001; Ikeda and Hikosaka, 2003; McPeek and Keller, 2004), and responding to image components that are related to a specific feature but not others (O'Craven et al., 1999; Mante et al., 2013) are just a few examples from the literature on selective attention. Central to value-based decision-making is the challenge of choosing the most beneficial option among competing alternatives (Padoa-Schioppa, 2011). The choice between a small but immediate reward versus a large but delayed reward, and between sure rewards versus risky (probabilistic) ones with a higher expected value, are two examples of value-based decisions that have been investigated (Roesch and Olson, 2005; Padoa-Schioppa and Assad, 2006; Kable and Glimcher, 2007; Hunt et al., 2012; Strait et al., 2014). Central to perceptual categorization is the problem of discriminating among competing percepts in the face of potentially ambiguous or noisy sensory stimuli (Hanks and Summerfield, 2017). The identification of the dominant odor component in a mixture of two (or more) odors (Niessing and Friedrich, 2010), determination of the animal category from an ambiguous visual stimulus (Freedman et al., 2001; Swaminathan and Freedman, 2012), identification of motion direction in a random dot motion task (Gold and Shadlen, 2007; Liu and Wang, 2008), and identification of a song note based on its duration (Prather et al., 2008) are just a few examples from the rich literature on the study of perceptual selection. Lastly, central to action selection is the issue of executing the appropriate motor plan among competing alternatives (Cisek and Kalaska, 2010; Murakami and Mainen, 2015). The choice between rolling or turning behaviors in fly larvae (Jovanic et al., 2016), between freezing versus flight defensive behaviors in mice in response to a threatening stimulus (Shang et al., 2015; Fadok et al., 2017; Shang et al., 2018), between grooming and freezing behaviors in mice (Hong et al., 2014), between swimming to the left versus right in zebrafish (Koyama et al., 2016), between feeding versus escape in mollusks (Kovac and Davis, 1980; Kristan, 2008), and between two reaching actions in monkeys (Cisek and Kalaska, 2005) are a few of the many examples studied in the literature.

Studies of the different forms of competitive selection across animal species have advanced our understanding of many aspects of the neural basis of selection. Prominent among these are the identities of brain areas that are involved in particular selection tasks, the information encoded by these areas in service of selection, and models of how these neural representations may contribute to observed choice behaviors. An emerging view is that despite differences in selection tasks and the brain areas studied, different forms of competitive selection may share key computational principles as well as neural mechanisms (Wang, 2008; Cisek and Kalaska, 2010; Freedman and Assad, 2011; Padoa-Schioppa, 2011; Mysore and Knudsen, 2012). However, several fundamental questions remain unanswered: (i) ‘Exactly what key computations constitute competitive selection?’, (ii) ‘What aspects of the models correspond to which computational goals?’, and more importantly, (iii) ‘How is competitive selection actually implemented within the neural circuits of the relevant brain areas?’ Here, by decomposing selection into a set of well-defined computational building blocks and mapping them onto neural circuit building blocks, we develop a neural circuit framework that can help experimenters answer these questions and elucidate neural circuit mechanisms of competitive selection.


Organization

We begin with two key theoretical (and computational) perspectives on selection that have been discussed in the literature, namely the winner-take-all (WTA) and the accumulation-to-threshold (A2T) perspectives, and describe their isomorphic relationship (section titled ‘Competitive selection as symmetry-breaking: Theory and models’). Next, we break down the seemingly monolithic winner-take-all selection into six key computational primitives (section titled ‘Hidden computational features…’). Here, for each computational feature, we describe its conceptual role in the idealized WTA equation, and discuss its applicability to selection problems that have been studied in behavioral neuroscience. We then explore the demands that its execution places on neural circuit architecture and function, and identify specific circuit motif(s) that can implement the computational feature. In this process, we view the literature on selection through the lens of the elemental computation and summarize relevant findings from different species and forms of selection. Because our focus, here, is on questions of biological realization rather than in-principle operation, we draw selectively upon those studies in the literature that inform issues of neural implementation. Next, we combine the individual circuit motifs from the previous section into a mechanistic framework for competitive selection, and link this WTA-inspired framework back to the A2T perspective, thereby closing the loop between them (section titled ‘Feasibility, generality and limitations…’). In addition, we highlight the biological viability of this framework, and also point out that it has several key elements in common with leading models of decision making that have been proposed to account for behavioral as well as neural results in cortical and subcortical brain areas. Based on these, we argue that the proposed neural circuit framework is canonical - one that can serve as a starting point for experimentally uncovering how core computations of competitive selection are implemented by specific neural mechanisms. The final section aids such future efforts by detailing specific predictions that arise from each of the six computational building blocks, as well as approaches to test them experimentally (section titled ‘Experimentally testable predictions’). We conclude with a broad discussion of challenges in investigating the neural circuit bases of competitive selection.


Definitions


Options

Stimuli or potential choices available to the animal. For instance, in the case of value-based decision-making, option A may be a stimulus associated with a reward of high magnitude but that arrives with long delay, and option B, a stimulus associated with a reward of low magnitude but short delay. In the case of selection for spatial attention, two competing options may be stimuli at two different locations, with one of them aligned with a spatial cue.


Competitive selection/decision-making

The process by which one option must be selected among many (>1) available options, that is, for which competition among neural representations is required to identify a winner. Examples include selection between two or more stimulus options presented simultaneously, selection between two or more stimulus options presented across time, or selection between two or more neural representations activated by a single (ambiguous) stimulus option. Competitive selection does not include situations in which just one representation is activated because only a single option is available (for instance, attending to a single target in the absence of any distracters), nor situations in which category boundaries are hardwired through learning stable representations in such a manner that no competition among representations is necessary for the choice.


Norm of an option

A quantity that represents the ‘worth’ of an option (or of the attribute being compared). This term captures more broadly, ideas encapsulated in specialized terms used in the literature. For instance, in the context of spatial attention, the norm would be the classic ‘stimulus priority’, and in the case of value-based decision-making, it could be the ‘subjective value’. This term is intended, ultimately, to correspond to a continuous quantity that allows for lawful comparisons along some common scale of comparison. (We note that our use of the term ‘norm’ is not intended to correspond directly to the formal mathematical definition of ‘norm’ on vector spaces.)


Channel

Group of neurons (excitatory and inhibitory) involved in representing an option.


Competitive selection as symmetry-breaking: Theory and models


Theoretical formulations

Competitive selection, at its core, is a symmetry-breaking process: among several options available to the animal, one is chosen, and all the others (temporarily) rejected. From a theoretical perspective, such symmetry-breaking has been described using several equivalent formulations. It has been described as the detection of the peak in the dynamic representational landscape, in which the heights at different points represent the norms of the different options at any instant (Fecteau and Munoz, 2006; Cisek and Kalaska, 2010; Sugawara and Nikaido, 2014). It has also been framed as a form of categorization - the transformation of continuous inputs (here, graded representations of the options) into two discrete output groups separated by a selection or category boundary such that the neural representation of just one of the options passes into the ‘selected’ category, whereas those of the remaining options fall into a second ‘unselected’ one (Freedman and Assad, 2011; Mysore and Knudsen, 2011b; Mysore and Knudsen, 2012). Cast in the language of dynamical systems, different choices have been described as different attractor states of a dynamic ‘energy function’ defined over the space of option attributes, with competitive selection involving the identification of the attractor with the lowest energy given sensory inputs and internal influences at that instant (Machens et al., 2005; Niessing and Friedrich, 2010). Alternatively, selection can be thought of as the outcome of a template matching process in which either the multiple options are matched to a relevant neural template, or a single option is compared to multiple neural templates, with the one yielding the best match (or lowest error) being the selected option (Riesenhuber and Poggio, 1999); selection in sequential match-to-sample experiments is consistent with this view. Finally, another commonly used description is that competitive selection occurs when the neural representation associated with one of the competing options first crosses some functional response threshold. Ultimately, however, no matter the description, the outcome of symmetry-breaking is that the selected option, and only that one, triggers downstream consequences that culminate in a percept or behavioral output.


Modeling formulations

From a modeling perspective, two broad classes of models have been employed to account for symmetry-breaking in competitive selection. The first is the class of winner-take-all (WTA) or attractor models. Here, computational units representing different options interact with one another, with the strongest option outcompeting all the others (Carpenter and Grossberg, 1987; Yuille and Grzywacz, 1989; Hahnloser et al., 2000; Maass, 2000; Rousselet et al., 2004). If xi are inputs corresponding to i = 1,… N options, yi are the corresponding transformed outputs, x* denotes the winning input, and i* denotes the winning option, the generalized winner-take-all operation is represented by the equations:

In other words, the option with the dominant representation breaks symmetry and drives the output. The winner-take-all class of models has been used to account for selection both among simultaneously presented options (Koch and Ullman, 1987), as well as between options presented over time (Machens et al., 2005). This class of models accounts for the majority of the theoretical formulations of selection listed above - including peak detection, attractor dynamics, categorization, and error minimizing template matching (Riesenhuber and Poggio, 1999; Machens et al., 2005; Wang, 2008; Mysore and Knudsen, 2012).

The second class of models takes the accumulation-to-threshold (A2T) approach and accounts explicitly for the theoretical formulation of earliest threshold crossing. Here, a commonly used model in two-option scenarios is the diffusion model, which implements the statistically optimal sequential probability ratio test (SPRT; Barnard, 1946; Wald, 1947; Kira et al., 2015). In this model, evidence for the options from noisy or ambiguous sensory inputs is combined into a single accumulator, with the state of the accumulator increasing when inputs provide evidence for one option, and decreasing, when evidence favors the other option (Stone, 1960; Laming, 1968; Ratcliff, 1978; Ratcliff and McKoon, 2008). The evidence accumulates until it crosses a positive (or negative) ‘threshold’. Alternatively, computational units representing each of the competing options accumulate evidence for that option towards an abstract decision threshold (Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2004; Bogacz et al., 2007; Furman and Wang, 2008; Deco et al., 2009; Ditterich, 2010; Thura et al., 2012; Xue and Liu, 2014; Hanks and Summerfield, 2017). The option for which the evidence crosses threshold first is designated the ‘winner’ or the selected option. In other words, in the A2T formulation, the temporal primacy of threshold crossing results in symmetry-breaking and triggering of the output corresponding to the selected option. Early computational descriptions, called race models, assumed that evidence for each option accumulated independently of the others (Vickers, 1970; Vickers, 1979), but gave way to later models in which accumulation processes for the different options interacted with one another in an inhibitory manner (Chen et al., 2013; Teodorescu and Usher, 2013). In addition, the accumulation of evidence has been described both as a continuous ramping process (Shadlen and Kiani, 2013; Hanks et al., 2015) and a discrete stepping process (Latimer et al., 2015), although recent work suggest that both processes account equally well for neural data (Zoltowski et al., 2019). The A2T class of models has been used to great effect in the decision-making literature (Kim and Shadlen, 1999; Shadlen and Newsome, 2001; Roitman and Shadlen, 2002; Huk and Shadlen, 2005; Gold and Shadlen, 2007; Kim and Basso, 2008; Hanks et al., 2015; Herman et al., 2018; Yartsev et al., 2018). A major feature of A2T models is that they not only account for the choice made (given the inputs), but also account well for the reaction times of the choice responses.

Although seemingly different, the WTA and A2T classes of models are not conceptually distinct (Wang, 2012), but rather view selection from two complementary perspectives. A2T models focus heavily on the time-course of evolution of the neural responses that lead to the representational landscape, and handle symmetry-breaking by building into the model, the notion of threshold crossing, albeit without much detail on how the threshold might be set (Churchland and Ditterich, 2012; Huk and Meister, 2012); but see Lo and Wang, 2006; Wei et al., 2015 for multi-area proposals). By contrast, WTA models typically begin with a representational landscape without much detail on how it might be constructed, and focus on implementing symmetry-breaking. Despite the different emphases, the WTA and A2T models are largely isomorphic, with A2T models necessarily producing a categorical choice, and WTA models being compatible with accumulation of evidence over time (Wang, 2002; Wong and Wang, 2006; Wang, 2008). This correspondence is not surprising considering that, in reality, both the evolution of neural responses over time (construction of the representational landscape), as well as the application of symmetry-breaking transformations, are crucial aspects of any functional description of competitive selection. Consequently, just as the different theoretical formulations employed to describe competitive selection are conceptually equivalent, so are the two broad classes of computational models used to account for it.


Neural support

Studies of the different forms of selection have used both the WTA and the A2T models to describe observed neural correlates, supporting their interchangeability at the conceptual level. For instance, selection for spatial attention has been viewed from the perspective of A2T (Ratcliff et al., 2007; Mysore and Knudsen, 2014; Herman et al., 2018) as well as WTA (Fecteau and Munoz, 2006; Mysore and Knudsen, 2011b; Mysore and Knudsen, 2014). Similarly, studies of decision-making have applied A2T (Gold and Shadlen, 2007) as well as WTA models (Hunt et al., 2012; Strait et al., 2014). In the context of perceptual categorization, several studies have interpreted results using A2T (Shadlen and Newsome, 2001; Roitman and Shadlen, 2002), and others using WTA models (Wang and Spelke, 2002; Machens et al., 2005; Wong and Wang, 2006). Finally, studies have examined action selection from both the A2T perspective (Öztürk, 2009; Thura and Cisek, 2014) and the WTA perspective (Cisek, 2007; Cisek and Kalaska, 2010; Koyama et al., 2016).

Thus, there is evidence in neural responses to support aspects of both the WTA as well as the A2T formulations of symmetry-breaking. However, little is known about how either class of models is actually implemented in neural circuitry. For instance, how categorical segregation of inputs is accomplished in the brain has been unclear (Freedman and Assad, 2016). Similarly, how the values of selection thresholds are determined, whether they are static or dynamic, and how they are specified in neural circuits, are all unknown (Huk and Meister, 2012), despite biologically-grounded proposals (Lo and Wang, 2006; Wei et al., 2015). Moreover, considering the range of differences in model implementation (Ditterich, 2010; O'Connell et al., 2018), it is unclear what specific aspects of these models are required for accounting for neurophysiological and behavioral data, and what are non-essential details. In the next section, we explicitly address the circuit mechanisms of selection by adopting, predominantly, the WTA perspective (Maass, 2000).


Hidden computational features of WTA symmetry-breaking and their implementation in neural circuits

Despite the wealth of computational models used to implement WTA selection, and their extensive invocation in the selection literature to account for neural and behavioral responses, a detailed understanding of their implementation in neural circuits has remained elusive. We propose that a key impediment has been the deceptive simplicity of the WTA transformation. Encapsulated in a two-line equation, this seemingly straightforward mathematical transformation is, in fact, composed of six ‘hidden’ computational features that act together to produce idealized WTA selection. Briefly, they are: (#1) comparison, (#2) categorical (or sharp) selection boundary, (#3) dynamic flexibility of the selection or category boundary, (#4) ability to select among many (all) viable pairs of options (independent of their identities), (#5) ability to select among multiple (>2) options, and (#6) generation of a unitary output. Each of these computations can place non-trivial constraints on the nature of interactions between the representations of the competing options and on the organization of the underlying neural circuitry. Here, we start with the representation of the options and then, by examining each of the six computational features, delineating their circuit requirements, and highlighting support (if any) from the literature, we attempt to explicitly map competitive selection onto circuit elements.

Competitive selection is broken down into six ‘hidden’ computational features, by drawing inspiration from the idealized WTA equation (and Figure 2). These features are built on a representational foundation in which the worth of each option (or of the relevant attribute(s) of each option) to the animal, referred to broadly as the ‘norm’ of each option, is encoded in neural activity.

Comparison across options: This corresponds to the ‘>’ operation in the WTA equation, and can be implemented by neural inhibition among competing options, with the inhibition generated by each option being dependent on its norm.

Categorical selection boundary: The ability to select the option with the highest norm, even when competing options are similar. Within the limits posed by neural response variability, such categorization is implemented well by a donut-like pattern of competitive inhibition.

Flexibility of selection boundary: The ability to dynamically select the option with the highest norm, no matter what the actual values of the options’ norms are. This requires feedback inhibition among competing options.

Ability to select among many (all) viable pairs of competing options: This can be implemented either by copying-and-pasting the circuit module for selection among one pair of options, for all pairs of options (expensive strategy). Alternatively, it can be implemented by adopting a metabolically efficient, combinatorially optimized strategy implemented by sparse inhibitory neurons with dense coding properties (Figure 7; this strategy minimized net metabolic and wiring costs).

Ability to select in the presence of multiple (>2) competing options: This can be implemented by scaling up the circuit that selects between two options to multiple options, together with specific nonlinearity constraints governing the combination of inhibition from multiple sources.

Production of unitary choice: The ability to produce exactly one winner. This can be implemented with high-gain competitive inhibition, coupled with downstream recurrent excitation.

We note that the winner-take-all equation represents the idealized implementation of selection operating with a hard (discontinuous) nonlinearity and noiseless steady-state representations. By contrast, neurons and networks typically implement softer (continuous) nonlinearities, that is, ones in which the transition between a low output state and a high output state occurs over a non-zero range of inputs. Second, neural representations possess significant trial-to-trial variability (or noise), and competitive selection transpires over time - from the instant the options are made available to the animal to the instant of expression of the behavioral or perceptual output corresponding to the chosen option. Third, although the six computations are all key parts of an idealized selection process, they may apply to varying extents to different forms of selection behavior, with the ‘comparison’ (#1) and ‘unitary choice’ (#6) features being essential across the board. Nonetheless, as we will see below, and the six computational building blocks together serve as a fruitful starting point for constructing a neural circuit framework for competitive selection.


Neural representation of options


Conceptual set-up

Selection operates upon the substrate of neural representations of the competing options. Therefore, a reasonable requirement for lawful comparisons among options is that their neural representations be encoded along a common scale (Levy and Glimcher, 2012), one that embodies the worth, or so-called ‘norm’, of each option. The norm can either represent the net contribution of all the attributes of an option that are relevant to the selection process, computed via some weighted combination of those of individual attributes, or can represent just the contribution of a particular attribute that may be being compared at a given instant. To be useful, the norm satisfies two properties. First, it is instantiated in neural activity via a shared or common currency (for instance, firing rate), thereby providing a level playing field for comparisons. Second, the neural encoding of the norm of an option is graded and ordered, with ‘stronger’ neural responses reflecting higher magnitudes of the norm. These properties facilitate the construction of a representational landscape in which each option evokes responses proportional to its norm. We note that there is no requirement for these representations to be encoded in a separate ‘stage’ or neural circuit. Rather, they can be encoded within the neural circuit(s) performing selection, consistent with past suggestions (Cisek, 2012). Additionally, neither the norm nor its currency are intended to be identical across brain areas or universal across forms of selection. They are ‘local’ notions that ensure a common neural playing field for the comparisons being performed within a brain area at any instant.


Neural support

Within the literature on different forms of selection, there are several examples of neural norms that serve as the basis for comparison among options; these are discussed below.

In the context of selective attention, and specifically, selective spatial attention, the ‘priority’ of each competing stimulus is defined as the combination of its physical salience, its behavioral relevance, and potentially also the reward history associated with that stimulus (Koch and Ullman, 1987; Fecteau and Munoz, 2006; Awh et al., 2012). The salience of a stimulus arises from its physical properties that ascribe inherent distinctiveness to it, such as visual contrast, speed of motion, auditory intensity (‘loudness’), etc; its behavioral relevance arises from voluntary goals associated with the stimulus such as intention to orient gaze towards it; and history-related influences arise from recent outcomes associated with the stimulus (rewarded or not) or its recent functions (distracter or not). Together, these attributes combine to represent the priority of each stimulus (in the currency of neural firing rate, for instance), and result in a landscape of stimulus priorities.

Neurons in several brain areas, such as the frontal eye field (FEF) (Fecteau and Munoz, 2006), lateral intraparietal area (LIP) (Bisley and Goldberg, 2010) and in the intermediate and deep layers of the superior colliculus (SCid) across vertebrate species (Fecteau and Munoz, 2006; Mysore and Knudsen, 2011b; Knudsen, 2018), have been shown to encode stimulus priority. They exhibit a systematic relationship between firing rate and physical salience of stimuli, and respond more strongly if their preferred stimuli are behaviorally relevant. Responses of these neurons are typically insensitive to stimulus attributes that are not intrinsically salient, such as orientation or color of a visual stimulus, and frequency of an auditory stimulus. Moreover, because neurons in these areas encode sensory space topographically, stimuli (options) at different spatial locations are encoded in different parts of the topographic map. Together this leads to a spatial map of stimulus priority in which the heights (firing rates) at different locations of the map correspond to the priorities of stimuli at those locations.

In the context of value-based decision-making, options are considered to be associated with a value that depends on various attributes: magnitude of reward, time delay of reward, probability of occurrence, risk, reward expectation, ambiguity, temporal certainty, valence (appetitive or aversive), and motivation (Montague and Berns, 2002; Rangel et al., 2008; Chib et al., 2009; FitzGerald et al., 2009; Levy et al., 2010; Padoa-Schioppa, 2011; Levy and Glimcher, 2012; Yoo and Hayden, 2018). In the classical view of rational decision theory (Tversky and Kahneman, 1979; Koechlin, 2020), this value is termed the subjective expected utility (or subjective value), and is computed as the product of reward probability and magnitude. Recent work, however, indicates that this is not always the case and that reward probabilities and magnitudes can influence decisions either additively or independently (Farashahi et al., 2019; Rouault et al., 2019).

A variety of studies have demonstrated evidence for the neural encoding of different attributes in primates and rodents: of reward magnitudes (Tremblay and Schultz, 1999; Roesch and Olson, 2005; Roesch et al., 2006; Kable and Glimcher, 2007; Cohen et al., 2012; Engelhard et al., 2019), reward delay (McClure et al., 2004; Winstanley et al., 2004; Roesch and Olson, 2005; Roesch et al., 2006), risk and ambiguity (Amiez et al., 2006; Christopoulos et al., 2009; Hsu et al., 2009; Tobler et al., 2009; O'Neill and Schultz, 2010; Levy and Glimcher, 2012; Raghuraman and Padoa-Schioppa, 2014; Monosov, 2017; Chen and Stuphorn, 2018), and stimulus valence (Paton et al., 2006; Belova et al., 2007; Morrison and Salzman, 2009; Shabel and Janak, 2009; Janak and Tye, 2015). In addition, studies have also provided evidence for the (graded) neural encoding of subjective value itself (Gottfried et al., 2003; Roesch and Olson, 2005; Padoa-Schioppa and Assad, 2006; Paton et al., 2006; Kable and Glimcher, 2007; Klein et al., 2008; Schoenbaum et al., 2009; Levy et al., 2010; Plassmann et al., 2010; Sul et al., 2010; Strait et al., 2014; Sasikumar et al., 2018; Hattori et al., 2019; but see Yoo and Hayden, 2018). Notably, recent work refuting the subjective expected utility-view of value-based decision-making has revealed neural encoding of either an additive result of reward magnitude and probability, or of them, independently (Farashahi et al., 2019; Rouault et al., 2019). Typically, in all these cases, the firing rates of individual neurons (in the case of single unit electrophysiology), or the overall activation level within a patch of neural tissue (in the case of fMRI experiments), has been found to be the currency.

In the context of perceptual decisions, animals must frequently group sensory inputs into perceptual categories, with a two-category choice studied commonly in the laboratory. The categorization of a stimulus as appetitive or aversive, categorization of a complex stimulus mixture as being more similar to one or the other of its components, etc, are some of the commonly studied examples. Here, ‘degree of membership’ of a stimulus to a particular category constitutes a plausible norm.

Studies across vertebrate and invertebrate species have identified neurons in different brain areas that encode category membership. This includes encoding of the degree of belonging of a tactile stimulus to a frequency category (Romo et al., 1999; Romo et al., 2002; Brody et al., 2003; Romo et al., 2004; Hirokawa et al., 2019), of a visual stimulus to a direction-of-motion category (Freedman and Assad, 2006; Ferrera et al., 2009), an animal category (Freedman et al., 2001), or faces (Desimone et al., 1984; Freiwald and Tsao, 2010), of an auditory stimulus to a speech category (Tsunada et al., 2011) or frequency category (Znamenskiy and Zador, 2013), and of an odor mixture to one of two odor categories (Niessing and Friedrich, 2010; Olsen et al., 2010; Shen et al., 2013).

A special case within the work on perceptual decisions is the series of studies in primates involving the discrimination of the direction of coherent motion of a group of randomly moving dots (Shadlen and Newsome, 2001; Roitman and Shadlen, 2002), and in rodents involving the discrimination of the auditory stream with the greater number of clicks (Hanks and Summerfield, 2017). The conceptual formulation used to explain behavior and neural correlates in these tasks suggests another possibility for a norm in perceptual choices, namely, a ‘decision variable’. This is an abstract quantity representing at each instant, the strength of evidence in support of one perceptual choice (for instance, dots are moving to the left) versus the other (dots are moving to the right). One instantiation of this formulation involves a decision variable for each option (Usher and McClelland, 2001; Ratcliff et al., 2007) with the value of each decision variable evolving over time as evidence for that option accumulates. The rate of evolution of each decision variable (i.e., change in the magnitude of the neural response) is proportional to the strength of evidence, thereby satisfying the properties of a norm described above. Neural responses encoding evidence-dependent decision variables have been found in the monkey LIP (Shadlen and Newsome, 2001; Roitman and Shadlen, 2002), monkey FEF (Kim and Shadlen, 1999), monkey SC (Horwitz and Newsome, 1999; Ratcliff et al., 2007), monkey basal ganglia (Ding and Gold, 2012), rodent PPC and PFC (Hanks et al., 2015) and rodent striatum (Yartsev et al., 2018).

In the context of action selection, the ‘probability of execution’ of each competing motor plan constitutes a plausible norm. Studies that have examined neural activity in the presence of two competing action choices show that neurons in the primary motor cortex of primates exhibit a graded representation of each action plan depending on the probability of their selection/execution (Bastian et al., 2003; Thura et al., 2012; Thura and Cisek, 2014; Coallier et al., 2015). Additionally, neurons in the primate dorsal premotor cortex (PMd) (and the primary motor cortex) have been shown to track sensory evidence, to be modulated by the probability of execution of the motor plan (but see Dekleva et al., 2018), and to be modulated by a subjective ‘urgency’ parameter (Thura and Cisek, 2014). These data are consistent with a neurally encoded variable for each potential action that changes in a graded manner with the likelihood of that action (Cisek, 2007), thereby providing for a platform for comparing competing action plans. Indeed, when only a single action choice was presented, PMd activity did not scale with the reward associated with that choice, consistent with the idea that PMd activity encodes for probability of selection (Pastor-Bernier and Cisek, 2011).

Thus, there is support from different forms of selection for the representation of competing options in a graded manner that reflects their norm. In many cases, there is additional support for the norm being unidimensional, and for it being encoded in the common currency of neuronal firing rates. This, then, sets the stage for the first step in the computational framework for competitive selection.


Comparison


Conceptual set-up

The first crucial computational feature of the WTA operation that must be implemented by neural circuits is comparison among competing options, that is, the ‘>’ operation.


Neural circuit requirements

Comparison among options can be achieved in neural circuits through inhibition. This can be done by having each option evoke inhibition that is proportional to its norm, and that modulates the representations of all options. Notably, the anatomical scale of the inhibition must be ‘global’, able to reach all the neurons that encode potential competing options. This allows each option to be compared against the others, effectively producing representations that reflect the relative norms of the competing options. From an implementational perspective, one straightforward way to achieve this is via global feedforward inhibition. Such feedforward inhibition among the representations of the options normalizes inputs based on total drive, ensuring that responses stay within the neural dynamic range (Olsen et al., 2010). (We note, however, that this is not the only way to implement comparison, we will discuss an alternate, feedback, implementation in a subsequent section titled ‘Generality: Comparison …’).


Neural support

Examples of inhibition sub-serving comparison and selection have been reported in different brain areas and for several forms of selection. Reports involve either the indirect inference of neural inhibition from response patterns - typically by comparison of responses when one option is presented with those when multiple options are, or a direct demonstration of it through causal experiments involving the silencing of appropriate (inhibitory) neurons.

In the context of selective (spatial) attention, studies have demonstrated a suppression of neural responses to a stimulus inside the RF when a distant competitor is also simultaneously presented, leading to the plausible inference that neural inhibition plays a key role (Rizzolatti et al., 1974; Frost et al., 1981; Falkner et al., 2010; Mysore et al., 2010). This inference is strengthened by studies that have tested separately conditions that produce an enhancement versus those that produce a suppression (Winkowski and Knudsen, 2008), as well as studies in behaving animals in which it was possible to infer response suppression unambiguously (Gazzaley et al., 2005).

In addition to these indirect indications of competitive inhibition, studies in birds have silenced candidate inhibitory neurons in the midbrain tegmentum and directly demonstrated the presence of competitive inhibition in selection underlying spatial attention (Marín et al., 2007; Mysore and Knudsen, 2013). Taken together, these studies provide support that the brain uses competitive inhibition for comparison and selection in the context of (spatial) selective attention.

In the context of value-based decision-making, competitive inhibition has been proposed to explain neural responses in the monkey OFC during a choice between two goods (Ballesta and Padoa-Schioppa, 2019). Comparisons among neurally encoded choice values have also been proposed to occur in the ventral striatum, mPFC and posterior cingulate cortex in humans (Kable and Glimcher, 2007), and in the ACC in monkeys (Hayden et al., 2011; Rushworth et al., 2012). However, inhibitory neurons that might sub-serve competition in value-based decision-making have not yet been identified.

In the context of perceptual categorization, in tasks in which animals have to make a forced choice based on a noisy stimulus, neurons in the primate LIP (Shadlen and Newsome, 2001; Roitman and Shadlen, 2002), rodent parietal cortex (Hanks et al., 2015), primate PFC (Kim and Shadlen, 1999), rodent PFC (Erlich et al., 2011; Hanks et al., 2015) and rodent striatum (Yartsev et al., 2018) show ramping activity that is enhanced if evidence in the stimulus favors the neuron’s preferred choice but is suppressed if the evidence favors the alternate choice. These data provide support for the hypothesis that activities of neurons accumulating evidence for different choices are compared, potentially through competitive inhibition. In Drosophila, feedforward (lateral) inhibition has been shown to play a key role in odor discrimination (Olsen et al., 2010).

Similar results have been found in delayed match-to-sample versions of perceptual decision-making tasks, in which animals were required to report whether a test stimulus had a higher or lower value of a particular feature, when compared to that of an earlier reference stimulus. A common finding is the presence of neural sub-populations with enhanced firing rates when the reference stimulus is larger in the feature being tested than the test (or in the same category as the test), as well as other neurons with a complimentary pattern of firing, suggesting a competitive comparison between the two stimuli: in S2 (Romo et al., 2002), DLPFC (Romo et al., 1999), ventral premotor areas (Brody et al., 2003; Romo et al., 2004), PFC (Freedman et al., 2001; Ferrera et al., 2009), LIP (Freedman and Assad, 2006) and inferior temporal cortex (ITC) (Freedman et al., 2003). Although, direct evidence of where and how the comparison and inhibition happens is not yet known, models have hypothesized the presence of inhibitory interactions between the option representations (Gold and Shadlen, 2007; Tsunada and Cohen, 2014).

In the context of action selection, consistent with early proposals (Jeffress, 1951; Bullock, 2004), there is evidence that multiple competing motor plans are readied in parallel preceding the selection of just one (Cisek and Kalaska, 2005; Cui and Andersen, 2007; Seeds et al., 2014; Dekleva et al., 2016; Hampel et al., 2017; but see Dekleva et al., 2018). In these cases, over the course of action selection, the activity representing the chosen plan is enhanced while the other competing plans are suppressed. This pattern of responses has been explained by the proposal that competing actions interact with each other through inhibition, via mechanisms that are yet to be discovered (Cisek and Kalaska, 2005; Thura and Cisek, 2014). In the context of complex (hierarchical) action programs, several studies have strongly suggested inhibition between competing behavioral modules. In the marine mollusk, rhythmic feeding behavior and a withdrawal response compete, with bilaterally symmetric interneurons in the buccal cavity being implicated in this competition (Kovac and Davis, 1977; Kovac and Davis, 1980). In Drosophila, a suppression hierarchy of motor programs for smaller stereotyped cleaning movements has been identified as underlying grooming behavior (Hampel et al., 2017), with potentially (asymmetric) inhibition between competing modules (Edwards, 1991; Seeds et al., 2014; Hampel et al., 2017).

In parallel, direct evidence for the involvement of competitive inhibition among multiple action plans has been reported in studies across species: zebrafish (Koyama et al., 2016), Drosophila larvae (Jovanic et al., 2016), and mice (Fadok et al., 2017; Hong et al., 2014).

In summary, based on studies of the neural correlates of selection, there is evidence for (norm-dependent) inhibition involved in the comparison among options. Direct evidence for the presence of such inhibition has been demonstrated in a subset of the cases. Going forward, it will be important to experimentally identify the source of competitive inhibition, and to demonstrate its computational contribution, in various brain areas underlying the different kinds of selection.


What can the circuit thus far NOT do?

The circuit depicted in can account well for selection of the best option when the two options presented are significantly different from one another. However, when the options are close to one another in norm, it is not effective at signaling the winner reliably, especially in the presence of neural response variability (Carandini and Churchland, 2013; Mahajan and Mysore, 2020). We turn to this computational feature next.


Categorical selection boundary


Conceptual set-up

The next ‘hidden’ computational feature of the idealized WTA operation is the categorical identification of the option with the highest norm. For instance, in a two-input example in which the first one has a higher value, the idealized WTA operation correctly selects it as the winner both when the inputs are [10, 2], that is when x1 has a much higher value than x2, and when the inputs are [10, 8], that is when there is only a small difference between them. In other words, the idealized WTA operation implements a step-like category boundary.

In practical terms, the ability of neural circuits to approximate a step-like function promotes the selective enhancement of response differences between similar options straddling the selection boundary, thereby improving the reliability of the signaling the winning option. This improvement in reliability can be appreciated particularly in the context of neural 'noise' (or response variability) that is ubiquitous in biological circuits. If, for instance, the norms of two competing options x1, and x2 are represented by noisy firing rates [10 ± 0.8, 8 ± 0.6] spikes/sec (mean ± sd), the difference between the firing rates on any individual trial can be very small. On the one hand, biological circuits rarely produce a perfectly step-like nonlinearity. On the other hand, a circuit mechanism that can selectively enhance differences across the selection boundary to produce explicitly categorical outputs from continuous inputs (Gollisch and Meister, 2010) can improve signaling reliability substantially. (We note that our discussion here relates specifically to neural responses, and does not impose a requirement that behavioral response profiles be step-like.)


Neural circuit requirements

At first glance, amplifying the responses to all options multiplicatively (i.e., with a gain factor) may seem like a potential mechanism to enhance differences between their norms. However, in the context of noisy (neural) responses, the difference between the norms of two options is more reliably quantified by discriminability (d’=difference in response means/√(average response variance)), rather than by a simple disparity between the means. Because uniform amplification scales up both the mean as well as the standard deviation equally, it does not help improve the discriminability. What is needed instead, is differential amplification, such that responses to options that just straddle the selection boundary are driven apart. In simple terms, the more categorical the representation across the selection boundary, the more robust-to-noise the selection will be.

Recently, it was demonstrated that a donut-like inhibitory motif, in which each option suppresses the representation of all options except its own, is highly effective at generating categorical selection boundaries (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020). It is also substantially more effective than other commonly invoked motifs in decision-making models, namely - recurrent amplification, feedback inhibition and divisive normalization. (This motif as well, can be implemented either via feedforward inhibition or feedback inhibition, as demonstrated in Mahajan and Mysore, 2020; also see section titled ‘Generality: Comparison…’).

A second mechanism that has been proposed, specifically in the context of decision-making in circular feature spaces (for instance, the space of motion directions, or orientations), is structured synaptic inhibition (Xue and Liu, 2014). In this scheme, inhibitory neurons encoding for a particular feature value (say, motion direction) deliver strong feedforward inhibition to the excitatory neurons that encode either the same motion direction or the opposite motion direction, but weak inhibition, to excitatory neurons encoding for all other orientation values. In addition, these inhibitory neurons suppress one another (and themselves) with a uniform strength. It is unclear whether this mechanism directly generalizes to non-circular feature spaces.


Neural support

In the literature, a host of studies have found categorical neural representations in the context of different forms of selection. However, only one study thus far has investigated experimentally how this is achieved in a neural circuit (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020). We discuss these points below.

In the context of selection for spatial attention, explicitly categorical responses in the sensorimotor pathway have been reported, to date, only in the optic tectum of the barn owl (OT, or superior colliculus in mammals) (Mysore et al., 2011; Mysore and Knudsen, 2011b; Mysore and Knudsen, 2014). In the other classic hubs along the oculomotor pathway, including the pulvinar (Saalmann et al., 2012), LIP (Gottlieb et al., 1998), FEF (Sato et al., 2001; Thompson and Bichot, 2005), and rodent visual thalamus (Wimmer et al., 2015), responses to the target have been shown to be higher than those to distracter(s), but have not been shown to be explicitly categorical -- likely a consequence of the specific protocols used to probe selection and of the lack of appropriate parametrization of the stimuli. Interestingly, in one primate study that did use a stimulus protocol close to the one used in the owl study, response profiles of FEF neurons in a stimulus-speed categorization task were found to be nearly linear as a function of the stimulus speed (Ferrera et al., 2009). These markedly non-categorical response profiles were, however, shown to implicitly (Gollisch and Meister, 2010) contain information that could be used by downstream neurons to create categorical responses. Thus, whether other hubs (beyond the avian OT) in the vertebrate visuospatial attention pathway encode explicitly categorical responses in the context of spatial selection and attention is to be determined.

A convincing demonstration of the neural correlates of the WTA operation requires that neural responses exhibit the following properties:

That the neural responses to the selected option are substantially and categorically different from those to the other competing options, or in other words, that a clear winner is explicitly evident in the neural responses, rather than having to be inferred by applying additional nonlinear transformations to the responses (Gollisch and Meister, 2010; Figure 5A: Leftmost panel represents implicit signaling of the winner; rightmost panel represents explicit signaling of the winner).

That the selected option ‘takes-all’, or in other words, that the neural responses to the non-selected or ‘losing’ options are driven either to zero (‘hard’ WTA), or to a non-zero level that is below the threshold for triggering an output action or percept (‘soft’ WTA).

That (1 - 2) hold not just when the competing options differ from each other substantially in terms of their norms but also when they have similar norms. In other words, these properties must hold under systematic, parameterized variation of the norms of the competing options.

In addition, that (1 - 3) hold, in general, for all pairs of competing options, and also when the number of competing options is varied.

From a mechanistic perspective, a recent study (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020) built on previous anatomical work in reptiles and birds (Sereno and Ulinski, 1987; Wang et al., 2004; Gruberg et al., 2006), and used selective inactivation experiments in barn owls to investigate the mechanism of inhibition underlying categorical selection in the optic tectum (OT). The study demonstrated not only that the pattern of net competitive inhibition received by the optic tectum is functionally donut-like, but also that the donut-like pattern is required for categorical signaling by the OT (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020).

In the context of value-based decision-making, studies have shown that animals are able to select categorically between options based on a subjective boundary (see also Yoo and Hayden, 2018). In some cases, for instance, in a task involving selection between two different juice rewards, neurons in the primate OFC have been shown to encode categorical correlates of choice (the ‘taste’ coding neurons; (Padoa-Schioppa and Assad, 2006; Onken et al., 2019). In a recent study involving a sequential offer task (Ballesta and Padoa-Schioppa, 2019), a modeling approach suggests the need for inhibition between the options with a pattern that is reminiscent of the donut-like motif; the actual implementation of this inhibition within cortical circuits is yet to be tested. In other cases, for instance, in the vmPFC, responses during value-based decision-making tasks have, thus far, not been shown to exhibit categorical profiles (Kable and Glimcher, 2007; Hunt et al., 2012; Hunt et al., 2013; Strait et al., 2014). However, because these studies did not vary parametrically the relative values of reward options, a requirement for assessing whether response profiles are categorical, it is possible that the appropriate experimental design will reveal categorical signatures of selection. Thus far, no explicit circuit level solution for categorical representations underlying value-based decision-making has been identified experimentally.

In the context of perceptual decision-making, categorical neural responses have been reported in numerous studies across brain areas. These include the encoding of complex sensory stimuli (mixtures) (Roitman and Shadlen, 2002; Heekeren et al., 2008; Niessing and Friedrich, 2010; Olsen et al., 2010; Freedman and Assad, 2016), responses to auditory note identities (Prather et al., 2008), and responses in delayed match-to-category and match-to-sample tasks in which an animal has to make a categorical decision regarding either whether two temporally separated stimuli belong to the same category or whether the second stimulus is greater or less than the first one, respectively. For the latter group of tasks, neurons in primate LIP (Freedman and Assad, 2006), premotor cortex (Hernández et al., 2002; Romo et al., 2004), S2 (Romo et al., 2002) and PFC Freedman et al., 2001 have been shown to exhibit categorical responses. Just as with value-based decision-making, many models of perceptual categorization include a general mutual inhibition architecture (Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2001; Machens et al., 2005; Bogacz et al., 2007), which intrinsically admits the donut-like inhibitory motif (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020;. see section titled ‘Generality: Comparison…’).

There is also some support for the alternative mechanism of structured synaptic inhibition (Xue and Liu, 2014), which was proposed to account for behavioral results and LIP activity during motion-direction discrimination (Churchland et al., 2008). Inhibition between neurons encoding for similar feature values (motion direction or orientation) as well between neurons encoding opposite feature values has been inferred in early sensory cortices (Ringach et al., 1997; Neri and Levi, 2009). Whether similar mechanisms are at play in the LIP and whether they underlie robust-to-noise selection, in general, are not yet known.

In the context of action selection, models proposed in several studies have included mutual inhibition – in primates (Cisek and Kalaska, 2005; Cisek, 2006; Pastor-Bernier and Cisek, 2011; Thura and Cisek, 2014), as well as in invertebrates (Kovac and Davis, 1977; Kovac and Davis, 1980; Edwards, 1991; Kristan, 2008; Seeds et al., 2014; Hampel et al., 2017), but no neural circuit details have been offered, leaving open the question of where and how categorical responses are implemented. In other studies in which neural circuits involved in action selection tasks have been identified, for instance, in selection between orienting responses (Koyama et al., 2016), and between more complex behavior programs (Hong et al., 2014; Jovanic et al., 2016; Fadok et al., 2017), the identified circuit architectures are consistent with the donut-like motif. However, experimental evidence for the computational contribution of the donut-like circuit motif in these tasks is yet to be reported.

In summary, there is strong support for categorical neural representations underlying different forms of selection. Additionally, the operation of the proposed donut-like inhibitory circuit mechanism for robust-to-noise selection has been experimentally demonstrated in the avian midbrain in the context of selection for spatial attention (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020). For the other forms of selection (and brain areas), although many computational proposals in the literature are consistent with this circuit motif (and more so than with the structured inhibition motif), an experimental demonstration of the circuit mechanism for categorical selection in those cases remains an open question.

An intriguing issue in this context is that whereas categorical neural representations are pervasive, behavioral responses are frequently less categorical: psychometric performance curves (for instance,% correct curves), typically vary gradually with the independent variable (but see You and Mysore, 2020. A plausible explanation is that behavior is the consequence of the aggregated response of a large population of neurons with the animal as a whole frequently performing worse than individual neurons (Newsome et al., 1989). This, however, does not take away from the fundamental issue of how categorical neural representations are produced. It also raises the question of what might be the effect on neural and behavioral responses of disrupting the underlying circuit mechanism? A testable prediction is that such a disruption would cause psychometric curves to become even less categorical than normal, worsening behavioral performance around the selection boundary.


What can the circuit thus far NOT do?

The circuit depicted in implements a fixed (categorical) selection boundary, with the value being determined by the biophysical properties of the neurons (input/output functions, synapses etc; Mysore and Knudsen, 2012). Therefore, if the options encountered by animals require the selection boundary to shift to different values dynamically, this circuit would be incapable of doing so (Mysore and Knudsen, 2012). This computational feature is considered next.


Dynamic flexibility of the selection boundary


Conceptual set-up

The third ‘hidden’ computational feature of the WTA operation is the identification of the option with the largest norm (i.e., the ‘winner’), independently of the absolute values of the norms of the options. For instance, in a selection problem involving two inputs x1, and x2, WTA correctly selects the winner x* as the first option (x* = x1) both when the inputs are, respectively, [9, 5], and when they are [20, 13]. A fixed boundary would not work in both cases, but instead, a category boundary of 9 is needed in the first case, and of 20, in the second.

In practical terms, this is a problem that animals, and in turn, their neural circuits, can encounter on a regular basis. For instance, the absolute priorities of a pair of competing potential targets of attention can be quite different at two different instants, or the amounts of juice reward associated with two options can differ between trials. To select the winning option consistently, the selection boundary cannot be fixed at a pre-determined value, but rather, needs to be flexible, adjusting to the set of options available at any instant.

The dynamic nature of such flexibility, which requires the generation of flexible selection boundaries on the fly, places the constraint that the underlying circuit implementation cannot rely upon plasticity mechanisms. This is in contrast to the slower form of learned flexibility that has been studied in the decision-making literature (Bichot et al., 1996; Miller and Cohen, 2001; Mante et al., 2013; Dajani and Uddin, 2015; Nilsson et al., 2015). There, the response expected to the same stimulus can be qualitatively different in different contexts, based on response 'rules' that are learned by experience and then invoked flexibly based on contextual cues (Freedman and Assad, 2006; Jaramillo et al., 2014; Xiong et al., 2015). Such rule-based flexibility is thought to involve various mechanisms including synaptic plasticity in the appropriate neural pathways (Xiong et al., 2015) and astrocyte function in the cortex (Brockett et al., 2018). By contrast, the ‘flexible category boundary’ that we refer to here, requires flexibility to be built-into the underlying circuitry.


Neural circuit requirements

Recent computational modeling (in the context of selection for spatial attention) has predicted that the circuit motif necessary for achieving flexible selection boundaries is feedback inhibition between the representations of the competing options (Mysore and Knudsen, 2012). It stands opposed to feedforward inhibition, the magnitude of which is not modulated by its effect on downstream targets, and which is has been shown to be insufficient for flexibility (Mysore and Knudsen, 2012). Modeling demonstrates that the reciprocal inhibition of inhibition motif is the most efficient implementation of feedback among the many implementations that can all work (Mysore and Knudsen, 2012). (Incidentally, the terms ‘mutual inhibition among competing options’ or ‘lateral inhibition’ used in previous studies do not always disambiguate between the feedforward vs. feedback scenarios described here. For this reason, we prefer the use of the terminology of feedback as opposed to feedforward inhibition.)


Neural support

Reciprocal inhibition of inhibition has been reported in several brain areas (Pangratz-Fuehrer and Hestrin, 2011; Picardo et al., 2011), including within networks that are involved in different forms of flexible selection (Deleuze and Huguenard, 2006; Brown et al., 2014; Goddard et al., 2014; Jovanic et al., 2016; Fadok et al., 2017; Koyama and Pujala, 2018).

In the context of spatial attention, the reciprocal inhibition of inhibition motif has been found within the avian Imc (Wang et al., 2004), a GABAergic midbrain tegmental nucleus that is critical for stimulus selection across space (Marín et al., 2007; Mysore and Knudsen, 2013): Imc neurons that encode for distinct locations in space functionally inhibit one another with long range connectivity (Goddard et al., 2014). In mammals, the thalamic reticular nucleus is known to play a key role in sensory selection (Nakajima et al., 2019), and the reciprocal inhibition of inhibition motif has been reported within it (Deleuze and Huguenard, 2006). However, the contribution of these feedback inhibitory motifs to flexible selection for attention is yet to be demonstrated experimentally.

In the context of value-based decision-making, studies have recently started to investigate the underlying neural circuit mechanisms (Ballesta and Padoa-Schioppa, 2019), and the neural basis of dynamic flexibility has not yet been investigated explicitly.

In the context of perceptual decision-making, several studies have measured neural responses that support flexibly categorical representations. For instance, in delayed match-to-sample tasks involving tactile stimuli, responses in the premotor cortex (Hernández et al., 2002; Romo et al., 2004), S2 (Romo et al., 2002) and PFC (Brody et al., 2003) are consistent with a flexible section boundary that facilitates the identification of whether the test stimulus was of greater frequency than the reference. Similarly, in a delayed match-to-sample task involving visual stimuli, responses in the monkey frontal eye field (FEF) have been shown to contain information to allow downstream neurons to create flexible and explicit categorical output (Ferrera et al., 2009). In addition, computational models that have been proposed to account for the observed responses underlying flexible selection behavior have included mutual (feedback) inhibitory interactions between the competing options (Machens et al., 2005; Wong and Wang, 2006). However, where in the brain, and how, flexibility is implemented in the context of these tasks is unclear. In the context of odor representations, feedback inhibition is known to exist between glomeruli in the olfactory bulb (Li et al., 2019), which may allow for flexibility in odor discrimination.

In the context of action selection, the reciprocal inhibition of inhibition motif has been reported in several studies – in the hindbrain (Mauthner cell circuit) of larval zebrafish for left versus right escape behavior (Koyama et al., 2016), in the projection neurons of Drosophila larvae for selection between startle and exploratory behavior (Jovanic et al., 2016), and in the central amygdala of mice for selection between passive freezing and conditioned flight following fear conditioning (Fadok et al., 2017). Whereas silencing inhibitory neurons in all these studies has directly demonstrated a role for them in selection, the specific computational role for feedback inhibition has not been demonstrated directly.

In summary, despite the proposed essential role of feedback inhibition for flexible selection, and the presence of this motif in several brain areas/selection circuits, its necessity for flexibility of selection boundaries is yet to be tested experimentally.


What can the circuit thus far NOT do?

Flexible, categorical selection within a single pair of options is insufficient for adaptive behavior. A circuit for selection must be able to select between any given pair of options. The circuit in will need to be elaborated to achieve this computational feature, and this is considered next.


Ability to select among many (all) viable pairs of options


Conceptual set-up

The fourth ‘hidden’ computational feature of the idealized WTA operation is the identification of the winner no matter which specific inputs {xk} are active at any instant (and which of those happens to be the largest).

In practical terms, selection and decision-making are typically versatile, operating over a wide array of potential options. For instance, one can select one’s preferred fruit between oranges and apples, between blueberries and pomegranates, and so on. Similarly, selection for spatial attention operates for stimuli occurring across a large collection of possible locations. Competitive selection must, therefore, function for every viable pair (group) of options, despite different options activating distinct groups of neurons (or neural 'channels') (top vs. bottom panels). Without this ability, we would be able to select among only some fruit pairs but not others, and attend to a target only when competing stimuli are presented at some location pairs but not at others.


Neural circuit requirements and support

To implement this computational feature, the underlying neural circuitry must be designed to handle comparisons for different (all possible) pairs of evoked neural representations.

In the context of selection for spatial attention, two strategies that neural circuits could employ to this end were presented recently (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018). The first is a copy-and-paste strategy, in which the circuit module required to compare one pair of options and select between them is simply reproduced as many times as needed to serve all possible pairs of potential channels. The second strategy, which was discovered experimentally to be in operation in the barn owl midbrain, is combinatorially optimized coding (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018). Briefly, the authors discovered that inhibitory neurons that underlie spatial selection in the midbrain attention network, namely Imc neurons, are sparse in number, encode sensory space densely (with multi-lobed RFs), and are activated combinatorially in order to deliver competitive inhibition at all pairs of stimulus locations. Theory and modeling demonstrated that this strategy, termed COSMI (combinatorially optimized coding by sparse, multilobe inhibitory neurons), is highly efficient compared to the brute-force copy-and-paste strategy when high-firing neurons (in this case, parvalbumin-positive neurons) are involved – it minimizes the combined metabolic and wiring costs involved in operating the selection circuit.

Consider that there are L possible spatial locations at which stimuli could occur in the animal’s representation of the environment. Then, the neural circuit underlying stimulus selection across space must be capable of comparing and selecting for each of the L(L-1) possible pairs of locations. A straightforward solution to this problem is a modular copy-and-paste strategy (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018; Figure 7A), in which the circuit module required to compare one pair of options and select between them is reproduced as many times as needed to serve all possible pairs of potential locations.

However, since the number of possible pairs of locations varies as L2, this copy-and-paste strategy places heavy demands on the costs of building and operating the circuitry, namely on wiring and metabolic costs. Therefore, it is unclear apriori whether the modular copy-and-paste strategy is preferred by the brain or whether an alternate strategy involving optimized connectivity and specialized encoding principles are biologically preferable.

This was recently addressed in the context of selection for spatial attention in the barn owl midbrain (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018; Figure 7B). The authors investigated the functional logic of a group of inhibitory midbrain tegmental neurons, the Imc, which are known to play a critical role in selection across space (Marín et al., 2007; Mysore and Knudsen, 2013). The study discovered that Imc neurons are sparse in number, and employ a combinatorial strategy in order to deliver competitive inhibition at all pairs of stimulus locations. To support this strategy, Imc neurons encode spatial locations with unusual receptive fields (RFs) with multiple discrete hotspots or lobes, thereby producing a dense coding of space. Notably, the RF lobes of individual neurons are carefully optimized across the Imc population. This strategy was shown to minimize the sum of the metabolic costs of spikes generated by the high-firing Imc neurons, and the wiring costs of building the donut-like circuit (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018). Thus, inhibitory neurons in the owl midbrain implement selection at all pairs of spatial locations in the space map of the optic tectum, and do so optimally by using a small number of high-firing inhibitory neurons that encode space in a multilobed manner such that they are activated in a combinatorial fashion by competing stimuli (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018).

In the context of perceptual categorization, the use of different odor mixtures has demonstrated that selection is indeed versatile, capable of occurring among many distinct pairs of options (Niessing and Friedrich, 2010). In value-based decision-making, a recent study Xie and Padoa-Schioppa, 2016 found that when monkeys were presented with two different sets of value-based choices (A vs B, or C vs D), the neurons in the OFC encoding the decision variable remained stable across contexts. This suggested a remapping at the earlier evaluation stage (Xie and Padoa-Schioppa, 2016), although potential mechanisms such remapping are as yet unclear. It is plausible that the remapping, which involves routing activity related to the preferred option (among competing ones) to an assigned neural population, itself occurs via a competitive process.

Outside of the owl study (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018), the circuit mechanisms underlying such ‘versatile’ selection have not been identified. Nonetheless, the seemingly specialized strategy employed by owl Imc neurons has broad conceptual appeal owing to the relatively straightforward constraints that yield it: the involvement of inhibitory neurons with feedback and donut-like connectivity, whose function is additionally governed by the plausible principle of minimization of net neural costs. Such a combinatorial scheme is consistent with the patterns of suppression reported in olfactory bulb glomeruli in mice (Economo et al., 2016).

Thus, versatility of selection across many distinct option-pairs is a useful computational feature. Whether the circuit strategy of combinatorially optimized inhibition is also found in other brain areas/species, or more generally, what the strategy might be, for other forms of selection is yet to be determined experimentally.


What else ought a selection circuit be able to do?

Flexible, categorical signaling among all viable pairs of options leads naturally to the next feature; selection among more than two options at any instant. This computational feature is considered next.


Ability to select among multiple (>2) options


Conceptual set-up

The computations we have discussed, thus far, have all dealt nominally with two competing options at a time. However, the natural world is rich with potential options, and animals frequently select among more than just two competing alternatives. It is, therefore, useful for neural circuits to be able to handle selection amidst such complexity in order to facilitate adaptive behavior. Indeed, this ability is the fifth hidden computational feature of the idealized WTA equation: the winner x* among multiple competing options {xi} is correctly identified even when many xi are present (i.e., i > 2).

An understanding of the neural circuit requirements underlying selection among multiple options is still in its infancy (Churchland and Ditterich, 2012). To motivate better the discussion about potential circuit mechanisms, we first summarize key results from relevant neurophysiological experiments and associated models, and then consider circuit implications.


Neural and behavioral data

In the context of selection for spatial attention, several primate studies have used more than one distracter in conjunction with the attentional target. They have shown that responses of neurons in the FEF (Lee and Keller, 2008; Cohen et al., 2009), LIP (Balan et al., 2008), and midbrain superior colliculus (SC) (Basso and Wurtz, 1997; Basso and Wurtz, 1998), to the target stimulus decrease with increasing number of distracters. Recently, work in the barn owl has begun exploring the effect of the number as well as relative priorities of distant competitors on different aspects of competitive responses in the optic tectum (Rajagopalan et al., 2018). Results from increasing the number of competitors are consistent with primate results. Broadly, a role for inhibition that is dependent on the priorities of the stimuli (rather than just their number) has been suggested as a potential mechanism (Basso and Wurtz, 1997; Churchland and Ditterich, 2012).

In the context of perceptual decision-making, responses of neurons in the monkey parietal cortex have been investigated during a task in which they had to report the direction of a noisy motion stimulus when presented with either two, or four response options (Churchland et al., 2008; Churchland et al., 2011). Similar to the studies of spatial attention, this study reported a reduction in neural activity in the LIP (and an increase in response variability) when the number of available options increased. Nonetheless, at the time of the decision, neural firing rates were similar, suggesting that the final threshold value for choice may be constant, with the underlying network requiring more evidence and longer time to reach that threshold. In addition, behaviorally, preference reversal and reference effects have been reported in the context of selection among multiple alternatives (Mellers and Biagini, 1994; Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2004).

In the context of value-based decision-making, neural responses in the primate LIP to multiple options also show similar reduction in activity with increasing number of options (Louie et al., 2011).

Finally, in the context of action selection, neural correlates in the presence of >= 2 movement options have been examined (Bastian et al., 2003). As in other forms of selection, firing rates in PMd have been shown to decrease with increase in target uncertainty (i.e., increase in number of options) (Dekleva et al., 2016), and in M1, a measure corresponding roughly to response variability has been shown to increase systematically (Bastian et al., 2003).


Models and neural circuit requirements

Several variants of A2T and WTA models have been proposed to explain perceptual decision-making (Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2004; Bogacz et al., 2007; Furman and Wang, 2008; Churchland and Ditterich, 2012; Deco et al., 2013; Xue and Liu, 2014; Tajima et al., 2019), value-based decision-making (Glimcher, 2014) and action selection (Cisek, 2007; Cisek and Kalaska, 2010) amongst multiple options.

On the one hand, they account for key neural and behavioral effects in animals – reduction in firing rates, changes in RTs and reduced accuracy, and in addition, account for key effects on behavioral choice observed in humans, namely, reference, context-dependent preference reversal, and set-size effects (Tversky and Kahneman, 1991; Tversky and Simonson, 1993; Wolfe, 1994; Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2004).

On the other hand, the proposed models have a range of differing circuit design details - involving feedback versus feedforward inhibition, involving linear versus nonlinear mechanisms for combining signals across alternatives, involving pooled versus option-specific (lateral) inhibition that is value-dependent, structured versus homogeneous inhibitory connectivity (across feature space), etc (Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2004; Bogacz et al., 2007; Furman and Wang, 2008; Deco et al., 2009; Ditterich, 2010; Bollimunta and Ditterich, 2012; Churchland and Ditterich, 2012; Xue and Liu, 2014; Murakami and Mainen, 2015; Tajima et al., 2019). Because of this diversity, it is unclear which implementational aspects of these models are essential for handling computations underlying selection among multiple stimuli, and which ones are not. Notably, because the models are direct extensions of their two-option counterparts, it would appear that there are no systematic additional constraints that come into play specifically when multiple options, rather than just two, are to be dealt with.

Recent experimental and modeling work in the barn owl suggest otherwise. Specifically, examination of the flexibility of selection boundaries suggests that additional constraints emerge when selection is generalized to beyond just two options, and that a direct extension of two-option models may be insufficient (Rajagopalan et al., 2018). Preliminary results indicate that the core issue may relate to the manner in which inhibition from all other options is combined to affect the representation of each option, and that this may need to be nonlinear (yellow oval). Notably, this requirement of nonlinearity is consistent with one series of models of multialternative decision-making (Bogacz and Gurney, 2007; Bogacz et al., 2007; Zhang and Bogacz, 2010).

In summary, key issues underlying selection among multiple options may yet need to be resolved experimentally. Some open questions are: ‘how does inhibition scale with the number of options?’, ‘how is inhibition from multiple options combined?’, ‘how are floor effects avoided (to ensure that neural responses to the winner stay robust and are not washed out despite inhibition from an increasing number of options)?’, and ‘how do the computational features of flexibility and categorical representations, which have been discussed thus far in the context of two options, continue to be accomplished with >2 options?’.


Unitary output generation


Conceptual set-up

Following the flexible and categorical identification of the winner within any set of competing options, the final (and an essential) computational feature of selection involves ensuring that only the winning option, but not any of the others, is capable of triggering an action or percept. This is implicit in the idealized WTA equation, which sets the winning option to a high value but all the non-winning options to zero (by definition).

From the point of view of neural circuits, this computational feature translates to a slightly less stringent scenario. Neural circuits do need to ensure that the responses to the winning option are above the functional threshold of output-generating neurons (Lo and Wang, 2006; Furman and Wang, 2008; Seger and Peterson, 2013). However, responses to the other options do not necessarily need to be driven to zero, they just need to be weaker than this functional response threshold. (We note, here, that unitary choice formation is essential only at the very final stage in the selection process, just prior to output production, but is not required to occur at any of the previous stages or sites of computation in the brain.)


Neural circuit requirement

We propose that this computation can be implemented in neural circuits by incorporating two additional features – by making the gain of the competitive inhibition high, and by coupling that with recurrent amplification of each option’s representation.

The logic is as follows. Competitive inhibition evoked by each option is required, based on the discussion thus far, to be proportional to that option’s norm, and to produce a donut-like output pattern. If the gain of this inhibition were to be set to a high value, this would have the desired consequence of driving the responses of low-norm options to very low values. However, this raises the potential concern that the high inhibitory gain could cause the losing options to drive the winner’s responses to values that may be too low to be effective for driving output. Conceptually, this concern can be offset with an amplification mechanism that preferentially scales the representation of just the winner. This can be implemented by a bank of recurrent amplifiers, one for each option, positioned such that each amplifier also receives the high-gain competitive inhibition. This second feature will facilitate preferential amplification of just the highest-norm option, because the remaining amplifiers in the bank, corresponding to all other options, are powerfully inhibited by the high-gain competitive inhibition.

The recurrent excitation required by this implementation is a classic mechanism that has been proposed previously for the accumulation of evidence over time (Furman and Wang, 2008; Wang, 2008; Wang, 2012). As a result, By virtue of being framed in the WTA perspective, the above computational feature, and all the ones so far, have been discussed nominally as operating on steady-state firing rate responses. On the other hand, responses in neural circuits evolve over time, and animals make decisions under temporal urgency (Reddi et al., 2003; Churchland et al., 2008; Thura et al., 2012). It is, therefore, important to note that the circuit proposed above is well capable of producing temporally evolving responses seen in the brain, and in A2T models: The recurrent excitation required in this implementation is, in fact, a classic mechanism that has been proposed for the accumulation of evidence over time (Furman and Wang, 2008; Wang, 2008; Wang, 2012). (In addition, the non-selective motor urgency signal, which is thought to multiplicatively modulate the sensory input (Thura et al., 2012), is plausibly accounted for as one of the (many) internal influences that go into building the representations of the options;.) Therefore, with the proposed circuit mechanism for unitary choices, responses to the competing options are not only separated by the high-gain competitive inhibition, but also accumulate over time because of the recurrent amplification, and do so with asymmetric rates as a result of competitive inhibition impinging on the amplifiers. Consequently, the option with the highest norm is predicted to reach the firing threshold of the downstream ‘output’ neurons first, and to trigger the associated percept or action. An additional advantage of this scheme involving temporal primacy is that it precludes the need for careful tuning of the parameters corresponding to competitive inhibition and amplification (as long as they are within a neurally plausible range).

Thus, high-gain competitive inhibition together with downstream recurrent amplification can selectively enhance responses to the option with the highest norm while suppressing the responses to all other options, thereby allowing only the option with the highest norm to drive output.


Neural support

Numerous studies across the selection literature have demonstrated that the responses to the winning option are higher (or enhanced), whereas those to the losing options are low (or suppressed), as described in the previous sections (Freedman et al., 2001; Hernández et al., 2002; Romo et al., 2002; Freedman et al., 2003; Romo et al., 2004; Freedman and Assad, 2006; Padoa-Schioppa and Assad, 2006; Cisek and Kalaska, 2010; Mysore et al., 2011; Mysore and Knudsen, 2011a). However, very little is known about the circuit mechanisms underlying unitary output generation.

In the context of spatial attention, the so called ‘visuomotor’ and ‘motor’ neurons in the primate FEF (Bruce and Goldberg, 1985) as well as the SCid (Wurtz and Albano, 1980) are known to exhibit peak activity just before initiation of a saccade towards the motor field of that neuron. Similarly, caudate neurons in the basal ganglia show selective activity to the target of attention even when no overt action was required (Arcizet and Krauzlis, 2018). Additionally, a recent primate study suggests that the difference between the activities of right and left SCs serves as a decision variable, which, when it crosses a threshold, results in unitary action (Herman et al., 2018). This is in line with an earlier model (for perceptual decision-making) in which a multi-area module involving the primate cortex, basal ganglia and the SC was proposed as a means both for detecting threshold crossing (via the cortico-collicular pathway) as well as for threshold setting (via the cortico-caudate pathway) (Lo and Wang, 2006). In all cases, however, the implementational details of the proposed models in neural circuitry are unknown – for instance, the neural circuit mechanisms for comparison across the SCs, the source of recurrent excitation, etc.

Potential support for the specific implementational scheme that we propose above - namely high-gain competitive inhibition and recurrent amplification, comes from the avian midbrain selection network. Neurons in the avian sensorimotor hub, the OT, receive powerful inhibition from GABAergic neurons in the midbrain tegmentum, called Imc (Marín et al., 2007; Mysore and Knudsen, 2013), following a donut-like spatial pattern (Wang et al., 2004; Mahajan and Mysore, 2020). In addition, cholinergic neurons in the nucleus isthmi pars parvocellularis serve as point-to-point recurrent amplifiers of activity in the OT of birds (Marín et al., 2005; Asadollahi and Knudsen, 2016) as well as fish (Henriques et al., 2019). Indeed, because Ipc neurons are powerfully suppressed by the Imc, the circuit supports asymmetric amplification as well (Wang et al., 2004; Asadollahi et al., 2010). Whether and how this Imc-Ipc circuit, which is thought to be conserved across vertebrates (Knudsen, 2018), impacts unitary output generation in behavior is yet to be tested, and similar circuits are yet to be studied in other species/brain areas.

In the context of perceptual decision-making, studies have demonstrated that unitary choice is triggered immediately after neural firing rates of primate LIP reach a fixed value (Gold and Shadlen, 2007; Churchland and Ditterich, 2012; Hanks and Summerfield, 2017). The observation that the responses to the losing options are not zero, but remain graded, has led others to propose that the LIP may be feeding its activity to a downstream area that implements unitary choice (Gold and Shadlen, 2002; Gold and Shadlen, 2007). (Note that, as we point out above, responses to the losing options don’t necessarily need to go to zero, they just need to not exceed the threshold for output.) Although modeling studies have accounted for threshold generation in perceptual decision-making tasks (Lo and Wang, 2006; Wei et al., 2015), an understanding of the actual neural implementation is still lacking.

In value-based decision-making, a model of LIP activity during choice has used an arg-max operation for unitary choice generation, which is consistent with both the WTA as well as the A2T formulations, but the circuit details are as yet unclear (Louie et al., 2011).

In the context of action selection, neurons in the primate premotor and motor cortices encoding for the winning option, but not the losing ones, are shown to be active at the time of choice (Cisek and Kalaska, 2005). A WTA-like model has been proposed, but the neural implementation is as yet unclear. Some support for inhibition as well as recurrent excitation in the context of voluntary movement initiation has been reported in rats (Isomura et al., 2009).

In summary, unitary choice is self-evident in animal behavior and has been demonstrated in the laboratory across selection tasks and species. We have proposed that a general circuit mechanism underlying this computation is competitive inhibition with high gain, coupled with recurrent amplification. There is clear evidence that such a circuit exists in the avian midbrain selection network. However, the link between the circuit architecture and unitary choice in this network, and more generally, the neural circuit mechanisms underlying unitary choice in other brain areas and in the context of other forms of selection, are yet to be uncovered experimentally.


Feasibility, generality and limitations of the framework

For the purposes of mapping the implementation of competitive selection onto explicit neural circuit elements, we broke it down into a set of six well-defined computational primitives by drawing inspiration from the idealized WTA operation. Starting with a simple neural circuit, we progressively built in these computational features by adding specific motifs to the circuit’s architecture. The resulting combined circuit, capable of implementing all six computational features of WTA selection, is shown in. The routes for circuit implementation proposed here are either the simplest ones and/or are those that are supported directly by published reports. Nonetheless, the specific implementation in use in any particular brain areas and animal species is a question to be answered experimentally.

Notably, although developed to account for the steady state response properties of WTA, this circuit can generate time-evolving responses consistent with the A2T perspective, and can produce predictions related to behavioral reaction times. It is also amenable to the action of a broad urgency signal for multiplicatively modulating sensory evidence, thought to be essential for handling time-varying sensory evidence (Thura and Cisek, 2014). We note that the computations described here are not required to be implemented within a single, monolithic ‘selection circuit’, rather, they may well be implemented in a distributed fashion across brain areas and processing stages.

At first glance, this combined circuit appears complex with several seemingly specialized circuit components. Consequently, it raises two critical questions: (a) First, is it biologically plausible? In other words, is there evidence that such a circuit is implemented (either in a combined or distributed fashion) in the brain in the context of any selection task? (b) Second, is it general? In other words, does it represent a specially curated solution that applies only in limited contexts, or can it generalize for neural implementation across brain areas and animal species? We turn to these questions next.


Plausibility: Biological instantiation of the combined circuit

Brain networks in several animal species including birds, fish, reptiles (Mysore and Knudsen, 2011b; Jovanic et al., 2016; Koyama et al., 2016; Knudsen, 2018; Koyama and Pujala, 2018; Mahajan and Mysore, 2018; Fernandes et al., 2019; Mahajan and Mysore, 2020) implement most of the six computational features in the manner depicted in the combined circuit framework. We focus here, specifically on the avian midbrain selection network as an example case (Sereno and Ulinski, 1987; Wang et al., 2004; Wang et al., 2006; Knudsen, 2011). This network is thought to be conserved across all vertebrates (Knudsen, 2018) and to serve selection for spatial attention. It consists of the optic tectum (OT, the avian SC), and satellite inhibitory (Imc) and cholinergic (Ipc) neurons in midbrain tegmentum.

The SCid/OTid, which is required for selection for spatial attention (McPeek and Keller, 2004; Lovejoy and Krauzlis, 2010), encodes sensory stimuli as well as internal influences in a topographically organized map of stimulus priority (Fecteau and Munoz, 2006). The inhibitory Imc neurons deliver feedforward inhibition globally across the OTid space map and are required for comparison among competing options (Marín et al., 2007; Mysore et al., 2010; Mysore and Knudsen, 2013). They are connected in a functionally donut-like fashion with the OTid and Ipc neurons, implementing the categorical selection boundaries observed in the OT (Wang et al., 2004; Mahajan and Mysore, 2020). They inhibit one another, potentially allowing for flexible selection boundaries (Mysore and Knudsen, 2012; Goddard et al., 2014). They have been shown to employ a combinatorially optimized strategy to achieve selection at all pairs of stimulus locations (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018). In addition, Imc neurons, which are associated with each location of the OT space map (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018), are thought to help implement selection among multiple competing stimuli, although respecting as yet unknown additional constraints regarding input integration (Rajagopalan et al., 2018). Finally, their function is complemented by that of the cholinergic amplifiers – Ipc neurons, which connect in a point-to-point, recurrent manner with the OTid (Marín et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2006; Asadollahi and Knudsen, 2016), and are also the recipients of donut-like inhibition from the Imc (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020), potentially facilitating unitary choice.

Thus, there is direct evidence that the avian (as well as fish and reptilian) midbrain network employs the proposed circuit motifs for the first four of the six ‘hidden’ computational features of competitive selection, with the ones underlying the other two - selection amidst clutter and unitary choice, remaining to be investigated.

In addition, in several other species, there is evidence for the plausibility of the circuit implementation needed for a subset of the computational features. For instance, (a) long-range inhibition in monkey cortex (Tamamaki and Tomioka, 2010; Womelsdorf and Everling, 2015), monkey LIP (Falkner et al., 2010), rodent hippocampus/entorhinal cortex (Picardo et al., 2011), and cross-hemispherical suppress (Sooksawate et al., 2011); (b) donut-like inhibition in flies (Jovanic et al., 2016), fish (Koyama et al., 2016; Koyama and Pujala, 2018), and rodent amydgala (Fadok et al., 2017); (b) reciprocal inhibition of inhibition in flies (Jovanic et al., 2016), fish (Koyama et al., 2016; Koyama and Pujala, 2018), and rodent amydgala (Fadok et al., 2017).


Generality: Comparison with leading computational models of competitive selection

To address the issue of generality, we next compare our framework with computational models that have been proposed in the literature to account for behavioral and neural responses (across brain areas) in a range of selection and decision-making tasks.

Models of competitive selection fall into two broad classes based on the nature of their architectures – those that involve structured connectivity diagrams (‘structured’ models), and those that are highly recurrent with no clear apriori structure imposed on them (Mante et al., 2013; Chaisangmongkon et al., 2017). The latter can account for mixed selectivity of neural responses observed in cortical areas (but see Hirokawa et al., 2019, and can be trained to learn different category boundaries. However, it is unclear whether they are dynamically flexible – i.e., able to adjust category boundaries on the fly, especially without the use of indicator or gating variables that convey discrete group information (Siu et al., 1991). Importantly, because it is difficult to extract specific circuit mechanisms from the latter, we do not consider them further. We compare our circuit framework with the former class of ‘structured’ models of competitive selection.

Structured models can themselves be divided into two kinds. First, models in which the inhibition is structured (Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2004; Machens et al., 2005; Bogacz et al., 2007; Churchland and Ditterich, 2012; Mysore and Knudsen, 2012), and second, models in which the inhibition is unstructured (pooled; -left panel, Amit and Brunel, 1997; Wang, 2002; Lo and Wang, 2006; Wong and Wang, 2006; Furman and Wang, 2008). The structured inhibition models include models of multialternative decision-making (Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2004; Bogacz et al., 2007; Churchland and Ditterich, 2012), of perceptual decision-making (Machens et al., 2005), and of selection for spatial attention (Mysore and Knudsen, 2012). Notably, there is a great deal of commonality between these models and our framework, with all of them being elaborations of a core conceptual circuit diagram involving mutually inhibiting populations of neurons. The unstructured inhibition models, which include models of perceptual decision-making (Amit and Brunel, 1997; Wang, 2002; Lo and Wang, 2006; Wong and Wang, 2006; Furman and Wang, 2008) and value-based decision-making (Louie et al., 2011; Deco et al., 2013), stand as a potential alternative to our framework. However, such circuits involving pooled uniform inhibition may be less effective at generating categorical (step-like) neural selection boundaries (Carandini and Churchland, 2013; Mahajan and Mysore, 2020), and may also not account fully for decision behavior among multiple alternatives (Gluth et al., 2020). Incidentally, it has been shown that under special circumstances, these pooled models can reduce to the same mutually inhibitory module (- right panel (Wong and Wang, 2006). Below, we compare and contrast these leading structured models with each of the key components of our circuit framework.

In the context of building the representational landscape for competing options, we proposed that the norm of each option constitutes a means for lawfully comparing options. A straightforward perspective is that the norm represents the net worth of an option, such that the contribution of each attribute is combined in some weighted fashion to produce a single number. However, this is not necessary. Alternatives: In the case of hierarchical or distributed implementation of selection, subsets of attributes may be progressively represented along the stages of a hierarchy (Cisek, 2012; Connor and Stuphorn, 2015; Lorteije et al., 2015; Hunt and Hayden, 2017), or alternatively, intra-attribute competition could occur sequentially (Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2004; Churchland and Ditterich, 2012; Chen et al., 2013). Indeed, subsets of attributes could themselves determine entirely the final choice (Farashahi et al., 2019; Rouault et al., 2019). In these cases, the norm would correspond not to the ‘net worth’ of each option, but just to the ‘worth’ of the relevant attribute(s). Nonetheless, the core idea is that options, or subsets of their attributes, are being competed along some common axis, with the competition implemented by circuit elements in.

In the context of the first ‘hidden’ computational feature, our ‘baseline’ circuit established a means for the neural representations of competing options to be compared, and did so with feedforward inhibition distributed from each option to all. Comparison: This motif is found in several of the leading computational models (Bogacz and Gurney, 2007; Olsen et al., 2010). Alternative: Whereas inhibitory interactions between competing options are important for comparing among them, the inhibition does not need to be of the feedforward variety, even though such inhibition is found in many brain areas. Feedback inhibition, a mainstay of many selection models (Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2001; Machens et al., 2005; Bogacz and Gurney, 2007; Ratcliff and McKoon, 2008; Churchland and Ditterich, 2012; Mysore and Knudsen, 2012), can also serve the purpose of comparing among options (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020), and is consistent with our circuit framework (see the paragraph after next).

In the context of the second ‘hidden’ computational feature, we introduced a donut-like inhibitory motif for generating categorical (step-like) neural response profiles (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020). Comparison: The donut-like inhibitory motif is found in all of the leading structured inhibition models (Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2001; Machens et al., 2005; Bogacz and Gurney, 2007; Ratcliff and McKoon, 2008; Churchland and Ditterich, 2012; Mysore and Knudsen, 2012). Unstructured inhibition models of decision-making, which invoke pooled uniform inhibition, do not possess the donut-like motif (Amit and Brunel, 1997; Wang and Spelke, 2002; Lo and Wang, 2006; Wong and Wang, 2006; Furman and Wang, 2008; Louie et al., 2011; Deco et al., 2013), but such circuits may not be effective for generating categorical neural selection boundaries (Carandini and Heeger, 2012; Mahajan and Mysore, 2020). Alternative: The donut-like motif for categorization can be implemented not only via the feedforward inhibitory path among the options, but also via a feedback path between the options, or via both (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020). Indeed, it is implemented in the feedforward as well as feedback inhibitory pathways in most of the leading structured inhibition models (Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2001; Bogacz and Gurney, 2007; Ratcliff and McKoon, 2008; Churchland and Ditterich, 2012; Mysore and Knudsen, 2012), and in just the feedback pathway in others (Machens et al., 2005).

In the context of the third ‘hidden’ computational feature, we added feedback inhibition between the competing options to implement flexible selection boundaries (Mysore and Knudsen, 2012). Comparison: Feedback inhibition is, in fact, found in nearly all the leading models with structured inhibition (Roe et al., 2001; Usher and McClelland, 2001; Machens et al., 2005; Churchland and Ditterich, 2012). Models with unstructured inhibition have been shown to display flexibility (Carandini et al., 1997), though the reason for this is unclear. It has been proposed that inhibition among the pool of inhibitory neurons found in these models may be the key (Mysore and Knudsen, 2012), but this is yet to be tested. Alternative: Both direct reciprocal inhibition among inhibitory neurons, as well as indirect feedback inhibition routed through intermediate excitatory neurons, can achieve flexibility (Mysore and Knudsen, 2012). In the owl midbrain selection circuit, feedback inhibition is implemented in the direct manner (Goddard et al., 2014). In the structured inhibition models listed above, feedback inhibition is typically implemented in an indirect manner.

In the context of the fourth ‘hidden’ computational feature, we examined the problem of selection among many (all) viable pairs of options. Based on a recent study of spatial selection (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018), we incorporated a combinatorial solution into the circuit framework as a biologically efficient solution. Comparison: To the best of our knowledge, the mechanistic underpinnings of this computational feature have not been investigated in other studies. Alternative: A potentially straightforward alternative to the combinatorially optimized solution is a simple ‘copy-and-paste’ strategy, in which the RFs (or preference tuning curves) of the inhibitory neurons closely match those of the input excitatory neurons (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018). However, this solution is metabolically expensive (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018), and therefore, less desirable. Another potential alternative may be the (currently unknown) mechanism underlying value 'remapping' reported recently (Xie and Padoa-Schioppa, 2016).

In the context of the fifth ‘hidden’ computational feature, we considered the problem of selection among multiple (>2) options. Based on preliminary data (Rajagopalan et al., 2018), we highlighted the potential importance of nonlinear combination of inputs in order to account for the effects of multiple options on flexibility of the selection boundary, an aspect of multi-option decision-making that has not been experimentally investigated in other studies. Comparison: Broadly, existing models involving structured inhibition achieve selection among multiple options by essentially scaling-up the circuit diagram for two options to multiple ones; ours does this as well. Additionally, one set of models (Bogacz and Gurney, 2007; Bogacz et al., 2007) specifically calls for nonlinear combination of inputs, consistent with our proposal. Alternative: Other structured inhibition models use linear or nonlinear integrators, allow negative activity, and/or employ constant versus variable feedback activation to account for multi-option selection (Ditterich, 2010; Churchland and Ditterich, 2012). However, it remains to be explored whether they are able to also account for the effects on flexibility that non-linearity does. Regarding models with unstructured inhibition (Furman and Wang, 2008), recent evidence suggests that they may not account fully for decision behavior among multiple alternatives (Gluth et al., 2020).

Finally, in the context of the sixth ‘hidden’ computational feature, we proposed a ‘push-pull’ solution for the unitary choice problem, involving an amplifier downstream of the inhibitory neurons. Comparison/Alternative: To the best of our knowledge, explicit biological solutions for solving the unitary choice problem are not known. Existing computational models typically state that a threshold must be crossed for the decision, but do not provide a neural mechanism for it (Churchland and Ditterich, 2012; Huk and Meister, 2012).

Taken together, there are many points of correspondence between our proposed circuit framework in, and computational models with structured inhibition that have been proposed to account for selection behaviors. There is also little apparent difference between them in terms of overall complexity (vs.). Our framework, in essence, serves as a collection of mechanistic building blocks underlying many of the models of selection and decision-making. This point is further illustrated in: abstracting away the implementational details of our combined circuit reduces it to a circuit diagram involving mutually inhibiting populations of neurons, which is identical to the one used to represent each of the leading models with structured inhibition.


A canonical neural circuit framework

The construction of our framework from first principles, by using a computational primitive-centric approach, has resulted in potential insights into the complex function of competitive selection. It allows for the deconstruction of a potential selection circuit into core motifs that are associated with specific computations, thereby providing a starting point for the experimental search for neural circuit mechanisms of competitive selection (see section titled ‘Experimentally testable predictions’). By contrast, whereas each of the existing computational models successfully accounts for data from the selection task(s) that it is built to model, it is not always clear why that model works, what circuit elements are essential, and what experiments to design in order to investigate the neural circuit underpinnings of selection in a relevant brain area. Indeed, in some cases, intuition regarding the computational roles of different circuit elements does not appear to be borne out: for instance, it has recently been demonstrated that recurrent amplification as well as feedback inhibition, by themselves, are insufficient to generate categorical selection boundaries (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020), in contrast to previous conjectures.

In light of the links to biology and parallels to existing models, the circuit framework proposed here is potentially capable of accounting for the implementation of selection in different tasks and across different brain areas. This will likely involve the use of alternate, but equivalent, implementations of the proposed core circuit motifs as discussed above, and may involve a distributed implementation of the various computational features across processing stages rather than a combined implementation within one so-called selection circuit. We propose that the building blocks we identify here may be mixed and matched, based on the needs and flavor of a particular selection task, to build a neural circuit to solve it.


Limitations and caveats

An important part of our framework is the representational landscape in which competing options, or more generally, the attributes that are being compared, are encoded along some common scale of comparison (norm), and in some common currency. We pointed to firing rate as a potential common currency, and firing rate-dependent inhibition featured prominently in the remainder of the framework. However, it is unclear if firing rate is the only such currency, and if not, the manner in which the subsequent computations are to be implemented is not clear in the current framework. Related to this point, the framework is also agnostic to how the norm comes to be encoded, especially considering recent reports that the norm is not universal and can depend on the context (Farashahi et al., 2019; Rouault et al., 2019; Koechlin, 2020).

Representation of options and their norms.What is the norm of each option? Is it unidimensional or can it be reduced to a unidimensional value? What is its common currency?How is each option represented – ordered (topographic) or non-ordered and distributed over neural ensembles?How are downstream neural circuits organized to decode this (potentially complex) representation and extract useful quantities necessary to implement the ‘hidden’ computations for selection?What is the source of the motor urgency signal and how it is incorporated into the representational landscape?

Properties and organization of inhibition, and recurrent amplification. Is feedforward neural inhibition implemented in the circuit?If so, how – via long-range inhibitory projections (Tamamaki and Tomioka, 2010; Womelsdorf et al., 2014; Womelsdorf and Everling, 2015) or via long range excitatory projections that impinge on to local inhibitory neurons (Zhang et al., 2014). Does feedback inhibition exist and if so what is its organization? What are the properties of inhibitory neurons (preferences, input/output functions) and what rules govern the combination of inhibition from multiple sources. What is the source of recurrent amplification? How does the competitive inhibition in the circuit interact with the mechanisms of amplification?

Unitary choice generation. In which brain area should the implementation of unitary choice be investigated? Only the brain area that occupies the very last computational stage before output generation? This is important to determine because explicitly categorical representations have been reported at various stages all along the neural information processing stream: from areas close to the sensory periphery (Niessing and Friedrich, 2010; Asadollahi et al., 2011; Schryver and Mysore, 2019), to higher order, integrative areas (Freedman et al., 2001; Freedman et al., 2003; Freedman and Assad, 2006; Swaminathan and Freedman, 2012), to areas close to motor output production (Mysore et al., 2011).

Integration across multiple brain areas. How do the multiple areas that are typically involved in a particular type of competitive selection task operate synergistically to drive the behavioral or perceptual output of that selection?

Overlapping or multiplexed neural function. How to understand, as a whole, the role of neurons in a particular brain area, when that area/neurons are involved in multiple forms of selection?

Comparison across species. What computational and implementational principles of selection are conserved across species? What principles are specialized?

Second, although we discuss six computations in the context of WTA symmetry-breaking, it is possible that they are not all equally important, in general. Comparison and unitary choice, the first and last ‘hidden’ computational features, are likely universal, with the others being useful depending on the nature of the selection task and the animal’s behavioral goals. For instance, categorical neural selection boundaries, though common, may not always be necessary. Similarly, not all selection tasks may require flexibility, with fixed boundaries being not only sufficient, but also necessary in some cases. For instance, in the case of syllable-length identification by songbirds, the goal of the underlying neural circuit is the determination of how the length of a syllable compares to a fixed value (Prather et al., 2008). With respect to the ability to select among all viable options, combinatorially optimized inhibition implemented by sparse inhibitory neurons with dense coding properties has been demonstrated as an efficient solution for selection across spatial locations. However, it is unclear if this is the only solution, especially in the context of other forms of selection (Xie and Padoa-Schioppa, 2016). Finally, for selection among more than two options, much is still unknown about specifics of neural circuit implementation.

Third, our framework was constructed around the WTA operation. Although it admits the analysis of response timecourses, choice response times were not considered explicitly.

Despite these limitations, the explicit mapping in our framework, of computations for selection onto circuit elements, can serve as a useful starting point for the investigation of circuit mechanisms underlying different forms of selection. Specific, experimentally testable predictions of the framework are outlined, next.


Experimentally testable predictions


Comparison: source of inhibition


Predictions

(a) Neural representations of options are modulated (suppressed) in the presence of competing ones, and (b) neural inhibition plays a key role, and it operates globally in the space of options.


Experimental tests

(a) Compare neural responses (in the relevant brain area) to one option versus two competing options and evaluate if response reduction occurs. (b1) Characterize anatomically the underlying neural circuit in detail and assess if inhibitory neurons are part of the circuit (local or distant). (b2) If so, test if disrupting neural inhibition minimizes/abolishes the impact of one option on another; test also the scale or scope of this inhibition with respect to the space of options by systematically changing one the competing options.


Significance

These experiments can identify the potential source of inhibition for implementing comparisons among options, reveal if it is of the structured variety or the unstructured (pooled) variety, and whether inhibition is implemented via long-range inhibitory projections or long-range excitatory projections onto local inhibitory neurons.


Categorical selection boundary


Predictions

(a) Neural representations underlying selection/decision-making are explicitly categorical. (b) An underlying donut-like pattern of competitive inhibition controls these categorical selection boundaries (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020). (c) Disrupting the categorical nature of the neural representation (by causally perturbing the underlying mechanism) causes a degradation of selection behavior specifically around the category boundary.


Experimental tests

(a) Measure responses of a neuron that encodes for (prefers) option A, while also presenting a competing option B. Systematically increase norm (priority, subjective value, etc) of option B from values lower than the norm of option A to values higher than that of A (Mysore et al., 2011; You and Mysore, 2020). The resulting response curve, called a CRP (competitor-norm dependent response profile), is expected to show a reduction in responses with increasing norm of option B. Characterize the categorization index of this CRP in a manner that takes into account response variability, and evaluate if it is significantly greater than 0 (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020). (b1) Based on the anatomical characterization above, determine if a donut-like motif is operational in the circuit. (b2) If so, selectively introduce self-inhibition into the circuit (i.e., disrupt the donut-like motif), repeat the CRP measurement, and re-compute the categorization index (Mahajan and Mysore, 2020). It is expected to be substantially lower than before (and potentially not distinguishable from 0). In other words, the responses are expected to be far less categorical without the donut-like motif. (c) Upon introducing self-inhibition (per b2, above), measure also the effect on behavioral responses and compare them to responses in the intact condition, specifically for stimulus options that straddle the selection boundary.


Significance

These experiments can reveal if neural responses (and behavior) underlying the selection task are categorical, if there is a donut-like organization of inhibition, if this is implemented via a feedforward or a recurrent path, and whether it controls categorization.


Flexibility of selection boundary


Predictions

(a) The selection boundary is dynamically flexible, and (b) feedback inhibition between competing options controls flexibility.


Experimental tests

(a) Measure CRP at a neuron that encodes for (prefers) option A while also presenting a competing (non-preferred) option B. Repeat this measurement in an interleaved manner with one exception: increase the norm of option A to a different (higher value). For each CRP, determine the norm of option B (‘transition’ norm) at which responses drop from a high value to a low value. If this transition norm is coupled to, and shifts with, the strength of option A, the selection boundary is dynamically flexible (no training/plasticity involved; Mysore et al., 2011). (b1) With anatomical (as well as functional) characterization of the circuit, assess if feedback inhibition exists between neurons encoding different options. Examine if this feedback pathway is direct (reciprocal inhibition among inhibitory neurons) or indirect (routed through intermediate excitatory neurons; Mysore and Knudsen, 2012). (b2) Selectively silence feedback inhibition between options (while leaving the inhibitory neurons themselves intact), and repeat measurements of the two response curves in (a). Depending on how the circuit is organized, this may be achieved either by silencing the feedback projections from one channel onto the other (source-side manipulation), or by preventing neurons in one channel from receiving (feedback) inhibition from those of another (recipient-side manipulation). The manipulation is expected to abolish the shifting of the boundary (transition norm) between the two response curves (Mysore and Knudsen, 2012), while leaving intact the response reduction in each curve.


Significance

These experiments can reveal dynamically flexible selection boundaries, the presence of direct vs. indirect feedback inhibition between competing options, and also the circuit mechanism underlying flexibility.


Ability to select among many (all) viable pairs of competing options


Predictions

(a) Animals are able to select between many different pairs of competing options. (b) This ability is mediated by an overcomplete set of inhibitory neurons with sparse coding, or by a sparse set of inhibitory neurons with combinatorially-optimized dense coding of option space (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018), or by an as yet unknown mechanism that results in norm-remapping (Xie and Padoa-Schioppa, 2016). Below we will discuss experiments to test the first two possibilities.


Experimental tests

(a) Present animals with different pairs of options (the laboratory equivalent of having to select between apples and oranges, bananas and blueberries, etc). Animals are expected to be able to perform well and consistently. (b1) Within the anatomically identified network relevant to this behavior, identify neurons that drive the inhibition: these can be inhibitory neurons that directly deliver competitive inhibition, or excitatory neurons with long-range connections that deliver inhibition indirectly by driving local inhibitory neurons that largely serve as simple sign-changers (Schryver et al., 2020). Measure responses of these ‘driver’ neurons to various options (individually), and characterize their encoding preferences. Dense coding by these neurons is indicative of a combinatorially-optimized solution, which can be tested with additional analysis/experiments (Mahajan and Mysore, 2018; Mahajan and Mysore, 2020), whereas sparse/ordered coding by these neurons is indicative of a copy-and-paste solution. (b2) ‘Focal’ or selective disruption of a subset of the driver neurons should affect selection between some pairs of options (all the ones that activate these neurons), but not other option pairs.


Significance

Results can reveal the neural circuit mechanisms that implement the ability to select among many (all) different pairs of options.


Ability to select among multiple (>2) competing options


Predictions

(a) Animals are able to select among multiple options in a manner that generalizes from selection between two options, but with potential preference reversal effects and contextual effects, and potential shifts in the encoding of the category boundary by individual neurons (Rajagopalan et al., 2018). (b) The neural and behavioral results are accounted for by circuits that involve non-linear combination of inhibitory inputs (Bogacz and Gurney, 2007; Rajagopalan et al., 2018). (c) Disruption of the nonlinearity in the combination of multiple inhibitory inputs impacts selection among multiple (but not two) options.


Experimental tests

(a) Present animals with two vs. more than two options, in each case using a CRP stimulus protocol that systematically varies relative norm between the competing options. Measure behavior as well as neural responses and quantify the effect of increasing the number of options on behavioral performance as well as on the neural specification of the selection boundary (i.e., the transition norm; Asadollahi et al., 2011; Mysore and Knudsen, 2011a; Schryver et al., 2020; You and Mysore, 2020). (b) Compare observed outcomes with those predicted by computational models with linear vs. non-linear combination of inhibition, in order to identify the best account for the observed data.


Significance

Results will shed light on the neural implementation of a circuit for selection among multiple options, and reveal rules (nonlinearities) governing the integration of inputs from multiple options for such selection.


Producing a unitary choice


Predictions

High gain competitive inhibition coupled (downstream) with high-gain amplification is involved in the production of unitary choice. Specifically, disruption of high-gain amplification by enhancing amplification of the option that would normally lose, increases the likelihood of that option being selected, but will slow reaction times, consistent with a change in the decision threshold.


Experimental tests

(a) Within the anatomically identified network relevant to the selection behavior, investigate the presence and connectivity of amplifier neurons (cholinergic or glutamatergic, for instance). (b) Assay the strength (gain) of amplification by comparing neural responses to a single option without and with silencing of the ‘amplifier’ neurons (Marín et al., 2005; Asadollahi and Knudsen, 2016). (c) During a two option selection task, experimentally disrupt the high-gain amplification by enhancing the output of the amplifier neurons to the weaker option, and measure neural and behavioral outcomes.


Significance

These experiments can reveal the neural circuit mechanism involved in setting the ‘threshold’ for selection and the production of unitary choice.


Funding Statement

The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.


Contributor Information

Shreesh P Mysore, Email: mysore@jhu.edu.

Joshua I Gold, University of Pennsylvania, United States.

Joshua I Gold, University of Pennsylvania, United States.


Funding Information

This paper was supported by the following grants:

National Institutes of Health R01EY027718 to Shreesh P Mysore.

National Institutes of Health R34NS111653 to Shreesh P Mysore.


Hippocampal remapping as hidden state inference

Honi Sanders, Matthew A Wilson, Samuel J Gershman, Peter Latham, Laura L Colgin — eLife, 2020. PMC7282808, CC BY 4.0.

Cells in the hippocampus tuned to spatial location (place cells) typically change their tuning when an animal changes context, a phenomenon known as remapping. A fundamental challenge to understanding remapping is the fact that what counts as a ‘‘context change’’ has never been precisely defined. Furthermore, different remapping phenomena have been classified on the basis of how much the tuning changes after different types and degrees of context change, but the relationship between these variables is not clear. We address these ambiguities by formalizing remapping in terms of hidden state inference. According to this view, remapping does not directly reflect objective, observable properties of the environment, but rather subjective beliefs about the hidden state of the environment. We show how the hidden state framework can resolve a number of puzzles about the nature of remapping.

Research organism: None


Introduction

Place cells of the hippocampus fire when an animal occupies specific spatial locations (place fields; O'Keefe, 1976). Each place cell has its own respective place fields, so collectively the population of place cell comprise a map of an environment, in which each location corresponds to activity of a particular subset of place cells. The hippocampus is thought to use independent maps for each context. These independent maps can be observed through ‘‘place field remapping’’, in which the location of a place field may change or the place field may disappear entirely between contexts (Muller and Kubie, 1987; Colgin et al., 2008; Kubie et al., 2019). The sensitivity of place cells to context changes is consistent with many other studies implicating the hippocampus in context-dependent behavior (Holland and Bouton, 1999; Gershman et al., 2010; Anagnostaras et al., 2001; Smith and Mizumori, 2006a). Despite its acknowledged importance, the precise relationship between context changes and remapping has remained elusive, due in part to ambiguity as to what counts as context change.

Researchers have operationalized context in many different ways. For example, some researchers investigated the role of sensory cues (Knierim et al., 1998; O’Keefe and Conway, 1978; Muller and Kubie, 1987), whereas others investigated the effect of changing spatial location or geometry (Skaggs and McNaughton, 1998; Lever et al., 2002), or changing the task (O'Keefe and Speakman, 1987; Markus et al., 1995). Not surprisingly, different effects have been observed for these different manipulations, without cohering into a unified picture of how context changes determine remapping.

Some of the confusion about what counts as a context change is due to inconsistent definitions of the word 'context'. Sometimes 'context' refers to experimenter-defined variables, such as physical location or sensory cues. In other cases, 'context' refers to the animal’s internal assessment of the environment as indicated by neural activity or behavioral response. For example, in the fear conditioning literature, animals are assumed to preferentially freeze in the 'same' context as that in which they received the shock. This doesn’t necessarily have to be physically the same environment, as long as the animal infers that it is the same environment (Chang and Liang, 2017; Gershman et al., 2010). Invoking subjective inferential factors in the interpretation of remapping compels us to consider basic questions about the nature of these inferences. What is the animal’s hypothesis space? How does it represent and update beliefs over this hypothesis space?

The goal of this paper is to develop formal answers to these questions, and thereby provide a coherent account of diverse experimental findings. Key to this account is the idea that the relationship between observable properties of the environment (including context) and remapping is mediated by inferences about unobservable properties of the environment (hidden states). We emphasize for clarity that the ‘‘observable’’ properties of the environment have themselves been inferred through sensory processing and therefore are in a sense hidden, but when we refer to hidden states, we are referring to regularities in the environment that could not be observed even with perfect sensory reproduction of the environment. According to this view (see also Fuhs and Touretzky, 2007; Gershman et al., 2014; Penny et al., 2013), place fields remap when the animal believes that it has entered a new hidden state. By specifying the animal’s internal model of how hidden states relate to observable stimuli, we can make principled predictions about when, why and how place fields remap.

Before describing the details and applications of this computational framework, we will briefly review some of the key empirical and theoretical background.


Empirical background

Remapping phenomena have been divided into several classes (Colgin et al., 2008; Muller, 1996; Kubie et al., 2019). At the extremes, there is ‘global’ or ‘complete’ remapping (where no place fields are shared between contexts) and ‘null’ or ‘lack of’ remapping (where all place fields are shared between contexts). Between these extremes is ‘partial remapping’ (where some place fields are shared between contexts but some are not) and ‘rate remapping’ (where place fields are shared between contexts but have characteristically different firing rates). However, none of these categories can be regarded as strictly exclusive.

The extent to which place fields are shared between contexts can be quantified by looking at the spatial correlations of place cell firing rates between contexts. Although studies report correlations near zero between place fields in different contexts (Leutgeb et al., 2004; Muller and Kubie, 1987; Schlesiger et al., 2015), there are reasons to believe that correlations are not actually zero. A recent report suggests that previous observations of global remapping might be artifacts of misalignment of maps between contexts (Kinsky et al., 2018). Some place cells have been found to consistently encode reward across virtual reality contexts that otherwise express ‘global remapping’ (Gauthier and Tank, 2018), so there is at least one class of place cells that have recently been found not to remap across contexts. More generally, many studies reporting global remapping report low but non-zero correlations (Leutgeb et al., 2004; Skaggs and McNaughton, 1998; Spiers et al., 2015).

Conversely, studies reporting lack of remapping never report perfect place field overlap between contexts. Indeed, even within a single context, patterns of spatial firing show variability over time, as if more than a single map is used in a given context (Fenton and Muller, 1998; Kay et al., 2019; Kelemen and Fenton, 2016). Additionally, the extent of remapping for repeated presentations of the same context depends on the amount of experience the animal has had (Law et al., 2016).

Rate remapping is also not a strict category. Manipulations used to generate rate remapping do so for a fraction of the place cell population, while other cells in the population maintain or lose their place fields (Wood et al., 2000; Leutgeb et al., 2005a). In this way, rate remapping is always accompanied by partial remapping. Additionally, protocols for generating rate remapping can sometimes produce a range of remapping states during learning, ranging from no remapping to global remapping. For example, Leutgeb et al., 2005a found rate remapping when comparing place field maps between circle and square enclosures. However, Lever et al., 2002 make the same comparison between circle and square enclosures, and find rate remapping as an intermediate state as the animal transitions from no remapping to global remapping over the course of learning.

The complications discussed above highlight the fact that virtually all remapping is partial remapping. Place cell responses to manipulations are extremely heterogeneous (Lee et al., 2004; Shapiro et al., 1997; Chen et al., 2013; Anderson and Jeffery, 2003). Additionally, remapping behavior can vary across animals (Wills et al., 2005; Lever et al., 2002) as well as across laboratories (Guzowski et al., 2004; Wills et al., 2005; Leutgeb et al., 2005b; Colgin et al., 2010), see the ‘‘Morph Experiments’’ section of the Results for an in-depth exploration of one example). We will argue that this heterogeneity arises from variability in beliefs across animals.


Theoretical background

Our theory of hidden state inference is motivated by, and builds upon, prior research into the nature of context-dependent learning. Since Pavlov, experimentalists have recognized that extinguishing an association after Pavlovian conditioning is not the same as unlearning it. The association can return under a variety of circumstances (Bouton, 2004), such as returning the animal to the conditioning context, or simply waiting a period of time before testing the animal. These phenomena seem to suggest that the animal is forming a new memory during extinction, which could compete with the conditioning memory at the time of retrieval. Context, on this view, serves as a particularly powerful retrieval cue. The fundamental challenge posed by this interpretation is to define precisely the conditions under which a new memory is formed or an old memory is updated, and the conditions under which a particular memory is retrieved at the time of test.

One approach to these questions is to frame them in terms of hidden state inference (Gershman et al., 2010; Gershman et al., 2017a): new memories are formed when an animal has inferred that it has encountered an unfamiliar (previously unvisited) state, and old memories are updated when it has inferred that it has encountered a familiar state. As we formalize below, these inferences can be calculated using Bayes’ rule, which computes a posterior probability distribution over hidden states by integrating prior beliefs about the hidden states with the likelihood of those hidden states given the animal’s observations. The hidden states are sometimes interpreted as latent causes (Courville et al., 2006; Gershman and Niv, 2012b), to emphasize the idea that the animal is forming beliefs about the causal structure of the environment.

The state inference framework can naturally explain many animal learning phenomena (see Gershman et al., 2015), for a review). For example, a conditioned response takes longer to extinguish when reward is delivered probabilistically during the acquisition phase, a phenomenon known as the partial reinforcement extinction effect (e.g., Gibbon et al., 1980). This phenomenon is surprising for classical associative learning accounts, since the learned association should be weaker under partial reinforcement, and hence should be faster to extinguish. According to the state inference framework, partial reinforcement renders the hidden state ambiguous; it takes more extinction trials until the animal is confident that acquisition and extinction trials were generated by different states (Courville et al., 2006; Gershman and Blei, 2012a).

In this paper, we argue that the same framework can unify many different place field remapping phenomena, under the assumptions that (i) each map corresponds to a unique hidden state, and (ii) a map is activated in proportion to the posterior probability of the corresponding hidden state. A closely related idea was pursued by Fuhs and Touretzky, 2007, to which we owe the inspiration for the present work. Our goal is to explain a significantly broader range of phenomena using a somewhat simpler model, and to resolve a number of lingering empirical puzzles. In particular, we stress the role of uncertainty in hidden state inference and its connection with partial remapping, rate remapping, and population heterogeneity. This connection allows us to explain phenomena such as the stabilization of place cell maps over time and the potential role of experience in place cell responses to morph enclosures, among other phenomena.


Results


Conceptual overview of the model

The computational problem facing the animal is to infer the posterior probability of each hidden state given its observations (e.g., geometric or color features of a box), as stipulated by Bayes’ rule:

where is the likelihood of the observations under the hypothetical state, and is the prior probability of state. A more detailed formal description of these terms can be found in the Materials and methods. In this section, we describe intuitively what they mean and how they work.

The animal is presented with observations that are generated by an unknown number of states through a process that the animal is not aware of (left side of). The animal builds an internal model of the world (thought bubble in). That model doesn’t have to mimic the world exactly, it simply needs to be flexible enough to be able to capture the structure that it is presented with. We suggest that the animal’s internal model provides a generative ‘‘recipe’’ through which it assumes observations are produced: first a state is sampled from, and then an observation is sampled from the distribution associated with that state. The job of the animal is to invert this generative process and infer the posterior probability of each hidden state given its observations. Since different states could theoretically produce the same observations, the animal is faced with fundamental ambiguity. The posterior distribution represents the animal’s uncertainty about the hidden state. As it collects more observations and thereby reduces its uncertainty, the posterior will tend to progressively concentrate on a single explanation of which observations come from which states.

Because there is no reason to assume that the animal has a priori knowledge about the set of states, we allow the state space to potentially grow as the animal collects new observations. The animal starts off with a single state, and at each new observation it can assign some probability to a new state or one of its previously inferred states. As detailed in the Materials and methods, we accomplish this using a Bayesian nonparametric prior over hidden states. Importantly, this prior favors a small number of hidden states, encoding a form of ‘simplicity bias' or Occam’s razor.

As mentioned in the Introduction, we assume a one-to-one correspondence between hidden states and maps. Thus, we transpose the question ‘did the place field remap?’ to ‘were these observations generated by the same hidden state?’ More precisely, we report the log posterior probability ratio between 1-state and 2-state hypotheses (or evidence ratio, for brevity), which we take to be related to the degree of remapping (see Materials and methods for definitions of two versions of the evidence ratio: the partition evidence ratio and the state evidence ratio). When the evidence ratio is near 0, the animal is indifferent between the two hypotheses, and in this case we expect partial remapping. No remapping occurs when the evidence ratio is strongly positive (favoring the 1-state hypothesis), rate remapping occurs when the log probability ratio is weakly positive, and global remapping occurs when it is strongly negative. Keep in mind, following our overview of the literature in the Introduction, that these are heuristic categories without strict boundaries. On the probabilistic view, these categories occupy different points along a spectrum.


The effect of sensory cues

One of the first questions asked about hippocampal remapping was which sensory cue controls whether a map is used. The first study of remapping O’Keefe and Conway, 1978 found that in an environment with four cues, some place fields disappeared with the removal of one or two cues, but most place fields maintained their firing with the removal of any two cues. In more modern terms, removal of a subset of cues caused partial remapping, but there was not a one-to-one correspondence between place fields and cues. Thus, from the very beginning it was clear that remapping is not in response to cues but in response to cue constellations (see also Shapiro et al., 1997; Fenton et al., 2000; Muller and Kubie, 1987). Each of these studies involved separately rotating or removing groups of stimuli, finding that many place fields that rotated when a given stimuli was rotated still maintained their firing when that stimuli was removed. A similar early result was that of O'Keefe and Speakman, 1987, where cues necessary for orientation of the map were removed, but the place cell map was maintained. The significance of these results is that the place field map is responsive to cues but is not controlled by cues in a one-to-one fashion.

Viewing remapping as hidden state inference provides an important insight into this behavior. Our model posits that the cues jointly inform the posterior over hidden states. Individual cues will typically only exert a weak effect on the posterior, and hence exert only a weak effect on remapping.

To simulate the effect of cue configurations on remapping, we assume that the observation vector consists of four features, each drawn from a Gaussian with mean 0 and standard deviation of 0.2. We provide the model with 20 observations drawn from that distribution and then provide one of four probe observations. For each probe, we compute the state evidence ratio.

The first probe is an observation where each feature has a value of 0 (no cues changed). The model prefers assigning the probe observation to the same hidden state as the previous observations, corresponding to no remapping. The second probe is an observation where the first feature has a value of 1 and the other features have a value of 0 (cue 1 changed). The third probe is an observation where the first and last features have a value of 1 and the other features have a value of 0 (cues 1 and 4 changed). For both of these, the model produces an evidence ratio near 0, registering a high level of uncertainty about the hidden state (i.e., partial remapping). The fourth probe is an observation where all four features have a value of 1 (all cues changed), for which the model prefers assigning the probe observation to a new hidden state, corresponding to global remapping. These simulations demonstrate how the model is sensitive to the configuration of cues; no one cue completely controls remapping, consistent with the experimental data reviewed above.

Another aspect of these simulations worth highlighting is the fact that they are probabilistic. The representation of uncertainty in hidden state identity corresponds in an important way with the result that hippocampal maps during two experiences are almost never entirely overlapping nor entirely independent. From the perspective of our model, this ‘partial remapping’ reflects the inherent uncertainty about whether different observations are drawn from the same distribution.


Experience-dependent remapping

The previous section addressed the study of how sensory cues control place field remapping. Another line of research has studied how more diffuse contextual cues control remapping, but the answer was invariably that it depended on prior experience (Knierim et al., 1995; Sharp et al., 1990; O'Keefe and Speakman, 1987; Breese et al., 1989; Knierim et al., 1998; Bostock et al., 1991; Shapiro et al., 1997). One prime example of this is the role of environmental geometry (the shape of the recording arena). Initially, it was thought that different geometries necessarily corresponded to different maps (Muller and Kubie, 1987; Quirk et al., 1992), but recordings had always been done in familiar environments. The first group to record throughout the course of learning found that there was no consistent relationship between environment shape and inferred hidden state (Lever et al., 2002). In this experiment, place cells were recorded in rats who were alternately placed in square and circle boxes occupying the same location in the recording room day after day. Early in learning, there was limited remapping. Only after extensive experience in the two boxes did the animals remap between the two boxes. This indicates that the sensitivity to context changes changes with experience. Analogous results have been found for the effects of experience on remapping in response to other manipulations (Bostock et al., 1991; Shapiro et al., 1997). These effects are hard to explain in terms of fixed contextual boundaries governing remapping. It is naturally explained by the hidden state inference perspective, which posits that uncertainty about hidden states evolves as more data are observed. In particular, distinctions between hidden states are acquired gradually, such that substantial remapping should only be observed after sufficient experience to counteract the ‘‘simplicity bias’’ favoring a small number of hidden states.

We simulate these experiments qualitatively in the following way. We take observations to be 1D for simplicity, where the single dimension is the feature along which the distinction is learned. For example, in the circle-square experiment (Lever et al., 2002), the dimension would be the shape of the enclosure. We generate observations from two Gaussians (corresponding to the circle and square contexts) with. We alternate drawing observations from each distribution. After each pair of draws, we compute the partition evidence ratio (in this case, the relative probability of the hypothesis that all observations up to that point were drawn from a single hidden state against the hypothesis that all observations up to that point had been drawn from two alternating hidden states).

Early in training, there is uncertainty about how many hidden states there are; the evidence provided by the observations is not yet sufficiently strong to overwhelm the simplicity bias of the prior. As more data are observed, the two-state hypothesis is eventually favored over the one-state hypothesis. The hidden state inference perspective thus explains why context-dependent remapping only emerges gradually with experience.


Stabilization of maps over time

Maps take time to stabilize: repetition of a novel environment induces less map similarity than repetitions of a familiar environment (Frank et al., 2004; Leutgeb et al., 2004; Law et al., 2016). In particular, Law et al., 2016 alternated presentation of two environments. They found that intra-environment map similarity went up as a function of experience. These results are difficult to explain under the assumption that remapping is induced by the discrepancy between expectations and current cues exceeding a fixed threshold (Jeffery, 2003). Long-term potentiation (LTP) had been tied to map stabilization (Kentros et al., 1998; Cobar et al., 2017), but the speed with which LTP can create place fields (single trials; Bittner et al., 2017) is inconsistent with the slowness of map stabilization. The hidden state inference perspective offers a different interpretation of map stabilization: as an animal gains more experience with a particular state, it sharpens its representation of that state (i.e., its uncertainty about the distributional statistics decreases), and consequently it becomes more confident in recognizing repetitions of that state.

We can model the dynamics of stabilization by considering observations which are generated from a single distribution with mean 0. We can consider the same hypotheses as were considered in, namely, that there are either 1 or two hidden states. We consider the same hypotheses but the actual generative process has the opposite structure as. Through the course of learning, the partition evidence ratio accumulates evidence in favor of the one-state hypothesis, corresponding to the emergence of a ‘‘stable’’ map. Indeed, early in learning, the animal does not know whether it is receiving observations from the simulation of or the simulation of, as they are indistinguishable. Only after extensive experience is the animal able to identify which generative process is generating its observations.


Remapping due to non-sensory changes

Remapping is not solely driven by sensory aspects of experience. For example, place fields can remap depending on internal variables such as movement direction or task (Smith and Mizumori, 2006b; Sanders et al., 2019; Wood et al., 2000; Muller et al., 1994). In general, it is known that place fields can remap depending on which direction the animal is running on a linear track (Markus et al., 1995; Battaglia et al., 2004). However, place fields tend not to remap based on running direction in an open field. This is most clearly shown in Markus et al., 1995. They compared two conditions, both of which occurred in an open field: one in which the animal was randomly foraging, and one in which the animal was running between four specific locations in one of two directions. They found that the extent of remapping in response to movement direction was larger in the directed foraging condition than in the random foraging condition despite having the same sensory cues in the two conditions.

From the perspective of hidden state inference, we can draw an analogy with the remapping observed after training in the circle and square boxes, replacing the sensory features of the environment with the non-sensory information about self-motion. In the directed foraging case, observations are clearly separated into two states (clockwise movement and counterclockwise movement), whereas in the random foraging case, there is no consistent partition that could support the inference of multiple states.

We model this experiment in the following way. Again, we take observations to be 1-dimensional for simplicity, where the single feature is the animal’s movement direction. This feature is represented as a circular (angular) variable, as movement direction is circular. We model the random foraging condition as observations drawn from a uniform distribution over the circle (red dots in). We model the directed foraging as observations drawn from a Von Mises distribution with alternating with a Von Mises distribution with (blue dots in). For each condition, we separate the observations into two groups with a line for which the distance from any observations is maximum (red and blue lines in). After 10 observations, we ask the model what the relative probability is that the observations were drawn from a single hidden state or drawn from two hidden states split by the line of maximum separation. The model assigns greater probability to the two-state hypothesis for directed foraging. In contrast, it assigns greater probability to the one-state hypothesis for random foraging. This corresponds to the empirical finding that place fields were more likely to remap under the directed foraging condition compared to the random foraging condition.


Cue rotation experiments

One series of experiments used rotation of cues with respect to the recording arena to ask how the place cell representation responds to such changes. The most simple version of these experiments had a circular arena with a cue card on one side of the arena. The cue card could be rotated to any position in the arena, reported as an angle with respect to the original cue card orientation in the room reference frame (Rotenberg and Muller, 1997; Knierim et al., 1998; Hargreaves et al., 2007). Experiments reported two types of changes in place field behavior in response to a given manipulation. One is extent of remapping, as we have been discussing in this paper. The other is which rotational angle the map is oriented towards. This added question is due to the inherent ambiguity in circular variables. Even if a place field moves to a different location in a given reference frame, it is still possible that remapping did not occur if the relative locations of place fields are preserved. Therefore, one must check whether the place field had the same location subject to a rotational offset. This rotational offset frequently corresponds to the rotational offset observed in head direction cells simultaneously recorded from a variety of brain regions (Knierim et al., 1995; Hargreaves et al., 2007). Experimental papers thus report 1) whether place fields remap and 2) if not, whether there is a rotational offset in their locations.

We model these experiments as follows. Similar to other simulations in this paper, each observation is a feature vector. However, instead of each entry in the vector containing the value of that feature on some sensory axis, the entry contains the angle between a given cue and an uncued direction in the room reference frame. Feature vectors with different values can potentially be identical if there is an offset that can be subtracted from each entry in one vector to give the other vector, corresponding to usage of a different uncued direction as the reference. Therefore, before performing hidden state inference, the animal must decide what reference direction to use in comparing the current observation to past observations from each hidden state. We model reference direction inference in the following way. Given the past observations previously assigned to a given hidden state, we can calculate the offset to apply to the current observation that gives the maximum value of the posterior predictive distribution. Say for example that a certain cue had always been +30° from the reference direction, but this time the cue location is provided as +120°. An offset of −90° would give the maximum probability of generating this observation from the same hidden state. This offset is calculated independently for each hidden state, and the state evidence ratio is calculated using the best offset for each hidden state. The offset of the most likely hidden state would correspond to the rotational offset in the place field locations.

We capture several empirical findings.

The animal is trained with a cue card consistently at 0° with respect to the minimally-cued room reference frame. The animal is removed from the maze, which is cleaned and the cue card is rotated 180°, before returning the animal. The finding is that place fields retain their positions relative to each other (no remapping) and relative to the card, so they rotate 180° with respect to the room reference frame (offset of 180°) (Rotenberg and Muller, 1997; Knierim et al., 1995). We model this by providing 10 single-dimensional training observations, each drawn from a wrapped normal with, representing the position of the cue card. Then we test with an observation with value 180°. The best offset for the current observation is −175° for the same hidden state as the previous observations (red). With that offset, the state evidence ratio is in favor of assigning to the same hidden state (red). Assigning to the same hidden state and 175° offset in the model correspond to the empirical finding of limited remapping and ∼180° rotation of place fields.

A similar experiment was performed where the cue card is rotated 180° without removing the animal or cleaning the maze. The finding is that the place fields did not remap or rotate in response to this manipulation (Rotenberg and Muller, 1997). We model this with an expanded feature vector because the animal has access to additional cues, albeit cues that are less reliable than the cue card: namely, a preserved internal orientation from path integration and odor cues that the animal has left on the maze. The first entry in the feature vector is the same as in the previous simulation, that is the cue card position drawn from a wrapped normal with. Five additional entries are included in the feature vector with uniformly distributed means and. The larger standard deviations on the positions of these cues correspond to their lower fidelity (Save et al., 2000; Hardcastle et al., 2015). The test observation has a value of 180° for the first entry (cue card) and values of the cue means for the other entries. Our model finds that the best offset is −2° (blue) and the state evidence ratio is in favor of assigning to the same hidden state (blue). However, the evidence ratio is much closer to 0, which would predict a larger degree of heterogeneity in place field behavior than the earlier experiment, which is a comparison for which there was not sufficient empirical power (Rotenberg and Muller, 1997). See also Hargreaves et al., 2007, Lee et al., 2004, and Shapiro et al., 1997 for other reports of heterogeneity during cue conflict rotation experiments.

What if the cue card was only moderately rotated in the animal’s presence? Rotenberg and Muller, 1997 rotated the cue card by 45° in the animal’s presence without cleaning the maze. They found that the place fields did not remap and rotated by 45°. We model this experiment the same way as the last experiment except that the test observation has 45° as its first entry. Our model finds that the best offset is 22° (purple) and the state evidence ratio is in favor of assigning to the same hidden state (purple). The difference between the results of this and the last experiment is due to the fact that the other cues have large enough variance to accommodate a 45° rotation without requiring a new hidden state.

To summarize this section, rotation experiments share a framework with other cue manipulation experiments with the added complication of estimation of the appropriate rotational reference direction. It is therefore possible for place fields to retain their relative arrangement while also rotating with respect to some reference frame, which we consider to be a lack of remapping (assignment to the same hidden state). If the posterior probability of an observation is sufficiently low even after picking the best rotational reference, then a new hidden state would be inferred and place fields would lose their relative arrangement.


Morph experiments

A persistent puzzle in the field is the inconsistent results from ‘morph’ environments that interpolate between different geometries (e.g., square and circle). Different labs have found different results with experimental setups that are not directly comparable (Wills et al., 2005; Leutgeb et al., 2005b; Colgin et al., 2010). We summarize the past results here and suggest an interpretation that leads to a novel prediction.

In 2005, two groups each performed an experiment to answer the question, ‘How does the hippocampus represent a novel environment that is intermediate between two familiar environments?’ Both groups familiarized rats in square and circle environments, and then tested them in intermediate environments (polygons with a variable number of sides). The two papers had different results, characterized at the time in terms of whether the similarity curve had a discrete switch or a gradual switch. However, this difference is extremely hard to robustly characterize, considering that the variation in similarity between repetitions of the same environment was half as large as the entire range of similarity variations for the entire morph sequence (compare first and last points in Leutgeb et al., 2005b, their Figure 6E). The other difference that was discussed at the time was whether the population response was coherent or heterogeneous. While both studies showed heterogeneous population responses, they did show different levels of heterogeneity, and we discuss this in the next Results section (Population heterogeneity and rate remapping).

A much more striking point of comparison was the difference in the extent of remapping between the extreme square and circle environments. Complete remapping was observed between the square and circle in Wills et al., 2005, whereas partial remapping was observed in Leutgeb et al., 2005b. We believe that the findings of partial vs. complete remapping is the major difference in the findings of these papers, and is the one we focus on explaining.

What differences in protocols led to these differences in results? In addition to all the idiosyncrasies of individual lab protocols, there were two major explicitly described differences between their protocols. One is that they used different training protocols. Wills et al., 2005 used a training protocol designed for inducing complete remapping between square and circle in 6 days, and excluded animals that did not meet that criterion. Leutgeb et al., 2005b used a similar training as Lever et al., 2002) for three weeks. The second difference was that Wills et al., 2005 presented the intermediate shapes in a scrambled order on the test day, whereas Leutgeb et al., 2005b presented the intermediate shapes sequentially based on number of sides on the test day.

The second difference (scrambled test order) was the focus of several theoretical explanations (Blumenfeld et al., 2006; Gershman et al., 2014), but a replication of Wills et al., 2005 using scrambled presentation resulted in limited remapping (Colgin et al., 2010), demonstrating that a scrambled presentation was not sufficient to force the hippocampus to use complete coherent remapping. Differences in the training protocol remain as a possible explanation. However, the problem remains that Colgin et al., 2010 attempted an exact replication of Wills et al., 2005, but got the opposite result. These differences can be seen in.

These results fit into a broader pattern of inconsistent results across two labs. Two experiments that led to complete remapping in the O’Keefe lab ended up leading to partial (and/or rate) remapping in the Moser lab. Training in alternating square and circle environments led to partial remapping initially and to complete remapping after 18 days in the O’Keefe lab (Lever et al., 2002), but led to partial remapping after 18 days of comparable training in the Moser lab (Leutgeb et al., 2005b). A 6 day white/morph circle-square training protocol led to complete remapping in the O’Keefe lab (Wills et al., 2005), but led to partial remapping in the Moser lab (Colgin et al., 2010). We do not believe either lab’s training to be inherently superior, but we do wish to point out that there are likely unreported idiosyncrasies of training that cause animals to consistently progress through partial remapping to global remapping more slowly in the Moser lab than in the O’Keefe lab (at least during the years 2000–2010). The main implication of this is that remapping behavior does not have a one-to-one mapping to the experimenter-defined conditions; rather, remapping behavior responds to a huge array of experiential factors, and the experimenter is only aware of a subset of these factors. Practically, this means that attempts to compare remapping behavior must be done between comparable controlled setups (as performed in the internal comparisons of Colgin et al., 2010), and comparisons should ideally not be made across labs.

To summarize, various experimental protocols for measuring remapping behavior in response to intermediate ‘morph’ environments give divergent results, which can be split into two categories: heterogeneous responses when there is only partial remapping between the extremes, and population-wide coherent responses when there is complete remapping between the extremes. As we explored above, partial remapping and complete remapping can be observed in a single experimental protocol early and late in training, respectively. We therefore predict that both sets of results can be observed in the same lab, with the same experimental protocol, simply by presenting the intermediate ‘‘morph’’ environments early or late in training.

We show simulations of this prediction in. Specifically, we compute the probability that the training observations came from a single hidden state and the probability they came from two hidden states according to. We then calculate the probability that the morph test is assigned to the same hidden state as the square assuming that the training observations came from two hidden states. The hypotheses that correspond to the morph being assigned the same hidden state as the square are S1) that there is a single hidden state for the training and the morph is from the same state and S2) that there are two hidden states for the training and the morph is from the same state as the square. The hypotheses that correspond to the morph being assigned a different hidden state than the square are D1) that there is a single hidden state for the training and the morph is from a novel state and D2) that there are two hidden states for the training and the morph is from the same state as the circle and D3) that there are two hidden states for the training and the morph is from a novel state. We take the log posterior ratio between the S hypotheses and the D hypotheses and plot that in for varying number of training observations. The probability of assigning intermediate ‘‘morph’’ environments to the same hidden state as one of the extreme environments increases with the amount of training.

Thus, we suggest that a key distinction between classes of past morph results is whether there is complete or partial remapping between the extreme environments, and that complete or partial remapping can be achieved by a wide range of training protocols (as described throughout the paper) including amount of experience (as described in).


Population heterogeneity and rate remapping

So far, we have drawn the correspondence between evidence ratios and ‘extent of remapping’. There are a variety of ways to empirically quantify extent of remapping over the population, including average population vector correlations, average firing rate map correlations, and average change in location of place fields (Leutgeb et al., 2005a). One important question to ask is how the extent of remapping is distributed across the population. One option is that some fraction of the place fields are perfectly retained and some fraction disappear or appear. This would be called partial remapping. Another possibility is that each place field modulates its peak firing rate. This would be called rate remapping. As mentioned in the Empirical Background section of the Introduction, both types coexist. We can qualitatively model this in the following way. For a given experimental manipulation, there is some distribution across the population of how much the firing rate is modulated. We can quantify for a given place field the extent of firing rate modulation using a measure such as 1-(lower firing rate)/(higher firing rate), ranging from 0 (identical firing in both conditions, i.e., no remapping) to 1 (place field exists in one condition but not in other condition, i.e., remapping). Intermediate values between 0 and 1 correspond to the extent of rate remapping. A common distribution with support on the interval [0,1] is the Beta distribution, which we will use for illustration. The Beta distribution has two parameters and, which correspond to relative probability mass on 1 and 0 respectively. We can map our evidence ratio loosely onto these parameters for illustration by saying that the value of the parameter corresponding to the preferred hypothesis is the magnitude of the evidence ratio + 1 and the value of the other parameter is 1. In this manner, the evidence ratio equals. For example an evidence ratio of +6 would have because a positive evidence ratio prefers no remapping, that is more probability mass on 0 (red line in). This evidence ratio is at the border of our range of partial remapping. If we put thresholds at 0.15 and 0.85 (dotted lines) for indistinguishable from no remapping and complete remapping respectively, we see that 0% of place fields completely remap, 31% rate remap, and 69% do not remap, which is consistent to what we would expect for that magnitude of evidence ratio. Conversely, an evidence ratio of −0.5 would correspond to parameter values of (blue line in). This evidence ratio is near the center of our range of partial remapping, and we see that 22% of place fields completely remap, 72% rate remap, and 6% do not remap.

This framework can organize some empirical observations into patterns that we would predict would generalize. One is that the fraction of place fields that completely remap seems to be correlated with the magnitude of rate remapping that is observed across different protocols. For example, the paper that coined the term ‘rate remapping’ (Leutgeb et al., 2005a) explores several different experimental manipulations. Rank ordering of their manipulations according to their measures of rate remapping (firing rate changes and population vector correlations) matches well with the rank ordering according to their measures of complete remapping (place field correlation and center of mass change). Similar patterns of partial remapping occurring in concert with rate remapping can be observed in many other reports (Wood et al., 2000, their Figure 5, Anderson and Jeffery, 2003, their Figure 2, Lu et al., 2013, their Figure 3, Sanders et al., 2019, their Figure 1). The framework of a distribution of remapping behaviors over the place field population captures this phenomenon. If we look at parameter values ranging from to, we see a positive relationship between the extent of rate remapping and the extent of partial remapping. The only report we are aware of in which rate remapping is observed in the absence of partial remapping is that of Allen et al., 2012. It is notable that they observe much weaker rate changes than the conditions studied in other papers: visual inspection of their Figure 6B1 (top) shows an average rate modulation of ∼(17-14)/17 = 17%. This would roughly correspond to the distribution shown as the red line in which does indeed show a population of place fields that rate remap but a negligible fraction of place fields that completely remap. Overall, a comprehensive literature review suggests that extent of rate remapping is correlated with the extent of partial remapping, as would be expected if there is a distribution over the population in sensitivity to manipulations. Future experiments are needed to verify this hypothesis directly.

Another pattern that seems to occur in the literature is that increased uncertainty seems to correlate with heterogeneity in remapping behavior across the population of place fields. One example of this pattern is the difference in heterogeneity observed between the protocol of Leutgeb et al., 2005b compared to that of Wills et al., 2005. More heterogeneity was observed in the experiment of Leutgeb et al., 2005b, who were in the partial remapping regime (red line in our), compared to the relatively coherent response observed across the population in the experiment of Wills et al., 2005, who were in the global remapping regime (blue line in our). Other examples of population heterogeneity occurring with uncertainty include findings by Lee et al., 2004; Chen et al., 2013; Gothard et al., 1996. The framework of a distribution of remapping behaviors over the place field population captures this phenomenon. If we look at parameter values ranging from to, we see a positive relationship between heterogeneity in response (as measured by the standard deviation of rate remapping extents across the population) and level of uncertainty (as measured by inverse exponentiated absolute value of evidence ratio). Future experiments are needed to test this hypothesis directly. Ideally, behavioral measures of uncertainty would be compared to neural measures of population heterogeneity.


Animal-to-animal variability

One challenge in the study of hippocampal remapping is that different animals respond differently to the same environments. Indeed, many of the previously discussed studies reported significant heterogeneity across animals in remapping behavior. Studies of the development of remapping over the course of learning frequently report that different animals learn at differing rates (Bostock et al., 1991; Lever et al., 2002). In fact, the variability across animals is frequently a nuisance in running experiments. The pre-training for one of the morph experiments described above (Wills et al., 2005) had three different ways that the observations could be partitioned. Out of the six animals they trained, four animals partitioned the observations in the way the experimenters expected, and the other two animals partitioned the observations in the other two possible ways (and therefore were excluded from the rest of the study).

The hidden state inference model offers one way to capture this heterogeneity across animals. The concentration parameter (see Materials and methods) controls the tendency to infer new hidden states when unexpected data are observed. Variation in this parameter was previously used to model age-dependent (Gershman et al., 2010; Gershman et al., 2017b) and individual (Gershman and Hartley, 2015a) variability in learning. While partitioning large amounts of cleanly separated data is insensitive to changes of over several orders of magnitude, can have effects on partitioning of ambiguous or insufficient data. For example, if we take the learning of remapping explored in, changes in the value of can alter the speed at which the model switches from preferring a one-state hypothesis to a two-state hypothesis. Moreover, if we take evidence ratios around 0 as indicative of partial remapping, different values can lead to different lengths of time spent in the partial remapping regime, even for the exact same set of experiences.

To explore a second manifestation of animal variability, we ran a simulation resembling the training of Wills et al., 2005. We characterize observations with two features: shape and color of the enclosure. The white circle is characterized by a 2D Gaussian with means [1, 1], the morph circle is characterized by means [1, -1], and the morph square is characterized by means [−1,–1]; all standard deviations are 0.1. We provided the model with observations from these generative distributions according to the schedule used by Wills et al., 2005. We then asked the model to assign an unnormalized posterior probability to the following hypotheses:

Each of the environments were drawn from separate hidden states (red bars), corresponding to ‘did not show wooden circle to morph-circle pattern transfer.’

The circles were the same and were different from the square (blue bars), corresponding to the selection criterion adopted by Wills et al., 2005.

All the observations were drawn from a single hidden state (purple bars), corresponding to ‘failed to show rapid remapping in the morph-square and the wooden circle'.

Different values of lead to variation in relative preferences for these hypotheses.

These results invite the interpretation that animal variability may be understood in terms of individual differences in the parameter (though of course other parametric variations might produce some of the same effects).


The effect of cue variability

In this section, we explore an experimental prediction of the model that highlights one of its key insights: remapping critically depends on past experience. Consider an environment that is characterized by two features. We can separate animals into two training groups: one in which feature one is highly variable and one in which feature two is highly variable (cyan and magenta dots in). We then probe with an observation that has a novel value in feature 1 (red x in). The model predicts that an animal trained with higher variability in feature one will be more likely to assign the novel observation to the same state as the previous observations (i.e., not to remap). Intuitively, high variability will make the place fields more ‘‘tolerant’’ of deviations from the central tendency of the distribution. After initial submission of this paper, a similar result was posted as a preprint (Plitt and Giocomo, 2019).

By analogy, imagine a building with many similar conference rooms. One conference room always has its chairs arranged in a particular configuration (a low variability context), whereas another conference room frequently has different configurations (a high variability context). Intuitively, a change in the expected configuration in the low variability context will prompt the inference that you must be in a different room (and hence the place cells in your hippocampus will remap), whereas a change in the expected configuration in the high variability context will not. In the high variability context, you expect the unexpected (cf. the concept of ‘expected uncertainty’ in Yu and Dayan, 2005).


Discussion

We have proposed that hippocampal remapping provides a window into the process of hidden state inference. According to our framework, animals receive a stream of observations (data points), which they attempt to partition according to the hypothetical hidden states that generated them. Bayesian inference offers a natural solution to this problem. The specific form of Bayesian nonparametric model that we employed here has been previously invoked to explain a number of other hippocampal-dependent behavioral phenomena (Gershman et al., 2010; Gershman et al., 2017a; Gershman et al., 2014). In this paper, we showed that this model recapitulates a broad range of remapping phenomena.

Central to our account is the idea that remapping reflects inferences about the hidden state, and in particular that partial remapping corresponds to high levels of uncertainty. Manipulations of sensory cues, environmental geometry, and training can all be understood in terms of their effects on state uncertainty. While this account has the potential to unify many phenomena under a common theoretical umbrella, there are still many limitations, loose ends and open questions, which we discuss below.


What is the feature space?

Our model takes feature vectors as its inputs, but what are these features? In our simulations, we allowed them to be highly abstract idealizations. Ultimately, a biologically grounded theory must specify these features in terms of the inputs to the hippocampus. Furthermore, it will be necessary to more explicitly specify what timescale the model is operating on, since different features are relevant at different timescales. Although we have focused on the timescale of hours to days, map switches can occur on the subsecond timescale (Olypher et al., 2002; Jezek et al., 2011; Kelemen and Fenton, 2016).

One general hypothesis about the feature space encoded by the hippocampus is the successor representation theory (Stachenfeld et al., 2017), which posits that place cells encode a predictive map of the state space. On this view, the feature inputs to the hippocampus correspond to state features. This raises the intriguing possibility that remapping should be sensitive to predictive relationships between states. Many studies have observed that place cells are modulated by prospective information like the animal’s future trajectory (e.g., Battaglia et al., 2004; Ferbinteanu and Shapiro, 2003). It is less clear whether there is any evidence for global remapping as a function of changes in prospective information.


What is an observation?

In this paper, we characterize ‘observations’ as feature vectors. A question is what qualifies as a single observation? For the experiments we highlight in the Results section, we define a single observation as an entire session, as temporal continuity constrains within-session variability in a way that between-session variability is not constrained. However, a session is not the only time scale over which an animal may perform hidden state inference. Different definitions of a single observation can highlight phenomena occurring on different time scales, such as the map switches that can occur on a timescale of 100 ms-1s (Olypher et al., 2002; Kelemen and Fenton, 2016).

One limitation is that an observation must be sufficiently long for sampling of all features of an environment. Indeed, it takes some time for the representation of an environment to settle down as the animal samples the environment (Leutgeb et al., 2004). The process of sampling the environment is a research question in its own right and the nature of that process will have important effects on the hidden state inference process we describe here.

A related question is how often hidden state beliefs are recalculated. One possibility is that it is recalculated every theta cycle. Another is that change detection or event segmentation may be used (Franklin et al., 2019).


Approximate inference

As discussed in the first section of the Results, exact inference over assignments of observations to hidden states is intractable, because the number of possible partitions is too large. As a result of this intractability, for most of the paper, we have limited ourselves to comparisons between a small number of hypotheses (selected based on the fact that most of the posterior probability will be concentrated on these hypotheses). This should be understood as an analytical heuristic rather than as an algorithmic theory of how the brain approximates probabilistic inference. It may be that the hippocampus does explicitly compare a small number of hypotheses. The key step in that algorithm would be generating appropriate proposals. A complete algorithmic theory must explain how the brain deals with arbitrarily large hypothesis spaces.

One idea is to model the hippocampus as stochastically sampling the hypothesis space (Fox and Prescott, 2010; Savin et al., 2014). According to this view, a sampling approximation approach would discretely represent each hypothesis with a frequency proportional to its probability. This fits nicely with the empirical finding that multiple maps can alternate rapidly (Kelemen and Fenton, 2016; Kelemen and Fenton, 2010; Jackson and Redish, 2007; Kay et al., 2019; Jezek et al., 2011). Some of these findings suggest an oscillatory implementation, whereby each theta cycle plays the role of a single sample from the distribution of possible hidden states, and the extent of map switching corresponds to the degree of uncertainty about hidden state assignment. Indeed, map switching increases at points of uncertainty (Jezek et al., 2011). We would additionally predict that measures of map switching such as overdispersion would decrease over the course of experience in protocols such as that of Lever et al., 2002 as one hypothesis dominates (i.e., as the evidence ratio between alternative hypotheses gets farther from 0 in).


Priors

We have focused on examples where specification of the appropriate generative distribution has been relatively straightforward: Gaussians (or the analogous Von Mises for circular variables) have fit nicely. Not every problem corresponds to these generative distributions, however, and the animal may have to perform inference and/or meta-learning over which generative distributions are appropriate for each cue class.

Another type of prior that we use is the Chinese Restaurant Process (CRP) prior over partitions of observations into hidden states, as discussed in the Materials and methods. We explore the utility of the CRP’s parameter in capturing animal-to-animal variability in remapping response to similar experimental protocols. The parameter also has the potential to itself be learned. For example, animals trained with a larger number of hidden states (e.g., enriched environment) may grow to employ a larger magnitude than animals trained with a smaller number of hidden states. As defines the animal’s relative preference for a larger number of hidden states, modulation of the value of in response to the complexity of past experience would be adaptive.


Hierarchical inference

Throughout this paper, we have assumed that hidden states are independent, but in reality, hidden states can share some structure while continuing to be distinct. Hierarchical inference can be useful to solve these problems (Gershman and Niv, 2015b). Our model does not directly address the question of hierarchical inference in the hippocampus. One possibility is that hidden state inference is explicitly hierarchical even within a co-localized population. McKenzie et al., 2014 found a hierarchy of representational similarities in dorsal hippocampus. This could correspond to a single population of place cells performing hidden state inference simultaneously at different levels of a hierarchy. For example, although we have focused on hidden states corresponding to ‘context’, similar inference could be applied to identifying ‘position’ or ‘item’ categories used by McKenzie et al., 2014. Another way that the model could be extended is based on the organization of place fields by size along the dorso-ventral axis of the hippocampus. An analogy between place field sizes and hidden state inference on the level of context raises an interesting possibility. The range of locations that are categorized as the same in terms of being included in the same place field increases along the dorso-ventral axis (Maurer et al., 2005), so too the range of observations that would be categorized as the same in terms of context-level hidden state inference may increase along the dorso-ventral axis. This gradient could be implemented if the same hidden state inference process would occur independently at different distances along that axis with different values of, leading to different proclivities for opening new hidden states. In that way, it would be possible for two observations to be assigned to the same hidden state at one location along the axis and assigned to different hidden states at another location along the axis, leading to a partial sharing of learning between the two observations. A test of this suggestion would be that remapping behavior should be different at different locations along the dorsoventral axis. More research is needed to determine how hierarchical inference is performed in the hippocampus.


Long-term instability of place fields

Early reports of place field stability demonstrated the existence of place fields that maintained spatial preference over the period of a month (Thompson and Best, 1990). However, recent work with sufficient statistical power have painted a different picture. Large scale recordings of hundreds of place cells over the course of a month have shown that place field instability is the norm over long time periods (Ziv et al., 2013; Rubin et al., 2015). It is possible that these reports of place field instability are the result of misattribution of place cell identity when comparing across sessions, but much effort has been put into avoiding such methodological issues (Sheintuch et al., 2017). One possible way to incorporate this finding within the hidden state inference framework is to appeal to computational work that allows for maintained fidelity of representation even with changing neuronal substrate (Raman et al., 2019; Rule et al., 2019; Druckmann and Chklovskii, 2012). On the other hand, changes in neural representation may reflect the cognitive finding that memory content can actually be modified over time through processes such as memory reconsolidation (Lee et al., 2017). Another approach is to assert that drift over time in place cell activity reflects an interest in maintaining different hidden states for the same observation occurring at different points in time. The extension of our framework with a generative model that explicitly accounts for time would be fruitful (see for example Gershman et al., 2017a).


Behavioral relevance of remapping

An interesting fact about the remapping literature is that there has been relatively little work done relating remapping to behavior. The widespread assumption in the field is that hippocampal remapping is the neurophysiological substrate for context-dependent learning (Colgin et al., 2008), and that is an assumption that we have followed here. There is some correlational evidence of a connection (Kentros et al., 2004; Kennedy and Shapiro, 2009). However, to our knowledge, there has not been a demonstration of a causal connection (Kubie et al., 2019). In fact, Jeffery et al., 2003 show task performance transfer between two conditions that show near-global remapping.

We suggest an experiment that emphasizes the role of the hippocampus in ‘latent learning’ (Tolman, 1948), and relies on our prediction that different training would give rise to different remapping behavior. Train two groups of animals to either remap or not remap to a given manipulation. For example, train one group of animals in a morph box where the configuration of the walls changes every day, which we would expect to lead to a lack of remapping between circle and square configurations. Train the other group with the same morph box but only presenting the square or circle configurations, similar to the training protocol of Lever et al., 2002, which we would expect to eventually lead to remapping between the circle and square configurations. Once the expected remapping behavior is neurophysiologically verified, the animals would undergo fear conditioning in one configuration (square or circle). The prediction would be that generalization of the fear memory to the other configuration would depend on which training the animal had received and correspondingly, which remapping behavior the animal had exhibited. An experiment such as that would be a first step towards ascertaining the behavioral relevance of hippocampal remapping.


Rotation experiments

There are several classes of empirical results that are related to the results explained in this paper, but not directly explained by our model. For example, in rotation experiments, the experimenters manipulated cues associated with the environment itself (‘proximal cues’ or ‘maze cues’) and/or manipulated cues associated with the room that the recording environment was placed in (‘distal cues’ or ‘room cues’). They asked questions such as whether the place cells followed the rotation of the maze cues or the room cues (Shapiro et al., 1997), and whether the place cells followed the animal’s own motion or the motion of the cues (Knierim et al., 1998). The answers to these questions were generally inconclusive, as they were sensitive to slight differences in protocol across labs. However, a consistent finding was that the results changed over the course of experience. For example, when a cue was repeatedly moved relative to other cues in an unstructured way, the cue lost control over the rotational alignment of the place fields (Knierim et al., 1995). While we do not explicitly model spatial relationships in our simulations, Knierim’s finding is similar to the training variance effect described in: when the model is trained with observations for which a cue has high variance, further variation in that cue is less likely to cause a new hidden state to be inferred.

Conversely, in Shapiro et al., 1997, the maze cues and room cues were each rotated 90 degrees in opposite directions. Initially, the place cell representation split, some following room cues and some following maze cues. However, after a few repetitions, the place cell representation remapped between the two conditions. This is reminiscent of the simulations in, where a particular cue manipulation (square-circle) initially does not cause remapping, but after sufficient repetition, the place cells remap between the conditions; more evidence has been gathered to support the hypothesis that two distinct hidden states exist.


Types of remapping

An influential interpretation of the literature has been that there are two main types of remapping: ‘global remapping’ and ‘rate remapping’. In particular, it has been argued that global remapping corresponds to changes in physical location whereas rate remapping corresponds to changes in condition that occur at those locations (Leutgeb et al., 2005a; Colgin et al., 2010; Alme et al., 2014; Lisman et al., 2017). As discussed in the Introduction, the lines between global remapping and rate remapping are not so sharp. Global remapping can occur between conditions at the same physical location (Wills et al., 2005), and rate remapping can occur between different physical locations (Spiers et al., 2015). Moreover, the same manipulation can cause global remapping or rate remapping at different points in training (Lever et al., 2002). Our work provides an explanation for why there are not clear delineations of which manipulations cause which types of remapping. The animal must infer hidden states from its observations. Alternative hypotheses must be considered as long as ambiguity exists about the appropriate assignment of observations to hidden states. This uncertainty about hidden state assignment can manifest as ‘partial’ or ‘rate’ remapping. The statistics of these hidden states can be learned over the course of experience, leading to increased certainty about hidden state assignments. This increased certainty can be observed as more definitive ‘global’ remapping or conversely, lack of remapping. One of our key points is that these categories are better thought of as existing along a continuum defined by state uncertainty.


Relationship to other theories

How does this proposal relate to other theoretical perspectives on hippocampal remapping? We can contrast our model with a basic similarity threshold model, according to which each state is associated with a fixed set of features, and new observations would be classified as the same or different based on whether they exceed some threshold of change detection. This model does not capture some of the key phenomena associated with remapping; in particular, it cannot account for any of the ways in which learning affects remapping.

One major model of remapping is the attractor network. Based on early work by Hopfield, 1982, the idea is that activity patterns associated with particular observations are learned by the network so as to be able to recover those activity patterns when degraded versions are presented. One attractor network implementation that has been specifically used to model remapping results was proposed by Blumenfeld et al., 2006. They sought to explain the difference in results between Wills et al., 2005 and Leutgeb et al., 2005b by focusing on the scrambled order of the morph sequence. Their model was a conventional Hopfield network augmented with a ‘weight’ term to change the pattern strength based on the novelty of that pattern. This led to attractors that were lumped together when the morph experiences were presented in sequential order instead of in a scrambled order. However, later work Colgin et al., 2010 demonstrated that the order of presentation of the morph experiences was not the decisive factor in the qualitative results of the morph experiments (as described in more detail in the ‘Morph Experiments’ section of the Results).

The attractor network perspective can be connected to our hidden state inference model by examining the probabilistic version of the Hopfield network, known as the Boltzmann machine (Ackley et al., 1985). The basins of attraction can be understood heuristically as feature configurations for distinct hidden states. One can make this heuristic connection more precise by defining an explicitly state-dependent energy function combined with a distribution over states, which would correspond to a mixture of Boltzmann machines (Nair and Hinton, 2009; Salakhutdinov et al., 2013).

In computational neuroscience, attractor networks are usually used as mechanistic descriptions of neuronal dynamics, unlike our hidden state inference model that operates at a higher level of abstraction. Thus, comparison of the two approaches is not entirely straightforward. It is possible that an attractor network could be used as an implementation of parts of the hidden state inference model. For example, inference about new states vs. old states is conceptually similar to the distinction between ‘‘pattern separation’’ in the dentate gyrus and ‘‘pattern completion’’ in CA3 (Knierim and Neunuebel, 2016; Rolls and Kesner, 2006). The attractor network describes how pattern separation and completion work. The hidden state inference model describes why pattern separation and completion work the way they do.

Our hidden state inference model is similar in spirit to the probabilistic model of remapping developed by Fuhs and Touretzky, 2007. In that model, each context is represented by a Hidden Markov Model. Remapping is then formalized as a model comparison problem. Like our model, their calculation weighs both simplicity of a hypothetical partition and its fit with the observed data. They use their model to explain gradual remapping (Lever et al., 2002), failure to generalize (Hayman et al., 2003), and some aspects of reversal learning and sequence learning. The technical differences between our models are subtle and do not change the general conclusions, which we share. Our work can be thought of as an update to the work of Fuhs and Touretzky, 2007. The main addition of this work is to stress the role of uncertainty and its relationship to partial remapping, rate remapping, and population heterogeneity, relationships that are highlighted in, and, for example.

The Temporal Context Model (TCM, Howard and Kahana, 2002) was originally motivated by human episodic memory, but has also been applied to hippocampal/entorhinal recordings (Howard et al., 2005). TCM defines a temporal context, which is a filtered version of the observations preceding the current observation. Later observations can be used to recall the temporal context of earlier observations. This model is particularly well suited to capturing hippocampal response to temporally modulated observations, such as those we explore in (Markus et al., 1995). Analogies can be drawn between TCM and our account (see Gershman et al., 2017a, for discussion) by drawing a correspondence between temporal context and hidden state. The process of retrieving a past temporal context on presentation of a novel observation would be analogous to assigning that novel observation to the same hidden state as the previous observations with the same temporal context. One difference is that recall of temporal context is strictly similarity-based whereas hidden state inference explicitly models the generative distribution and therefore would have different predictions in cases that depend on training variance such as.

There has been discussion about the role that context plays in context-dependent learning (Kubie et al., 2019). One approach is to consider context to be a cue that can acquire associations and competes with other cues (Rescorla and Wagner, 1972; Grau and Rescorla, 1984). Another is that context modifies the associations that are learned with other cues (Bouton, 1993; Nadel and Willner, 1980; Hirsh, 1974). We have previously proposed a model in which the animal performs inference over the alternative causal structures of the environment (Gershman, 2017). Context can play each of the previously mentioned roles depending on the previous training that the animal received. We would postulate that the hidden state calculated through the process outlined in this paper would be used as an input to the inference described by Gershman et al., 2017b.


Conclusion

Place field remapping has long been one of the most puzzling aspects of hippocampal physiology, yet still lacks a comprehensive theoretical account. In this paper, we have taken steps towards such an account, starting with a normative formulation of the problem that we believe remapping is solving, namely hidden state inference. The algorithmic and biological underpinnings of this theory remain incomplete, setting a clear agenda for future theoretical work.


Materials and methods


Generative model

We model the animal’s sensory inputs (observations) as a vector consisting of features. The specific representation of these features varies across experimental paradigms. The animal assumes that observations are generated by discrete hidden states. At each time point, a state is stochastically selected according to prior, and the observation features are sampled from the observation distribution associated with that state, where represents the parameters of the observation distribution for state. For notational simplicity we will omit the time index whenever it is unnecessary for the exposition.

We place a prior over the parameters and then marginalize to obtain the likelihood that a set of observations came from a single state c

which we can extend to obtain the likelihood that a set of observations came from a set of hidden states

We model real-valued features with a multivariate normal observation distribution. The parameter vector is given by, where is the mean vector, and is the covariance matrix. We place a conjugate normal-Wishart distribution over these parameters (see Murphy, 2007 for more details), with hyperparameter values (prior mean), (scale parameter), (degrees of freedom), and (scale matrix), where is the -dimensional identity matrix.

We model circular variables with a Von Mises observation distribution and a normal-gamma prior over the parameters. The hyperparamters of the prior are given by: (prior mean), (scale parameter), (shape parameter), and (rate parameter). Because in this case we cannot marginalize over parameters analytically, we used numerical integration.

To motivate our prior over hidden states, we start with a few basic desiderata: (i) the prior should be defined over an unbounded state space, allowing new states to be continually created; and (ii) the prior should prefer a small number of states, to facilitate generalization across observations (a form of Occam’s razor). These assumptions are satisfied by a simple nonparametric distribution known as the Chinese restaurant process (CRP; Aldous, 1985; Gershman and Blei, 2012a), which samples states according to the following sequential process:

where is the number of previous observations assigned to state, is the total number of states created prior to time point, and is a concentration parameter that controls the propensity to create new states. When, all observations will be generated by the same state. As approaches infinity, each observations will be generated by a unique state. More generally, the expected number of states after observations is. Another way of using the CRP prior is to analytically calculate an unnormalized log probability for a list of hidden state assignments:

We set for all figures except, in which we explicitly explore the effects of variation in. We emphasize that using this prior does not mean that the world actually generates hidden states through this process; it simply means that we are imputing this to the animal as its internal model of the world.


Inference

To compute the posterior over hidden states, the likelihood is combined with a prior over state assignments, according to Bayes’ rule. Because we are typically dealing with a set of observations, and hence a combinatorial space of state partitions (i.e., all possible assignments of observations to states), exact inference is intractable. However, because we are generally only interested in a small number of ‘plausible’ partitions, we can simplify the problem by only assessing the relative probability of those states. The probability of each of those partitions given a set of observations

In particular, most of our simulations concern the question of whether two or three sets of observations are assigned to the same or different states. If we assume that all other partitions have probability close to 0, then we can ignore them without too much loss in accuracy. We use in.

The partition evidence ratio reported in the main text is the log odds ratio between the posterior probabilities of two hypotheses (partitions and):

where denotes the set of observations, is given by and is given by. We use in, and.

In some cases, we are interested in computing the posterior probability that a new observation is assigned to a particular state conditional on a hypothetical assignment of all past observations:

where is from and

is the posterior predictive distribution characterizing the probability of observing a value of generated by a given hidden state given all previous observations with that hidden state assignment. For a Multivariate Normal likelihood function with a normal-Wishart prior, this is given by:

where is the generalized Student-t distribution with hyperparameters, as discussed in Section 8.3 of Murphy, 2007.

The state evidence ratio reported in the main text is the log odds ratio between the posterior probabilities of two state assignments and for a given observation given past state assignments for past observations

We use in, and.


Code

All code necessary to generate all figures can be found at https://github.com/HoniSanders/Sanders-et-al-2020-Elife (copy archived at https://github.com/elifesciences-publications/Sanders-et-al-2020-Elife; Sanders, 2020).


Funding Statement

The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.


Contributor Information

Honi Sanders, Email: honi@mit.edu.

Samuel J Gershman, Email: gershman@fas.harvard.edu.

Peter Latham, University College London, United Kingdom.

Laura L Colgin, University of Texas at Austin, United States.


Funding Information

This paper was supported by the following grant:

NSF STC award CCF-1231216 to Honi Sanders, Matthew A Wilson, Samuel J Gershman.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

No data were analyzed in this work.


A connectome and analysis of the adult Drosophila central brain

Louis K Scheffer, C Shan Xu, Michal Januszewski, Zhiyuan Lu, Shin-ya Takemura, Kenneth J Hayworth, Gary B Huang, Kazunori Shinomiya et al. — eLife, 2020. PMC7546738, CC BY 4.0.

The neural circuits responsible for animal behavior remain largely unknown. We summarize new methods and present the circuitry of a large fraction of the brain of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. Improved methods include new procedures to prepare, image, align, segment, find synapses in, and proofread such large data sets. We define cell types, refine computational compartments, and provide an exhaustive atlas of cell examples and types, many of them novel. We provide detailed circuits consisting of neurons and their chemical synapses for most of the central brain. We make the data public and simplify access, reducing the effort needed to answer circuit questions, and provide procedures linking the neurons defined by our analysis with genetic reagents. Biologically, we examine distributions of connection strengths, neural motifs on different scales, electrical consequences of compartmentalization, and evidence that maximizing packing density is an important criterion in the evolution of the fly’s brain.

Research organism: D. melanogaster

Animal brains of all sizes, from the smallest to the largest, work in broadly similar ways. Studying the brain of any one animal in depth can thus reveal the general principles behind the workings of all brains. The fruit fly Drosophila is a popular choice for such research. With about 100,000 neurons – compared to some 86 billion in humans – the fly brain is small enough to study at the level of individual cells. But it nevertheless supports a range of complex behaviors, including navigation, courtship and learning.

Thanks to decades of research, scientists now have a good understanding of which parts of the fruit fly brain support particular behaviors. But exactly how they do this is often unclear. This is because previous studies showing the connections between cells only covered small areas of the brain. This is like trying to understand a novel when all you can see is a few isolated paragraphs.

To solve this problem, Scheffer, Xu, Januszewski, Lu, Takemura, Hayworth, Huang, Shinomiya et al. prepared the first complete map of the entire central region of the fruit fly brain. The central brain consists of approximately 25,000 neurons and around 20 million connections. To prepare the map – or connectome – the brain was cut into very thin 8nm slices and photographed with an electron microscope. A three-dimensional map of the neurons and connections in the brain was then reconstructed from these images using machine learning algorithms. Finally, Scheffer et al. used the new connectome to obtain further insights into the circuits that support specific fruit fly behaviors.

The central brain connectome is freely available online for anyone to access. When used in combination with existing methods, the map will make it easier to understand how the fly brain works, and how and why it can fail to work correctly. Many of these findings will likely apply to larger brains, including our own. In the long run, studying the fly connectome may therefore lead to a better understanding of the human brain and its disorders. Performing a similar analysis on the brain of a small mammal, by scaling up the methods here, will be a likely next step along this path.


Introduction

The connectome we present is a dense reconstruction of a portion of the central brain (referred to here as the hemibrain) of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, as shown in. This region was chosen since it contains all the circuits of the central brain (assuming bilateral symmetry), and in particular contains circuits critical to unlocking mysteries involving associative learning in the mushroom body, navigation and sleep in the central complex, and circadian rhythms among clock circuits. The largest dense reconstruction to date, it contains around 25,000 neurons, most of which were rigorously clustered and named, with about 20 million chemical synapses between them, plus portions of many other neurons truncated by the boundary of the data set (details in). Each neuron is documented at many levels - the detailed voxels that constitute it, a skeleton with segment diameters, its synaptic partners and the location of most of their synapses.

Producing this data set required advances in sample preparation, imaging, image alignment, machine segmentation of cells, synapse detection, data storage, proofreading software, and protocols to arbitrate each decision. A number of new tests for estimating the completeness and accuracy were required and therefore developed, in order to verify the correctness of the connectome.

These data describe whole-brain properties and circuits, as well as contain new methods to classify cell types based on connectivity. Computational compartments are now more carefully defined, we conclusively identify synaptic circuits, and each neuron is annotated by name and putative cell type, making this the first complete census of neuropils, tracts, cells, and connections in this portion of the brain. We compare the statistics and structure of different brain regions, and for the brain as a whole, without the confounds introduced by studying different circuitry in different animals.

All data are publicly available through web interfaces. This includes a browser interface, NeuPrint (Clements et al., 2020), designed so that any interested user can query the hemibrain connectome even without specific training. NeuPrint can query the connectivity, partners, connection strengths and morphologies of all specified neurons, thus making identification of upstream and downstream partners both orders of magnitude easier, and significantly more confident, compared to existing genetic methods. In addition, for those who are willing to program, the full data set - the gray scale voxels, the segmentation and proofreading results, skeletons, and graph model of connectivity, are also available through publicly accessible application program interfaces (APIs).

This effort differs from previous EM reconstructions in its social and collaborative aspects. Previous reconstructions were either dense in much smaller EM volumes (such as Meinertzhagen and O'Neil, 1991; Helmstaedter et al., 2013; Takemura et al., 2017) or sparse in larger volumes (such as Eichler et al., 2017 or Zheng et al., 2018). All have concentrated on the reconstruction of specific circuits to answer specific questions. When the same EM volume is used for many such efforts, as has occurred in the Drosophila larva and the full adult fly brain, this leads to an overall reconstruction that is the union of many individual efforts (Saalfeld et al., 2009). The result is inconsistent coverage of the brain, with some regions well reconstructed and others missing entirely. In contrast, here we have analyzed the entire volume, not just the subsets of interest to specific groups of researchers with the expertise to tackle EM reconstruction. We are making these data available without restriction, with only the requirement to cite the source. This allows the benefits of known circuits and connectivity to accrue to the field as a whole, a much larger audience than those with expertise in EM reconstruction. This is analogous to progress in genomics, which transitioned from individual groups studying subsets of genes, to publicly available genomes that can be queried for information about genes of choice (Altschul et al., 1990).

One major benefit to this effort is to facilitate research into the circuits of the fly’s brain. A common question among researchers, for example, is the identity of upstream and downstream (respectively input and output) partners of specific neurons. Previously, this could only be addressed by genetic trans-synaptic labeling, such as trans-Tango (Talay et al., 2017), or by sparse tracing in previously imaged EM volumes (Zheng et al., 2018). However, the genetic methods may give false positives and negatives, and both alternatives require specialized expertise and are time consuming, often taking months of effort. Now, for any circuits contained in our volume, a researcher can obtain the same answers in seconds by querying a publicly available database.

Another major benefit of dense reconstruction is its exhaustive nature. Genetic methods such as stochastic labeling may miss certain cell types, and counts of cells of a given type are dependent on expression levels, which are always uncertain. Previous dense reconstructions have demonstrated that existing catalogs of cell types are incomplete, even in well-covered regions (Takemura et al., 2017). In our hemibrain sample, we have identified all the cells within the reconstructed volume, thus providing a complete and unbiased census of all cell types in the fly’s central brain (at least in this single female), and a precise count of the cells of each type.

Another scientific benefit lies in an analysis without the uncertainty of pooling data obtained from different animals. The detailed circuitry of the fly’s brain is known to depend on nutritional history, age, and circadian rhythm. Here, these factors are held constant, as are the experimental methods, facilitating comparison between different fly brain regions in this single animal. Evaluating stereotypy across animals will of course eventually require additional connectomes.

Previous reconstructions of compartmentalized brains have concentrated on particular regions and circuits. The mammalian retina (Helmstaedter et al., 2013) and cortex (Kasthuri et al., 2015), and insect mushroom bodies (Eichler et al., 2017; Takemura et al., 2017) and optic lobes (Takemura et al., 2015) have all been popular targets. Additional studies have examined circuits that cross regions, such as those for sensory integration (Ohyama et al., 2015) or motion vision (Shinomiya et al., 2019).

So far lacking are systematic studies of the statistical properties of computational compartments and their connections. Neural circuit motifs have been studied (Song et al., 2005), but only those restricted to small motifs and at most a few cell types, usually in a single portion of the brain. Many of these results are in mammals, leading to questions of whether they also apply to invertebrates, and whether they extend to other regions of the brain. While there have been efforts to build reduced, but still accurate, electrical models of neurons (Marasco et al., 2012), none of these to our knowledge have used the compartment structure of the brain.


What is included

shows the hierarchy of the named brain regions that are included in the hemibrain. shows the primary regions that are at least 50% included in the hemibrain sample, their approximate size, and their completion percentage. Our names for brain regions follow the conventions of Ito et al., 2014 with the addition of ‘(L)’ or ‘(R)’ to indicate whether the region (most of which occur on both sides of the fly) has its cell bodies in the left or right, respectively. The mushroom body (Tanaka et al., 2008; Aso et al., 2014) and central complex (Wolff et al., 2015; Wolff and Rubin, 2018) are further divided into finer compartments.

provide the list of identified neuron types and their naming schemes. These include newly identified sensory inputs and motor outputs.

The nature of the proofreading process allows us to improve the data even after their initial publication. Our initial data release was version v1.0 (Xu et al., 2020c). Version v1.1 is now available, including improvements such as better accuracy, more consistent cell naming and typing, and inclusion of anatomical names for central complex neurons. The old version(s) remain online and available, to allow reproducibility of older analyses, but we strongly recommend all new analyses use the latest version. The analyses in this article, and in the corresponding articles on the mushroom body and central complex, are based on version v1.1, unless otherwise noted.


What is not included

This research focused on the neurons of the brain and the chemical synapses between them. Every step in our process, from staining and sample preparation through segmentation and proofreading, has been optimized with this goal in mind. While neurons and their chemical synapses are critical to brain operation, they are far from the full story. Other contributors, known to be important, could not be included in our study, largely for technical reasons. Among these are gap junctions, glia, and structures internal to the cell such as mitochondria. Gap junctions, or electrical connections between neurons, are difficult to reliably detect by FIB-SEM under the best of circumstances and not detectable at the low (for EM) resolution needed to complete this study in a reasonable amount of time. Their contribution to the connectome will need to be established through other means - see the section on future research. Glial cells were difficult to segment, due to both staining differences and convoluted morphologies. We identified the volumes where they exist (a glia ’mask’, which allows these regions to be color-coded when viewed in NeuroGlancer) but did not separate them into cells. Structures internal to the neurons, except for synapses, are not considered here even though many are visible in our EM preparation. The most obvious example is mitochondria. Again, we have identified many of them so we could evaluate their effect on segmentation, but they are not included in our connectome. Finally, autapses (synapses from a neuron onto itself) are known to exist in Drosophila, but are sufficiently rare that they fall well below the rate of false positives in our automated synapse detection. Therefore most of the putative autapses are false positives, and we do not include them in our connectivity data.


Differences from connectomes of vertebrates

Most accounts of neurobiology define the operation of the mammalian nervous system with, at most, only passing reference to invertebrate brains. Fly (or other insect) nervous systems differ from those of vertebrates in several aspects (Meinertzhagen, 2016b). Some main differences include:

Most synapses are polyadic. Each synapse structure comprises a single presynaptic release site and, adjacent to this, several neurites expressing neurotransmitter receptors. An element, T-shaped and typically called a T-bar in flies, marks the site of transmitter release into the cleft between cells. This site typically abuts the neurites of several other cells, where a postsynaptic density (PSD) marks the receptor location.

Most neurites are neither purely axonic nor dendritic, but have both pre- and postsynaptic partners, a feature that may be more prominent in mammalian brains than recognized (Morgan and Lichtman, 2020). Within a single brain region, however, neurites are frequently predominantly dendritic (postsynaptic) or axonic (presynaptic).

Unlike some synapses in mammals, EM imagery (at least as we have acquired and analyzed it here) fails to reveal obvious information about whether a synapse is excitatory or inhibitory.

The soma or cell body of each fly neuron resides in a rind (the cell body layer) on the periphery of the brain, mostly disjoint from the main neurites innervating the internal neuropil. As a result, unlike vertebrate neurons, no synapses form directly on the soma. The neuronal process between the soma and the first branch point is called the cell body fiber (CBF), which is likewise not involved in the synaptic transmission of information.

Synapse sizes are much more uniform than those of mammals. Stronger connections are formed by increasing the number of synapses in parallel, not by forming larger synapses, as in vertebrates. In this paper, we will refer to the ‘strength’ of a connection as the synapse count, even though we acknowledge that we lack information on the relative activity and strength of the synapses, and thus a true measure of their coupling strength.

The brain is small, about 250 μm per side, and has roughly the same size as the dendritic arbor of a single pyramidal neuron in the mammalian cortex.

Axons of fly neurons are not myelinated.

Some fly neurons rely on graded transmission (as opposed to spiking), without obvious anatomical distinction. Some neurons even switch between graded and spiking operation (Pimentel et al., 2016).


Connectome reconstruction

Producing a connectome comprising reconstructed neurons and the chemical synapses between them required several steps. The first step, preparing a fly brain and imaging half of its center, produced a dataset consisting of 26 teravoxels of data, each with 8 bits of grayscale information. We applied numerous machine-learning algorithms and over 50 person-years of proofreading effort over ≈2 calendar years to extract a variety of more compact and useful representations, such as neuron skeletons, synapse locations, and connectivity graphs. These are both more useful and much smaller than the raw grayscale data. For example, the connectivity could be reasonably summarized by a graph with ≈25,000 nodes and ≈3 million edges. Even when the connections were assigned to different brain regions, such a graph took only 26 MB, still large but roughly a million fold reduction in data size.

Many of the supporting methods for this reconstruction have been recently published. Here, we briefly survey each major area, with more details reported in the companion papers. Major advances include:

New methods to fix and stain the sample, preparing a whole fly brain with well-preserved subcellular detail particularly suitable for machine analysis.

Methods that have enabled us to collect the largest EM dataset yet using Focused Ion Beam Scanning Electron Microscopy (FIB-SEM), resulting in isotropic data with few artifacts, features that significantly sped up reconstruction.

A coarse-to-fine, automated flood-filling network segmentation pipeline applied to image data normalized with cycle-consistent generative adversarial networks, and an aggressive automated agglomeration regime enabled by advances in proofreading.

A new hybrid synapse prediction method, using two differing underlying techniques, for accurate synapse prediction throughout the volume.

New top-down proofreading methods that utilize visualization and machine learning to achieve orders of magnitude faster reconstruction compared with previous approaches in the fly’s brain.

Each of these is explained in more detail in the following sections and, where necessary, in the appendix. The companion papers are ‘The connectome of the Drosophila melanogaster mushroom body: implications for function’ (Li et al., 2020) and ‘A complete synaptic-resolution connectome of the Drosophila melanogaster central complex’ by Jayaraman, et al.


Image stack collection

The first steps, fixing and staining the specimen, have been accomplished taking advantage of three new developments. These improved methods allow us to fix and stain a full fly’s brain but nevertheless recover neurons as round profiles with darkly stained synapses, suitable for machine segmentation and automatic synapse detection. We started with a 5-day-old female of wild-type Canton S strain G1 x w1118, raised on a 12 hr day/night cycle. 1.5 hr after lights-on, we used a custom-made jig to microdissect the brain, which was then fixed and embedded in Epon, an epoxy resin. We then enhanced the electron contrast by staining with heavy metals, and progressively lowered the temperature during dehydration of the sample. Collectively, these methods optimize morphological preservation, allow full-brain preparation without distortion (unlike fast freezing methods), and provide increased staining intensity that speeds the rate of FIB-SEM imaging (Lu et al., 2019).

The hemibrain sample is roughly 250 × 250 × 250 μm, larger than we can FIB-SEM without introducing milling artifacts. Therefore, we subdivided our epoxy-embedded samples into 20-μm-thick slabs, both to avoid artifacts and allow imaging in parallel (each slab can be imaged in a different FIB machine) for increased throughput. To be effective, the cut surfaces of the slabs must be smooth at the ultrastructural level and have only minimal material loss. Specifically, for connectomic research, all long-distance processes must remain traceable across sequential slabs. We used an improved version of our previously published ‘hot-knife’ ultrathick sectioning procedure (Hayworth et al., 2015) which uses a heated, oil-lubricated diamond knife, to section the Drosophila brain into 37 sagittal slabs of 20 μm thickness with an estimated material loss between consecutive slabs of only ∼30 nm – sufficiently small to allow tracing of long-distance neurites. Each slab was re-embedded, mounted, and trimmed, then examined in 3D with X-ray tomography to check for sample quality and establish a scale factor for Z-axis cutting by FIB. The resulting slabs were FIB-SEM imaged separately (often in parallel, in different FIB-SEM machines), and the resulting volume datasets were stitched together computationally.

Connectome studies come with clearly defined resolution requirements – the finest neurites must be traceable by humans and should be reliably segmented by automated algorithms (Januszewski et al., 2018). In Drosophila, the very finest neural processes are usually 50 nm but can be as little as 15 nm (Meinertzhagen, 2016a). This fundamental biological dimension determines the minimum isotropic resolution requirements for tracing neural circuits. To meet the demand for high isotropic resolution and large volume imaging, we chose the FIB-SEM imaging platform, which offers high isotropic resolution (<10 nm in x, y, and z), minimal artifacts, and robust image alignment. The high-resolution and isotropic dataset possible with FIB-SEM has substantially expedited the Drosophila connectome pipeline. Compared to serial-section imaging, with its sectioning artifacts and inferior Z-axis resolution, FIB-SEM offers high-quality image alignment, a smaller number of artifacts, and isotropic resolution. This allows higher quality automated segmentation and makes manual proofreading and correction easier and faster.

At the beginning, deficiencies in imaging speed and system reliability of any commercial FIB-SEM system capped the maximum possible image volume to less than 0.01% of a full fly brain, problems that persist even now. To remedy them, we redesigned the entire control system, improved the imaging speed more than 10x, and created innovative solutions addressing all known failure modes, which thereby expanded the practical imaging volume of conventional FIB-SEM by more than four orders of magnitude from to, while maintaining an isotropic resolution of 8 × 8 × 8 nm voxels (Xu et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2020a). In order to overcome the aberration of a large field of view (up to 300 μm wide), we developed a novel tiling approach without sample stage movement, in which the imaging parameters of each tile are individually optimized through an in-line auto focus routine without overhead (Xu et al., 2020b). After numerous improvements, we have transformed the conventional FIB-SEM from a laboratory tool that is unreliable for more than a few days of imaging to a robust volume EM platform with effective long-term reliability, able to perform years of continuous imaging without defects in the final image stack. Imaging time, rather than FIB-SEM reliability, is now the main impediment to obtaining even larger volumes.

In our study here, the Drosophila 'hemibrain', 13 consecutive hot-knifed slabs were imaged using two customized enhanced FIB-SEM systems, in which an FEI Magnum FIB column was mounted at 90° upon a Zeiss Merlin SEM. After data collection, streaking artifacts generated by secondary electrons along the FIB milling direction were computationally removed using a mask in the frequency domain. The image stacks were then aligned using a customized version of the software platform developed for serial section transmission electron microscopy (Zheng et al., 2018; Khairy et al., 2018), followed by binning along the z-axis to form the final 8 × 8 × 8 nm3 voxel datasets. Milling thickness variations in the aligned series were compensated using a modified version of the method described by Hanslovsky et al., 2017, with the absolute scale calibrated by reference to the MicroCT images.

The 20 μm slabs generated by the hot-knife sectioning were re-embedded in larger plastic tabs prior to FIB-SEM imaging. To correct for the warping of the slab that can occur in this process, methods adapted from Kainmueller (Kainmueller et al., 2008) were used to find the tissue-plastic interface and flatten each slab’s image stack.

The series of flattened slabs was then stitched using a custom method for large-scale deformable registration to account for deformations introduced during sectioning, imaging, embedding, and alignment (Saalfeld et al. in prep). These volumes were then contrast adjusted using slice-wise contrast limited adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE) (Pizer et al., 1987), and converted into a versioned database (Distributed, Versioned, Image-oriented Database, or DVID) (Katz and Plaza, 2019), which formed the raw data for the reconstruction, as illustrated in.


Automated segmentation

Computational reconstruction of the image data was performed using flood-filling networks (FFNs) trained on roughly five billion voxels of volumetric ground truth contained in two tabs of the hemibrain dataset (Januszewski et al., 2018). Initially, the FFNs generalized poorly to other tabs of the hemibrain, whose image content had different appearances. Therefore, we adjusted the image content to be more uniform using cycle-consistent generative adversarial networks (CycleGANs) (Zhu et al., 2017). Specifically, ‘generator’ networks were trained to alter image content such that a second ‘discriminator’ network was unable to distinguish between image patches sampled from, for example, a tab that contained volumetric training data versus a tab that did not. A cycle-consistency constraint was used to ensure that the image transformations preserved ultrastructural detail. The improvement is illustrated in. Overall, this allowed us to use the training data from just two slabs, as opposed to needing training data for each slab.

FFNs were applied to the CycleGAN-normalized data in a coarse-to-fine manner at 32 × 32 × 32 nm3 and 16 × 16 × 16 nm3, and to the CLAHE-normalized data at the native 8 × 8 × 8 nm3 resolution, in order to generate a base segmentation that was largely over-segmented. We then agglomerated the base segmentation, also using FFNs. We aggressively agglomerated segments despite introducing a substantial number of erroneous mergers. This differs from previous algorithms, which studiously avoided merge errors since they were so difficult to fix. Here, advances in proofreading methodology described later in this report enabled efficient detection and correction of such mergers.

We evaluated the accuracy of the FFN segmentation of the hemibrain using metrics for expected run length (ERL) and false merge rate (Januszewski et al., 2018). The base segmentation (i.e. the automated reconstruction prior to agglomeration) achieved an ERL of 163 μm with a false merge rate of 0.25%. After (automated) agglomeration, run length increased to 585 μm but with a false merge rate of 27.6% (i.e. nearly 30% of the path length was contained in segments with at least one merge error). We also evaluated a subset of neurons in the volume, ∼500 olfactory PNs and mushroom body KCs chosen to roughly match the evaluation performed in Li et al., 2019 which yielded an ERL of 825 μm at a 15.9% false merge rate.


Synapse prediction

Accurate synapse identification is central to our analysis, given that synapses form both a critical component of a connectome and are required for prioritizing and guiding the proofreading effort. Synapses in Drosophila are typically polyadic, with a single presynaptic site (a T-bar) contacted by multiple receiving dendrites (most with PSDs) as shown in. Initial synapse prediction revealed that there are over 9 million T-bars and 60 million PSDs in the hemibrain. Manually validating each one, assuming a rate of 1000 connections annotated per trained person, per day, would have taken more than 230 working years. Given this infeasibility, we developed machine learning approaches to predict synapses as detailed below. The results of our prediction are shown in, where the predicted synapse sites clearly delineate many of the fly brain regions.

Given the size of the hemibrain image volume, a major challenge from a machine learning perspective is the range of varying image statistics across the volume. In particular, model performance can quickly degrade in regions of the data set with statistics that are not well-captured by the training set (Buhmann et al., 2019).

To address this challenge, we took an iterative approach to synapse prediction, interleaving model re-training with manual proofreading, all based on previously reported methods (Huang et al., 2018). Initial prediction, followed by proofreading, revealed a number of false positive predictions from structures such as dense core vesicles which were not well-represented in the original training set. A second filtering network was trained on regions causing such false positives, and used to prune back the original set of predictions. We denote this pruned output as the ‘initial’ set of synapse predictions.

Based on this initial set, we began collecting human-annotated dense ground-truth cubes throughout the various brain regions of the hemibrain, to assess variation in classifier performance by brain region. From these cubes, we determined that although many regions had acceptable precision, there were some regions in which recall was lower than desired. Consequently, a subset of cubes available at that time was used to train a new classifier focused on addressing recall in the problematic regions. This new classifier was used in an incremental (cascaded) fashion, primarily by adding additional predictions to the existing initial set. This gave better performance than complete replacement using only the new classifier, with the resulting predictions able to improve recall while largely maintaining precision.

As an independent check on synapse quality, we also trained a separate classifier (Buhmann et al., 2019), using a modified version of the ‘synful’ software package. Both synapse predictors give a confidence value associated with each synapse, a measure of how firmly the classifier believes the prediction to be a true synapse. We found that we were able to improve recall by taking the union of the two predictor’s most confident synapses, and similarly improve precision by removing synapses that were low confidence in both predictions. show the results, illustrating the precision and recall obtained in each brain region.


Proofreading

Since machine segmentation is not perfect, we made a concerted effort to fix the errors remaining at this stage by several passes of human proofreading. Segmentation errors can be roughly grouped into two classes - ‘false merges’, in which two separate neurons are mistakenly merged together, and ‘false splits’, in which a single neuron is mistakenly broken into several segments. Enabled by advances in visualization and semi-automated proofreading using our Neu3 tool (Hubbard et al., 2020), we first addressed large false mergers. A human examined each putative neuron and determined if it had an unusual morphology suggesting that a merge might have occurred, a task still much easier for humans than machines. If judged to be a false merger, the operator identified discrete points that should be on separate neurons. The shape was then resegmented in real time allowing users to explore other potential corrections. Neurons with more complex problems were then scheduled to be re-checked, and the process repeated until few false mergers remained.

In the next phase, the largest remaining pieces were merged into neuron shapes using a combination of machine-suggested edits (Plaza, 2014) and manual intuition, until the main shape of each neuron emerged. This requires relatively few proofreading decisions and has the advantage of producing an almost complete neuron catalog early in the process. As discussed below, in the section on validation, emerging shapes were compared against genetic/optical image libraries (where available) and against other neurons of the same putative type, to guard against large missing or superfluous branches. These procedures (which focused on higher-level proofreading) produced a reasonably accurate library of the main branches of each neuron, and a connectome of the stronger neuronal pathways. At this point, there was still considerable variations among the brain regions, with greater completeness achieved in regions where the initial segmentation performed better.

Finally, to achieve the highest reconstruction completeness possible in the time allotted, and to enable confidence in weaker neuronal pathways, proofreaders connected remaining isolated fragments (segments) to already constructed neurons, using NeuTu (Zhao et al., 2018) and Neu3 (Hubbard et al., 2020). The fragments that would result in largest connectivity changes were considered first, exploiting automatic guesses through focused proofreading where possible. Since proofreading every small segment is still prohibitive, we tried to ensure a basic level of completeness throughout the brain with special focus in regions of particular biological interest such as the central complex and mushroom body.


Defining brain regions

In a parallel effort to proofreading, the sample was annotated with discrete brain regions. Our progression in mapping the cells and circuits of the fly’s brain bears formal parallels to the history of mapping the earth, with many territories that are named and with known circuits, and others that still lack all or most of these. For the hemibrain dataset, the regions are based on the brain atlas in Ito et al., 2014. The dataset covers most of the right hemisphere of the brain, except the optic lobe (OL), periesophageal neuropils (PENP) and gnathal ganglia (GNG), as well as part of the left hemisphere. It covers about 36% of all synaptic neuropils by volume, and 54% of the central brain neuropils. We examined innervation patterns, synapse distribution, and connectivity of reconstructed neurons to define the neuropils as well as their boundaries on the dataset. We also made necessary, but relatively minor, revisions to some boundaries by considering anatomical features that had not been known during the creation of previous brain maps, while following the existing structural definitions (Ito et al., 2014). We also used information from synapse point clouds, a predicted glial mask, and a predicted fiber bundle mask to determine boundaries of the neuropils. The brain regions of the fruit fly (B and C) include synaptic neuropils and non-synaptic fiber bundles. The non-synaptic cell body layer on the brain surface, which contains cell bodies of the neurons and some glia, surrounds these structures. The synaptic neuropils can be further categorized into two groups: delineated and diffuse neuropils. The delineated neuropils have distinct boundaries throughout their surfaces, often accompanied by glial processes, and have clear internal structures in many cases. They include the antennal lobe (AL), bulb (BU), as well as the neuropils in the optic lobe (OL), mushroom body (MB), and central complex (CX). Remaining are the diffuse neuropils, sometimes referred to as terra incognita, since most have been less investigated than the delineated neuropils.


Diffuse (terra incognita) neuropils

In the previous brain atlas of 2014, boundaries of some terra incognita neuropils were somewhat arbitrarily determined, due to a lack of precise information of the landmark neuronal structures used for the boundary definition. In the hemibrain data, we adjusted these boundaries to trace more faithfully the contours of the structures that are much better clarified by the EM-reconstructed data. Examples include the lateral horn (LH), ventrolateral neuropils (VLNP), and the boundary between the crepine (CRE) and lateral accessory lobe (LAL). The LH has been defined as the primary projection target of the olfactory projection neurons (PNs) from the antennal lobe (AL) via several antennal lobe tracts (ALTs) (Ito et al., 2014; Pereanu et al., 2010). The boundary between the LH and its surrounding neuropils is barely visible with synaptic immunolabeling such as nc82 or predicted synapse point clouds, as the synaptic contrast in these regions is minimal. The olfactory PNs can be grouped into several classes, and the projection sites of the uniglomerular PNs that project through the medial ALT (mALT), the thickest fiber bundle between the AL and LH, give the most conservative and concrete boundary of the ‘core’ LH. Multiglomerular PNs, on the other hand, project to much broader regions, including the volumes around the core LH. These regions include areas which are currently considered parts of the superior lateral protocerebrum (SLP) and posterior lateral protocerebrum (PLP). Since the ‘core’ LH roughly approximates the shape of the traditional LH, and the boundaries given by the multiglomerular PNs are rather diffused, in this study we assumed the core to be the LH itself. Of course, the multiglomerular PNs convey olfactory information as well, and therefore the neighboring parts of the SLP and PLP to some extent also receive inputs from the antennal lobe. These regions might be functionally distinct from the remaining parts of the SLP or PLP, but they are not explicitly separated from those neuropils in this study.

The VLNP is located in the lateral part of the central brain and receives extensive inputs from the optic lobe through various types of the visual projection neurons (VPNs). Among them, the projection sites of the lobula columnar (LC), lobula plate columnar (LPC), lobula-lobula plate columnar (LLPC), and lobula plate-lobula columnar (LPLC) cells form characteristic glomerular structures, called optic glomeruli (OG), in the AOTU, PVLP, and PLP (Klapoetke et al., 2017; Otsuna and Ito, 2006; Panser et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2016). We exhaustively identified columnar VPNs and found 41 types of LC, two types of LPC, six types of LLPC, and three types of LPLC cells (including sub-types of previously identified types). The glomeruli of these pathways were used to determine the medial boundary of the PVLP and PLP, following existing definitions (Ito et al., 2014), except for a few LC types which do not form glomerular terminals. The terminals of the reconstructed LC cells and other lobula complex columnar cells (LPC, LLPC, LPLC) are shown in, respectively.

In the previous paper (Ito et al., 2014), the boundary between the CRE and LAL was defined as the line roughly corresponding to the posterior-ventral surface of the MB lobes, since no other prominent anatomical landmarks were found around this region. In this dataset, we found several glomerular structures surrounding the boundary both in the CRE and LAL. These structures include the gall (GA), rubus (RUB), and round body (ROB). Most of them turned out to be projection targets of several classes of central complex neurons, implying the ventral CRE and dorsal LAL are closely related in their function. We re-determined the boundary so that each of the glomerular structures would not be divided into two, while keeping the overall architecture and definition of the CRE and LAL. The updated boundary passes between the dorsal surface of the GA and the ventral edge of the ROB. Other glomerular structures, including the RUB, are included in the CRE.


Delineated neuropils

Substructures of the delineated neuropils have also been added to the brain region map in the hemibrain. The asymmetrical bodies (AB) were added as the fifth independent neuropil of the CX (Wolff and Rubin, 2018). The AB is a small synaptic volume adjacent to the ventral surface of the fan-shaped body (FB) that has historically been included in the FB (Ito et al., 2014). The AB has been described as a Fasciclin II (FasII)-positive structure that exhibits left-right structural asymmetry by Pascual et al., 2004, who reported that most flies have their AB only in the right hemisphere, while a small proportion (7.6%) of wild-type flies have their AB on both sides. In the hemibrain dataset, the pair of ABs is situated on both sides of the midline, but the left AB is notably smaller than the right AB (right: 1679 μm3, left: 526 μm3), still showing an obvious left-right asymmetry. The asymmetry is consistent with light microscopy data (Wolff and Rubin, 2018), though the absolute sizes differ, with the light data showing averages (n = 21) of 522 μm3 for the right and 126 μm3 on the left. The AB is especially strongly connected to the neighboring neuropil, the FB, by neurons including vDeltaA_a (anatomical name AF in Wolff and Rubin, 2018), while it also houses both pre- and postsynaptic terminals of the CX output neurons such as the subset of FS4A and FS4B neurons that project to AB. These anatomical observations imply that the AB is a ventralmost annexed part of the FB, although this possibility is neither developmentally nor phylogenetically proven.

The round body (ROB) is also a small round synaptic structure situated on the ventral limit of the crepine (CRE), close to the β lobe of the MB (Lin et al., 2013; Wolff and Rubin, 2018). It is a glomerulus-like structure and one of the foci of the CX output neurons, including the PFR (protocerebral bridge – fan-shaped body – round body) neurons. It is classified as a substructure of the CRE along with other less-defined glomerular regions in the neuropil, many of which also receive signals from the CX. Among these, the most prominent one is the rubus (RUB). The ROB and RUB are two distinct structures; the RUB is embedded completely within the CRE, while the ROB is located on the ventrolateral surface of the CRE. The lateral accessory lobe (LAL), neighboring the CRE, also houses similar glomerular terminals, and the gall (GA) is one of them. While the ROB and GA have relatively clear boundaries separating them from the surrounding regions, they may not qualify as independent neuropils because of their small size and the structural similarities with the glomerulus-like terminals around them. They may be comparable with other glomerular structures such as the AL glomeruli and the optic glomeruli in the lateral protocerebrum, both of which are considered as substructures of the surrounding neuropils.

Substructures of independent neuropils are also defined using neuronal innervations. The five MB lobes on the right hemisphere are further divided into 15 compartments (α1–3, α’1–3, β1–2, β’1–2, and γ1–5) (Tanaka et al., 2008; Aso et al., 2014) by the mushroom body output neurons (MBONs) and dopaminergic neurons (DANs). Our compartment boundaries were defined by approximating the innervation of these neurons. Although the innervating regions of the MBONs and DANs do not perfectly tile the entire lobes, the compartments have been defined to tile the lobes, so that every synapse in the lobes belongs to one of the 15 compartments.

The anatomy of the central complex is discussed in detail in the companion paper ‘A complete synaptic-resolution connectome of the Drosophila melanogaster central complex’. Here, we summarize the division of its neuropils into compartments.

The FB is subdivided into nine horizontal layers (FBl1-9) as already illustrated (Wolff et al., 2015). The layer boundaries in our dataset were determined by the pattern of innervation of 574 FB tangential cells, which form nine groups depending on the dorsoventral levels they innervate in the FB. Since tangential cells overlap somewhat, and do not entirely respect the layer boundaries, these boundaries were chosen to maximize the containment of the tangential arbors within their respective layers.

The EB is likewise subdivided into zones by the innervating patterns of the EB ring neurons, the most prominent class of neurons innervating the EB. The ring neurons have six subtypes, ER1-ER6, and each projects to specific zones of the EB. Among them, the regions innervated by ER2 and ER4 are mutually exclusive but highly intermingled, so these regions are grouped together into a single zone (EBr2r4). ER3 has the most neurons among the ring neuron subtypes and is further grouped into five subclasses (ER3a, d, m, p, and w). While each subclass projects to a distinct part of the EB, the innervation patterns of the subclasses ER3a and ER3m, and also ER3p and ER3w, are very similar to each other. The region innervated by ER3 is, therefore, subdivided into three zones, including EBr3am, EBr3pw, and EBr3d. Along with the other three zones, EBr1, EBr5, and EBr6 (innervated by ER1, ER5, and ER6), the entire EB is subdivided into seven non-overlapping zones. Unlike other zones, EBr6 is innervated only sparsely by the ER6 cells, with the space filled primarily by synaptic terminals of other neuron types, including the extrinsic ring neurons (ExR). Omoto et al., 2017 segmented the EB into five domains (EBa, EBoc, EBop, EBic, EBip) by the immunolabeling pattern of DN-cadherin, and each type of the ring neurons may innervate more than one domain in the EB. Our results show that the innervation pattern of each ring neuron subtype is highly compartmentalized at the EM level and the entire neuropil can be sufficiently subdivided into zones based purely on the neuronal morphologies. The neuropil may be subdivided differently if other neuron types, such as the extrinsic ring neurons (ExR) (Omoto et al., 2018), are recruited as landmarks.


Quality of the brain region boundaries

Since many of the terra incognita neuropils are not clearly partitioned from each other by solid boundaries such as glial walls, it is important to evaluate if the current boundaries reflect anatomical and functional compartments of the brain. To check our definitions, which are mostly based on morphology, we compute metrics for each boundary between any two adjacent neuropil regions. The first is the area of each boundary, in square microns, as shown in. The map shows results for brain regions that are over 75% in the hemibrain region, restricted to right regions with exception to the asymmetric AB(L). By restricting our analysis to the right part of the hemibrain, we hopefully minimize the effect of smaller, traced-but-truncated neuron fragments on our metric.

Next, for each boundary, we compute the number of ‘excess’ neuron crossings by traced neurons, where excess crossings are defined as 0 for a neuron that does not cross the boundary, and for a neuron crosses the same boundary n times. There is no contribution to the metric from neurons that cross a boundary once, since most such crossings are inevitable no matter where the boundary is placed. shows the number of excess crossings normalized by the area of boundary. A bigger dot indicates a potentially less well-defined boundary.

We spot checked many of the instances and in general note that the brain regions with high excess crossings per area, such as those in SNP, INP and VLNP, tend to have less well-defined boundaries. In particular, the boundaries at SMP/CRE, CRE/LAL, SMP/SIP, and SIP/SLP have worse scores, indicating these boundaries may not reflect actual anatomical and functional segregation of the neuropils. These brain regions were defined based on the arborization patterns of characteristic neuron types, but because neurons in the terra incognita neuropils tend to be rather heterogeneous, there are many other neuron types that do not follow these boundaries. The boundary between the FB and the AB also has a high excess crossing score, suggesting the AB is tightly linked to the neighboring FB.


Insights for a whole-brain remapping

The current brain regions based on Ito et al., 2014 contain a number of arbitrary determinations of brain regions and their boundaries in the terra incognita neuropils. In this study, we tried to solidify the ambiguous boundaries as much as possible using the information from the reconstructed neurons. However, large parts of the left hemisphere and the subesophageal zone (SEZ) are missing from the hemibrain dataset, and neurons innervating these regions are not sufficiently reconstructed. This incompleteness of the dataset is the main reason that we did not alter the previous map drastically and kept all the existing brain regions even if their anatomical and functional significance is not obvious. Once a complete EM volume of the whole fly brain is imaged and most of its 100,000 neurons are reconstructed, the entire brain can be re-segmented from scratch with more comprehensive anatomical information. Arbitrary or artificial neuropil boundaries will thereby be minimized, if not avoided, in a new brain map. Anatomy-based neuron segmentation strategies such as NBLAST may be used as neutral methods to revise the neuropils and their boundaries. Any single method, however, is not likely to produce consistent boundaries throughout the brain, especially in the terra incognita regions. It may be necessary to use different methods and criteria to segment the entire brain into reasonable brain regions. Such a new map would need discussion in a working group, and approval from the community in advance (as did the previous map [Ito et al., 2014]), insofar as it would replace the current map and therefore require a major revision of the neuron mapping scheme.


Cell type classification

Defining cell types for groups of similar neurons is a time-honored means to help to understand the anatomical and functional properties of a circuit. Presumably, neurons of the same type have similar circuit roles. However, the definition of what is a distinct cell type and the exact delineation between one cell type and another remains inherently subjective and represents a classic taxonomic challenge, pitting ‘lumpers’ against ‘splitters’. Therefore, despite our best efforts, we recognize that our typing of cells may not be identical to that proposed by other experts. We expect future revisions to cell type classification, especially as additional dense connectome data become available.

One common method of cell type classification, used in flies, exploits the GAL4 system to highlight the morphology of neurons having similar gene expression (Jenett et al., 2012). Since these genetic lines are imaged using fluorescence and confocal microscopy, we refer to them as ‘light lines’. Where they exist and are sufficiently sparse, light lines provide a key method for identifying types by grouping morphologically similar neurons together. However, there are no guarantees of coverage, and it is difficult to distinguish between neurons of very similar morphology but different connectivity.

We enhanced the classic view of morphologically distinct cell types by defining distinct cell types (or sub-types) based on both morphology and connectivity. Connectivity-based clustering often reveals clear cell type distinctions, even when genetic markers have yet to be found, or when the neuronal morphologies of different types are hardly distinguishable in optical images. For example, the two PEN (protocerebral bridge - ellipsoid body - noduli) neurons have very similar forms but quite distinct inputs (Turner-Evans et al., 2019) Confirming their differences, PEN1 and PEN2 neurons, in fact, have been shown to have different functional activity (Green et al., 2017).

Based on our previous definition of cell type, many neurons exhibit a unique morphology or connectivity pattern at least within one hemisphere of the brain (with a matching type in the other hemisphere in most cases). Because our hemibrain volume covers only the right-side examples of ipsilaterally-projecting neurons, and the contralateral arborizations of bilaterally-projecting neurons arising from the left side of the brain were in practice very difficult to match to neurons in the right side, many partial neurons were therefore left uncategorized. As a result, many neuron types consisting of a distinct morphology and connectivity have only a single example in our reconstruction.

It is possible to provide coarser groupings of neurons. For instance, most cell types are grouped by their cell body fiber representing a distinct clonal unit, which we discuss in more detail below. Furthermore, each neuron can be grouped with neurons that innervate similar brain regions. In this paper, we do not explicitly formalize this higher level grouping, but data on the innervating brain regions can be readily mined from the dataset.


Methodology for assigning cell types and nomenclature

Assigning types and names to the more than 20,000 reconstructed cells was a difficult undertaking. Less than 20% of neuron types found in our data have been described in the literature, and half of our neurons have no previously annotated type. Adding to the complexity, prior work focused on morphological similarities and differences, but here we have, for the first time, connectivity information to assist in cell typing as well.

Many cell types in well-explored regions have already been described and named in the literature, but existing names can be both inconsistent and ambiguous. The same cell type is often given differing names in different publications, and conversely, the same name, such as PN for projection neuron, is used for many different cell types. Nonetheless, for cell types already named in the literature (which we designate as published cell types, many indexed, with their synonyms, at http://virtualflybrain.org), we have tried to use existing names. In a few cases, using existing names created conflicts, which we have had to resolve. ‘R1’, for example, has long been used both for photoreceptor neurons innervating the lamina and medulla, and ring neurons in the ellipsoid body of the central complex. Similarly, ‘LN’ has been used to refer to lateral neurons in the circadian clock system, ‘local neurons’ in the antenna lobe, and LAL-Nodulus neurons in the central complex. To resolve these conflicts, the ellipsoid body ring neurons are now named ’ER1’ instead of ‘R1’, and the nodulus neurons are now ‘LNO’ and ’GLNO’ instead of ‘LN’ and ‘GLN’. The names of the antennal lobe local neuron are always preceded by lowercase letters for their cell body locations to differentiate them from the clock neuron names, for example, lLN1 versus LNd. Similarly, ‘dorsal neurons’ of the circadian clock system and ‘descending neurons’ in general, both previously abbreviated as ‘DN’, are distinguished by the following characters - numbers for the clock neurons (e.g. DN1) and letters for descending neurons (e.g. DNa01).

Overall, we defined a ‘type’ of neurons as either a single cell or a group of cells that have a very similar cell body location, morphology, and pattern of synaptic connectivity. We were able to trace from arborizations to the cell bodies for 15,912 neurons in the hemibrain volume, ≈85% of which are located in the right side of the brain while the rest are in the medialmost part of the left-side brain.

We classified these neurons in several steps. The first step classified all cells by their lineage, grouping neurons according to their bundle of cell body fibers (CBFs). Neuronal cell bodies are located in the cell body layer that surrounds the brain, and each neuron projects a single CBF towards synaptic neuropils. In the central brain, cell bodies of clonally related neurons deriving from a single stem cell (called a neuroblast in the insect brain) tend to form clusters, from each of which arises one or several bundles of CBFs. Comparing the location, trajectory, and the combined arborization patterns of all the neurons that arise from a particular CBF with the light microscopy (LM) image data of the neuronal progeny that derive from single neuroblasts (Ito et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2013), we confirmed that the neurons of each CBF group belong to a single lineage.

We carefully examined the trajectory and origins of CBFs of the 15,752 neurons on the right central brain and identified 192 distinct CBF bundles. Neurons arising from four specific CBF bundles arborize primarily in the contralateral brain side, which is not fully covered in the hemibrain volume. We characterized these neurons using the arborization patterns in the right-side brain that are formed by the neurons arising from the left-side CBFs.

The CBF bundles and associated neuronal cell body clusters were named according to their location (split into eight sectors of the brain surface with the combination of Anterior/Posterior, Ventral/Dorsal, and Medial/Lateral) and a number within the sector given according to the size of cell population. Thus, CBF group ADM01 is the group with the largest number of neurons in the Anterior Dorsal Medial sector of the brain’s surface (see the cellBodyFiber field of the Neuprint database explained later). For the neurons of the four CBF bundles that arborize primarily in the contralateral brain side - AVM15, 18, 19, and PVM10 - we indicated CBF information in the records of the left-side neurons.

Among the 192 bundles, 155 matched the CBF bundles of 92 known and six newly identified clonal units (Ito et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2013), a population of neurons and neuronal circuits derived from a single stem cell. The remaining 37 CBF bundles are minor populations and most likely of embryonic origin. In addition, we found 80 segregated cell body fiber bundles (SCB001-080, totalling 112 cells) with only one or two neurons per bundle. Many of them are also likely of embryonic origin.

We were able to identify another 6682 neurons that were not traced up to their cell bodies. For the neurons that arise from the contralateral side, we gave matching neuron names and associated CBF information, provided their specific arborization patterns gave us convincing identity information by comparison with cells that we identified in the right side of the brain. For the neurons arising from the ventralmost part of the brain outside of the hemibrain volume, we identified and gave them names if we could find convincingly specific arborization patterns, even if the CBF and cell body location data were missing. Sensory neurons that project to the specific primary sensory centers were also identified insofar as possible. In total, we typed and named 22,594 neurons.

Different stem cells sometimes give rise to neurons with very similar morphologies. We classified these as different types because of their distinct developmental origin and slightly different locations of their cell bodies and CBFs. Thus, the next step in neuron typing was to cluster neurons within each CBF group. This process consisted of three further steps, as shown in. First, we used NBLAST (Costa et al., 2016) to subject all the neurons of a particular CBF group to morphology-based clustering. Next, we used CBLAST, a new tool to cluster neurons based on synaptic connectivity (see the next section). This step is an iterative process, using neuron morphology as a template, regrouping neurons after more careful examination of neuron projection patterns and their connections. Neurons with similar connectivity characteristics but with distinguishable shapes were categorized into different morphology types. Those with practically indistinguishable shapes but with different connectivity characteristics were categorized into connectivity types within a morphology type. Finally, we validated the cell typing with extensive manual review and visual inspection. This review allowed us both to confirm cell type identity and help ensure neuron reconstruction accuracy. In total we identified 5229 morphology types and 5609 connectivity types in the hemibrain dataset. (See for the detailed numbers and for naming schemes for various neuron categories.)

In spite of this general rule, we assigned the same neuron type name for the neurons of different lineages in the following four cases.

Mushroom body intrinsic neurons called Kenyon cells, which are formed by a set of four near-identical neuroblasts (Ito et al., 1997) (see also the accompanying MB paper).

Columnar neurons of the central complex, where neurons arising from different stem cells form repetitive column-like arrangement and are near identical in terms of connectivity with tangential neurons (Hanesch et al., 1989; Wolff et al., 2015; Wolff and Rubin, 2018) (and the accompanying CX paper).

The PAM cluster of the dopaminergic neurons, where one of the hemilineages of the two clonal units forms near identical set of neurons (Lee et al., 2020) (accompanying MB paper).

Cell body fiber groupings for neurons of the lateral horn, where systematic neuron names have already been given based on the light microscopy analysis (Frechter et al., 2019), which did not allow for the precise segregation of very closely situated CBF bundles. Individual cell types exist within the same lineage, however.

‘Lumping’ versus ‘splitting’ is a difficult problem for classification. Following the experiences of taxonomy, we opted for splitting when we could not obtain convincing identity information, a decision designed to ease the task of future researchers. If we split two similar neuron types into Type 1 and Type 2, then there is a chance future studies might conclude that they are actually subsets of a common cell type. If so, then at that time we can simply merge the two types as Type 1, and leave the other type name unused, and publish a lookup table of the lumping process to keep track of the names that have been merged. The preceding studies can then be re-interpreted as the analyses on the particular subsets of a common neuron type. If, on the contrary, we lump the two similar neurons into a common type, then a later study finds they are actually a mixture of two neuron types, then it would not be possible to determine which of the two neuron types, or a mixture of them, was analyzed in preceding studies.

In the hemibrain, using the defined brain regions (neuropils) and reference to known expression driver strains, we were able to assign a cell type to many cells. Where possible, we matched previously defined cell types with those labeled in light data using a combination of Neuprint, an interactive analysis tool (described later), Color_MIP_mask search (Otsuna et al., 2018), and human recognition to find the matching cell types, especially in well-explored neuropils such as the mushroom body and central complex, where abundant cell type information was already available and where we are more confident in our anatomical expertise (see the accompanying MB and CX papers). Even though most of the cell types in the MB and CX were already known, we still found new cell types in these regions, an important vindication of our methods. In these cases, we tried to name them using the existing schemes for these regions, and further refined these morphological groupings with relevant information on connectivity.

To give names to neuron types, we categorized neurons that share certain characteristics into groups and distinguished individual types by adding identifiers (IDs) with numbers, uppercase letters, or combinations of these. (See for the summary of the naming schemes of all the neuron types). For example, the tangential neurons of the fan-shaped body (FB) of the central complex were grouped as ‘FB’, and an ID of their primary innervating FB layer was added with numbers 1–9. Different types of neurons that arborize in each layer were further distinguished by uppercase letters. Thus, for example the FB7B neurons are the second type of tangential neurons that arborize in the seventh layer of FB. We also used uppercase letters to subdivide the neuron types that have previously been reported as a single type to keep naming consistency. For example, a population of antennal lobe local neurons that has been known as LN2L was divided into five morphology subtypes as lLN2F, 2P, 2R, 2S, and 2T for their full, patchy, regional, star-like and tortuous arborization patterns while still indicating that they are part of the LN2 population. The letter ‘L’ at the end of the previous name, which referred to the cell body location on the lateral side of the AL, was moved in front of LN to keep consistency with the established naming scheme for the olfactory projection neurons (e.g., DA1_lPN).

Neuron types that are known to exist were sometimes not identified in the particular brain sample used for the hemibrain EM dataset. In such cases, the corresponding ID numbers were kept blank. For example, the MBON08 neurons were not identified in the current sample and the number was therefore skipped.

Although the morphology type names generally end with either numbers or uppercase letters, in a few cases lower case letters were used for distinguishing morphological subtypes to keep the naming convention of that cell group consistent. For example, subtypes of the neurons in the optic lobes were distinguished as, for example LC28a and LC28b, because such subtypes of the optic lobe neurons have historically been distinguished by lowercase letters.

If neurons of near-identical morphology could be further subdivided into different connectivity types, they were suffixed with an underscore and a lowercase letter, for example FB2F_a, FB2F_b, and FB2F_c. A neuron type without such a suffix consists of a single connectivity type.

The cell type names are indicated in the ‘type’ field of the NeuPrint database. In the ‘instance’ field, information about the side of the neuronal cell body, when it is known, is added as _R and _L after the cell type name. The name of the CBF group is indicated in the ‘cellBodyFiber’ field of the right-side neurons except for those that belong to AVM15, 18, 19, and PVM10 groups, and in the same field of the left-side neurons for those four CBF groups. For the rest of the neurons, the CBF information is shown in the ‘instance’ field in parentheses when it is known.

Across the brain, we looked for neurons that correspond to already known cell types, and as far as possible gave them consistent names. These include: olfactory projection neurons and local neurons associated with the antennal lobe (Tanaka et al., 2012; Bates et al., 2020; Marin et al., 2020), neurons associated with the lateral horn (Dolan et al., 2019; Frechter et al., 2019; Bates et al., 2020), aminergic and peptidergic neurons (Bergland et al., 2012; Busch et al., 2009; Mao and Davis, 2009; Martelli et al., 2017; Pech et al., 2013; Pooryasin and Fiala, 2015; Shao et al., 2017; White et al., 2010), neurons associated with the circadian clock (Helfrich-Förster et al., 2007), and neurons that express the fruitless gene (Cachero et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2010; Zhou et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2020).

In some cases, we found candidate neurons that do not precisely match previously identified neurons. For example, in addition to the three cell types that match the octopaminergic (OA) neurons OA-ASM1, 2 and 3 (Busch et al., 2009), we found two neuron types in the same location that appear to match some of the tdc2-Gal4 expressing neurons in the FlyCircuit database of single-cell labeling images (Chiang et al., 2011). Because of the remaining uncertainty we gave them the canonical names SMP143 and SMP149, but added ‘Tdc2 (OA)-ASM candidates’ in the Notes field. We also found that the FB2B neurons share the same cell body location and appear to match another type of tdc2-Gal4 expressing neurons in the FlyCircuit database. Although OA-immunoreactive neurites have been observed in the FB (Sinakevitch et al., 2005), it is not known from where they are derived. Considering that the particular neurons may produce only tyramine (TA) but not OA, we added ‘Tdc2 (TA)-ASM candidates’ in the Notes. Due to similar considerations, the number of candidate neurons may not match the actual known numbers for many neuron types.

For the multiglomerular olfactory projection neurons and local interneurons of the antennal lobe, we devised new naming schemes by expanding the naming scheme of uniglomerular projection neurons, which consists of the contributing antennal lobe glomerulus and the location of the cell body cluster (Bates et al., 2020; Marin et al., 2020). Because the list of contributing glomeruli is not a useful designator for the multiglomerular projection neurons, we used information about the antennal lobe tract (ALT) projection pathways instead. Unique type ID numbers were then added at the end of the names of the multiglomerular projection neurons (1-92) and local neurons (1-50). For the local neurons LN1-6 the numbers were kept consistent with the published neuron names (Tanaka et al., 2012); for the newly identified local neurons and for the multiglomerular projection neurons, ID numbers were sorted according to the cell body location from dorsal to ventral.

For the neurons associated with the lateral horn, we expanded the existing naming scheme (names such as PV5a1) based on the cell body cluster location (uppercase letters and first number), anatomically associated groups (lower case letter), and individual neuron type (last number), which has previously been applied for ≈30% of the lateral horn neurons (Frechter et al., 2019; Bates et al., 2020). The neuron types that have been defined in the lateral horn sometimes contain slightly larger morphological varieties of neurons than would be categorized as different types in the hemibrain volume. To reconcile this slight discrepancy while keeping the published neuron type names as consistent as possible, in some cases we used suffices _a, _b, etc., for distinguishing not only the neurons that are different in their connectivity but also those that have minute but distinct morphological differences. Because of this technical issue more neurons are distinguished by suffices in the lateral horn than in other brain regions.

In cases where we gave new neuron names to the already known ones, or slightly modified the existing names for the sake of naming scheme consistency, we indicated the most commonly used previous names in the notes field, from where users can look for further synonyms using the Virtual Fly Brain database (http://virtualflybrain.org).

For the optic lobe neurons, we categorized only the VPNs based primarily on the specific projection patterns of their axon terminals in the central brain. Newly identified neuron types were given higher numbers than those already used (Fischbach and Dittrich, 1989; Panser et al., 2016; Otsuna and Ito, 2006; Hausen, 1984). Neurons that arborize only in the optic lobe are not classified, except for several intrinsic neurons in the lobula, because the hemibrain dataset does not provide enough information about their projection patterns in the optic lobe for conclusive cell typing.

Olfactory-, thermo-, and hygro-receptor (sensory) neurons were named according to their target glomeruli in the antennal lobe (Fishilevich and Vosshall, 2005; Couto et al., 2005; Gallio et al., 2011; Enjin et al., 2016; Frank et al., 2017; Marin et al., 2020). Some of the auditory receptor neurons (Johnston’s organ neurons) were also identified, but their precise target zones in the antennal mechanosensory and motor center (Kamikouchi et al., 2006) were not determined because of the insufficient information in the hemibrain image volume.

The neurons associated with the ocellar ganglion (OCG), a detached ganglion just beneath the ocelli, were categorized into eight types based on the morphology of their terminals in the central brain. Precise classification of OCG neurons is not possible without the projection pattern information in the OCG. To remedy this problem the neurons that share the common projection patterns within the brain were classified as OCG1, OCG2, etc., and when the projection pattern information in the OCG is available they will be classified in more detail as OCG1A, OCG1B, etc.

Outside the heavily studied regions, and the neuron types explained above, the fly’s circuits are largely composed of cells of so-far unknown type. Because such neurons, in what is called the terra incognita of the fly brain, account for nearly 70% of the total neuron types, it was necessary to devise a systematic naming scheme to give them names that annotate reasonable morphological characteristics and are easy to pronounce. About 40% of these neurons extend their projections to regions outside of the imaged volume of the hemibrain EM dataset, such as the contralateral brain side, the ventralmost parts of the brain, and the optic lobes. Since whole brain reconstructions of such neurons will soon become available, the naming scheme should provide reasonable names for the neurons that are not fully traceable within the hemibrain image volume.

To address this problem, we tested various naming schemes using single-cell LM images of about 500 neuron types in these regions. LM images have much lower spatial resolution but visualize entire projection patterns across the brain compared to the EM data. We found the regions (neuropils) of the central brain with the most extensive arborization by counting the voxel numbers of the three-dimensional LM data. We also simulated the numbers of output and input synapses available in the EM data by assessing the number of boutons and spines - characteristic morphology of output and input synaptic sites - in the LM images. Regions with the largest number of output synapses tend to lie on the contralateral side of the brain, out of the hemibrain volume, making it difficult to use EM information as a primary determining factor. Regions with the largest number of input synapses often showed discrepancies between EM and LM images, mainly due to the varying completeness of fine dendritic fragments in the EM data. We found the names based on the neuropils with the largest number of voxels gave the most consistent names, regardless of whether we used the information of the entire brain or only the image area that corresponds to the hemibrain volume. Because the still unmapped fragments of input dendritic arborizations are thin and tiny, with much smaller volumes compared to the already mapped major branches, we found the voxel counts of dendrites are much less affected by potential incompleteness than the counts of input synapses.

We then applied the above LM-based naming scheme to the EM data of terra incognita neurons, and found that naming based on EM voxel count matched with either the neuropils with the largest or second-largest number of output or input synapses for more than 95% of the neuron types. For the remaining types, we took the neuropil names with the second largest voxel numbers, which resulted in near-perfect match with the neuron type name and either the region of the most major or second major output/input synapses, making the names reasonable for connectivity analysis.

There is one more factor we had to consider. Certain groups of neuron types tend to share common core projection patterns and differ slightly only in the extent of arbors in each neuropil. For functional interpretation it would be more convenient if such neurons were classified into the same category of neuropils. If we gave names simply to individual neuron types, however, such neurons tend to be scattered into various neuropil categories affected by the slight differences of arborization patterns. To address this problem, we performed NBLAST morphological clustering with a higher threshold than used for individual neuron typing, to group the neurons that share the same CBF bundle and rather similar morphology into a common neuropil category. This additional process, however, sometimes caused mismatches between the resulting neuropil name and the most major or second major output/input synapses if the arborization pattern of that neuron type deviates too much from the rest of the group. In these cases we split such neuron types from the group and assigned them into more appropriate neuropil categories.

Between 45 and 630 neuron types were assigned into each neuropil category and distinguished with three-digit ID numbers, for example SLP153 and WED048, using the standard nomenclature abbreviations of the neuropils (Ito et al., 2014). We gave sequential numbers to the neuron types that share the same CBF bundles and common core projection patterns so that neurons with similar appearance would be assigned similar names, as far as possible. Within each CBF group, neurons are sorted from the ones with broader and more extensive projections to the ones with restricted local arborizations. Because of this numbering scheme, broadly arborizing neurons have scattered numbers within the number range of each neuropil category, depending on the CBF groups they belong to.


Results of cell typing

Using the workflow of, we identified 22,594 neurons with 5229 morphological types and 5609 connectivity types. Over 2000 of these are types with only a single instance, although presumably, for a whole brain reconstruction, most of these types would have partners on the opposite side of the brain.

shows the number of distinct neuron types found in different brain regions. shows the distribution of the number of neurons in each cell type.

In spite of our extensive efforts, the assignment of type names to neurons is still ongoing. Because we opted for splitting rather than lumping of hard to differentiate cell types, it is possible that some of the neuron types may be merged with others in the future. In such cases, the number that is unused after the merger should not be re-used for other later-discovered neuron types, in order to avoid confusion. There may also be cases where neuron types could be split, or that neuron types that are missing in the current brain sample might be identified in EM or LM images of other brain samples. In such cases the newly identified neurons are expected to be given numbers above the current number range.

Although cell types and names may change, and indeed have already changed between versions v1.0 and v1.1 of our reconstruction, what will not change are the unique body ID numbers given in the database that refer to a particular (traced) cell in this particular image dataset. We strongly advise that such body IDs be included in any publications based on our data to avoid confusion as cell type names evolve.


CBLAST

As part of our effort to assign cell types, we built a tool for cell type clustering based on neuron connectivity, called CBLAST (by analogy with the existing NBLAST [Costa et al., 2016], which forms clusters based on the shapes of neurons). The overall flow of the tool is described in, and the code and instructions on how to install and run it can be found at https://github.com/connectome-neuprint/CBLAST (Plaza and Dreher, 2020; copy archived at https://github.com/elifesciences-publications/CBLAST).

Partitioning a network into clusters of nodes that exhibit similar connectivity is known as community detection or graph clustering (Fortunato and Hric, 2016). Numerous methods have been proposed for selecting such partitions, the best known being the stochastic block model. To non-theoreticians, the process by which most methods choose a partitioning is not intuitive, and the results are not easily interpretable. Furthermore, most approaches do not readily permit a domain expert to guide the partitioning based on their intuition or on other features of the nodes that are not evident in the network structure itself. In contrast, CBLAST is based on traditional data clustering concepts, leading to more intuitive results. Additionally, users can apply their domain expertise by manually refining the partitioning during successive iterations of the procedure. This is especially useful in the case of a network like ours, in which noise and missing data make it difficult to rely solely on connectivity to find a good partitioning automatically. Additionally, other graph clustering methods do not accommodate the notion of left-right symmetry amongst communities, a feature that is critical for assigning cell types in a connectome.

CBLAST clusters neurons together using a similarity feature score defined by how the neuron distributes inputs and outputs to different neuron types. However, this is a circular requirement since neuron types must already be defined to use this technique. CBLAST therefore uses an iterative approach, refining cell type definitions successively. Initial cell type groups are putatively defined using an initial set of features based on morphological overlap as in NBLAST and/or based on the distribution of inputs and outputs in defined brain regions. These initial groups are fed into CBLAST in which the user can visualize and analyze the results using plots such as that in. Given the straightforward similarity measure, the user can look at the input and output connections for each neuron to better understand the decision made by the clustering algorithm. As the definitions of cell type definitions are improved, the clustering becomes more reliable. In some cases, this readily exposes incompleteness (e.g., due to the boundary of the hemibrain sample) in some neurons which would complicate clustering even for more computationally intensive strategies such as a stochastic block model. Based on these interactions, the user makes decisions and refines the clusters manually, iterating until further changes are not observed.

Our large, dense connectome is a key requirement for CBLAST. Unless a significant fraction of a neuron’s inputs and outputs is known, neurons that are in fact similar may not cluster together correctly. This requirement is not absolute, as we note that CBLAST is often able to match left and right symmetric neurons, despite some of these left side neurons being truncated by the boundaries of the dataset. Nonetheless, reconstruction incompleteness and any noise in the reconstruction can contribute to noise in clustering results.

CBLAST usually generates clusters that are consistent with the morphological groupings of the neurons, with CBLAST often suggesting new sub-groupings as intended. This agreement serves as some validation of the concepts behind CBLAST. In some cases it can be preferable to NBLAST, since the algorithm is less sensitive to exact neuron location, and for many applications the connectivity is more important than the morphology. In, we show the results of using CBLAST on a few neuron types extracted from the ellipsoid body. The clusters are consistent with the morphology, with exception to a new sub-grouping for R3p being suggested as a more distinct group than type ExR7/ExR6.


Assessing morphologies and cell types

Verifying correctness and completeness in these data is a challenging problem because no existing full brain connectome exists against which our data might be compared. We devised a number of tests to check the main features: Are the morphologies correct? Are the regions and cell types correctly defined? Are the synaptic connection counts representative?

Assessing completeness is much easier than assessing correctness. Since the reconstruction is dense, we believe the census of cells, types, and regions should be essentially complete. The main arbors of every cell within the volume are reconstructed, and almost every cell is assigned a cell type. Similarly, since the identified brain regions nearly tile the entire brain, these are complete as well.

For checking morphologies, we searched for major missing or erroneous branches using a number of heuristics. Each neuron was reviewed by multiple proofreaders. The morphology of each neuron was compared with light microscopy data whenever it was available. When more than one cell of a given type was available (either left and right hemisphere, or multiple cells of the same type in one hemisphere), a human examined and compared them. This helped us find missing or extra branches, and also served as a double check on the cell type assignment. In addition, since the reconstruction is dense, all sufficiently large ‘orphan’ neurites were examined manually until they were determined to form part of a neuron, or they left the volume. To help validate the assigned cell types, proofreaders did pairwise checks of every neuron with types that had been similarly scored.

For subregions in which previous dense proofreading was available (such as the alpha lobes of the mushroom body), we compared the two connectomes. We were also helped by research groups using both sparse tracing in the full fly brain TEM dataset (Zheng et al., 2018), and our hemibrain connectome. They were happy to inform us of any inconsistencies. There are limits to this comparison, as the two samples being compared were of different ages and raised under different conditions, then prepared and imaged by different techniques, but this comparison would nevertheless have revealed any gross errors. Finally, we generated a ‘probabilistic connectome’ based on a different segmentation, and systematically visited regions where the two versions differed.


Assessing synapse accuracy

As discussed in the section on finding synapses, we evaluated both precision (the fraction of found synapses that are correct) and recall (fraction of true synapses that were correctly predicted) on sample cubes in each brain region. We also double checked by comparing our findings with a different, recently published, synapse detection algorithm (Buhmann et al., 2019).

As a final check, we also evaluated the end-to-end correctness of given connections between neurons for different cell types and across brain regions. Specifically, for each neuron, we sampled 25 upstream connections (T-bar located within the neuron) and 25 downstream connections (PSD located within the neuron), and checked whether the annotations were correct, meaning that the pre/post annotation was valid and assigned to the correct neuron.

In total, we examined 1735 traced neurons spanning 1518 unique cell types (therefore examining roughly 43,000 upstream connections and 43,000 downstream connections). The histogram of synapse accuracy (end-to-end precision of predicted synapses) is given in. Median precision for upstream connections, as well as for downstream connections, is 88%. Additionally, 90% of cell types have an accuracy of at least 70%. For the few worst cases, we manually refined the synapse predictions afterwards. We note that the worst outlier, having an upstream connection accuracy of 12%, is both a case involving few total connections (17 T-bars), and some ambiguity in the ground-truth decisions (whether the annotated location is an actual T-bar).

We also evaluated single-connection pathways across each brain region. In the fly, functionally important connections are thought typically to have many synapses, with the possible exception of cases where many neurons of the same type synapse onto the same downstream partner. However, the presence of connections represented by few synapses is also well known, even if the biological importance of these is less clear. Regardless, we wanted to ensure that even single connection pathways were mostly correct. We sampled over 5500 single-connection pathways, distributed across 57 brain regions. Mean synapse precision per brain region was 76.1%, suggesting that single-connection accuracy is consistent with overall synapse prediction accuracy.

We also undertook a preliminary evaluation of two-connection pathways (two synapses between a single pair of neurons). We sampled 100 such two-connection pathways within the FB. Overall synapse precision (over the 200 synapses) is 79%, consistent with the single-edge accuracy. Moreover, the results also suggest that synapse-level accuracy is largely uncorrelated with pathway/bodies, implying that the probability that both synapses in a two-connection pathway were incorrect is 4.4%, close to the observed empirical value of 3%. (Applying a goodness of fit test with a null hypothesis of independence gives a p value of 0.7.)


Assessing connection completeness

A synapse in the fly’s brain consists of a presynaptic density (with a characteristic T-bar) and typically several postsynaptic partners (PSDs). The T-bars are contained in larger neurites, and most (>90%) of the T-bars in our dataset were contained in identified neurons. The postsynaptic densities are typically in smaller neurites, and it is these that are difficult for both machine and human to connect with certainty.

With current technology, tracing all fine branches in our EM images is impractical, so we sampled among them (at completeness levels typically ranging from 20% to 85%) and traced as many as practical in the allotted time. The goal is to provide synapse counts that are representative, since completeness is beyond reach and largely superfluous. Assuming the missing PSDs are independent (which we try to verify), then the overall circuit emerges even if a substantial fraction of the connections are missing. If a connection has a synapse count of 10, for example, then it will be found in the final circuit with more than 99.9% probability, provided at least half the individual synapses are traced.

If unconnected small twigs are the main source of uncertainty in our data (as we believe to be the case), then as the proofreading proceeds the synapse counts of existing connections should only increase. Of course corrections resulting in lower synapse counts, such as correcting a false connection or removing an incorrect synapse, are also possible, but are considerably less likely. To see if our proofreading process worked as expected, we took a region that had been read to a lower percentage completion and then spent the manual effort to reach a higher percentage, and compared the two circuits. (A versioned database such as DVID is enormously helpful here.) If our efforts were successful, ideally what we see is that almost all connections that changed had more synapses, very few connections got fewer synapses, and no new strong (many synapse) connections appeared (since all strong connections should already be present even in low coverage proofreading). If this is the behavior we find, we could be reasonably certain that the circuits found are representative for all many-synapse connections.

shows such an analysis. The results support our view that the circuits we report reflect what would be observed if we extrapolated to assign all pre- and postsynaptic elements.


Interpreting the connection counts

Given the complexity of the reconstruction process, and the many different errors that could occur, how confident should the user be that the returned synapse counts are valid? This section gives a quick guide in the absence of detailed investigation. The number of synapses we return is the number we found. The true number could range from slightly less, largely due to false synapse predictions, to considerably more, in the regions with low percentage reconstructed. For connections known to be in a specific brain region, the reciprocal of the completion percentage (as shown in) gives a reasonable estimate of the undercount.

If we return a count of 0 (the neurons are not connected), there are two cases. If the neurons do not share any brain regions, then the lack of connections is real. If they do share a brain region or regions, then a count of 0 is suspect. It is possible that there might be a weak connection (count 1–2) and less likely there is a connection of medium strength (3–9 synapses). Strong connections can be confidently ruled out, minus the small chance of a mis- or un-assigned branch with many synapses.

If we report a weak connection (1–2 synapses), then the true strength might range from 0 (the connection does not exist) through a weak connection (3–9 synapses). If your model or analysis relies on the strength of these weak connections, it is a good idea to manually check our reconstruction. If your analysis does not depend on knowledge of weak connections, we recommend ignoring connections based on three or fewer synapses.

If we report a medium strength connection (3–9 synapses) then the connection is real. The true strength could range from weak to the lower end of a strong connection.

If we report a strong connection (10 or more synapses), the connection not only exists, but is strong. It may well be considerably stronger than we report.


Data representation

The representation of connectomics data is a significant problem for all connectomics efforts. The raw image data on which our connectome is based is larger than 20 TB, and takes 2 full days to download even at a rate of 1 gigabit/second. Looking forward, this problem will only get worse. Recent similar projects are generating petabytes worth of data (Yin et al., 2019), and a mouse brain of 500 mm3, at a typical FIB-SEM resolution of 8 nm isotropic, would require almost 1000 petabytes.

In contrast, most users of connectivity information want a far smaller amount of much more specific information. For example, a common query is ‘what neurons are downstream (or upstream) of a given target neuron?’. This question can be expressed in a few tens of characters, and the desired answer, the top few partners, fits on a single page of text.

Managing this wide range of data, from the raw gray-scale through the connectivity graph, requires a variety of technologies. An overview of the data representations we used to address these needs is shown in.

This organization offers several advantages. In most cases, instead of transferring files, the user submits queries for the portion of data desired. If the user needs only a subset of the data (as almost all users do) then they need not cope with the full size of the data set. Different versions of the data can be managed efficiently behind the scenes with a versioned database such as DVID (Katz and Plaza, 2019) that keeps track of changes and can deliver data corresponding to any previous version. The use of existing software infrastructure, such as Google buckets or the graph package neo4j, which are already optimized for large data, helps with both performance and ease of development. The advanced user is not limited to these interfaces - for those who may wish to validate or extend our results; we have provided procedures whereby the user can make personal copies of each representation, including the grayscale, the DVID data storage, and our editing and proofreading software. These allow other researchers to establish an entirely independent version of all we have done, completely under their control. Contact the authors for the details of how to copy all the underlying data and software.


What are the data types?

Grayscale data correspond to traditional electron microscope images. This is written only once, after alignment, but often read, because it is required for segmentation, synapse finding, and proofreading. We store the grayscale data, eight bits per voxel, in Google buckets, which facilitates access from geographically distributed sites.

Segmentation, synapses, and identifying regions annotate and give biological meaning to the grayscale data. For segmentation, we assign a 64 bit neuron ID to each voxel. Despite the larger size per voxel (64 vs 8 bits) compared with the grayscale, the storage required is much smaller (by a factor of more than 20) since segmentation compresses well. Although the voxel level segmentation is not needed for connectivity queries, it may be useful for tasks such as computing areas and cross-sections at the full resolution available, or calculating the distance between a feature and the boundary.

Synapses are stored as point annotations - one point for a presynaptic T-bar, and one point for each of its postsynaptic densities (or PSDs). The segmentation can then be consulted to find the identity of the neurons containing their connecting synapses.

The compartment map of the brain is stored as a volume specified at a lower resolution, typically a 32 × 32 × 32 voxel grid. At 8 nm voxels, this gives a 256 nm resolution for brain regions, comparable to the resolution of confocal laser scanning microscopy.

Unlike the grayscale data, segmentation, synapses, and regions are all modified during proofreading. This requires a representation that must cope with many users modifying the data simultaneously, log all changes, and be versioned. We use DVID (Katz and Plaza, 2019), developed internally, to meet these requirements.

Neuron skeletons are computed from the segmentation (Zhao and Plaza, 2014), and not entered or edited directly. A skeleton representation describes each neuron with (branching) centerlines and diameters, typically in the SWC format popularized by the simulator Neuron (Carnevale and Hines, 2006). These are necessarily approximations, since it is normally not possible (for example) to match both the cross-sectional area and the surface area of each point along a neurite with such a representation. But SWC skeletons are a good representation for human viewing, adequate for automatic morphology classification, and serve as input to neural simulation programs such as ‘Neuron’. SWC files are also well accepted as an interchange format, used by projects such as NeuroMorpho (Ascoli et al., 2007) and FlyBrain (Shinomiya et al., 2011).

The connectivity graph is also derived from the data and is yet more abstract, describing only the identity of neurons and a summary of how they connect - for example, Neuron ID1 connects to neuron ID2 through a certain number of synapses. In our case, it also retains the brain region information and the location of each synapse. Such a connectivity graph is both smaller and faster than the geometric data, but sufficient for most queries of interest to biologists, such as finding the upstream or downstream partners of a neuron. A simple connectivity graph is often desired by theorists, particularly within brain regions, or when considering neural circuits in which each neuron can be represented as a single node.

A final, even more abstract form is the adjacency matrix: This compresses the connectivity between each pair of neurons to a single number. Even this most economical form requires careful treatment in connectomics. As our brain sample contains more than 25K traced neurons as well as many unconnected fragments, the adjacency matrix has more than a billion entries (most of which are zero). Sparse matrix techniques, which report only the non-zero coefficients, are necessary for practical use of such matrices.


Accessing the data

For the hemibrain project, we provide access to the data through a combination of a software interface (Clements et al., 2020) and a server (https://neuprint.janelia.org, also accessible through https://doi.org/10.25378/janelia.12818645). Login is via any Google account; users who wish to remain anonymous can create a separate account for access purposes only. Data are available in the form of gray-scale, pixel-level segmentation, skeletons, and a graph representation. Two previous connectomics efforts are available as well (a seven-column optic lobe reconstruction [Takemura et al., 2015] and the alpha lobe of the mushroom body [Takemura et al., 2017]). These can be found at https://neuprint-examples.janelia.org.

The most straightforward way to access the hemibrain data is through the Neuprint (Clements et al., 2020) interactive browser. This is a web-based application that is intended to be usable by biologists with minimal or no training. It allows the selection of neurons by name, type, or brain region, displays neurons, their partners, and the synapses between these in a variety of forms, and provides many of the graphs and summary statistics that users commonly want.

Neuprint also supports queries from languages such as Python (Sanner, 1999) and R, as used by the neuroanatomy tool NatVerse (Manton et al., 2019). Various formats are supported, including SWC format for the skeletons. In particular, the graph data can be queried through an existing graph query language, Cypher (Francis et al., 2018), as seen in the example below. The schema for the graph data is shown in.

MATCH (n:Neuron) - [c:ConnectsTo] -> (t:Neuron) WHERE t.type = `MBON18'

RETURN n.type, n.bodyId, c.weight ORDER BY c.weight DESCENDING

This query looks for all neurons that are presynaptic to any neuron of type ‘MBON18’. For each such neuron it returns the types and internal identities of the presynaptic neuron, and the count of synapses between them. The whole list is ordered in order of decreasing synapse count. This is just an illustration for a particular query that is quite common and supported in Neuprint without the need for any programming language.

Adjacency matrices, if needed, can be derived from the graph representation. We provide a small demonstration program that queries the API and generates such matrices, either with or without the brain regions. The two matrices themselves are available in gzipped Python format.

The raw greyscale images, with overlays of segmentation and feature masks (such as glia and mitochondria), can be viewed in the publicly available tool NeuroGlancer (Perlman, 2019). This viewer can be selected from the Neuprint browser.

For more information on accessing data and other hemibrain updates, please see https://www.janelia.org/project-teams/flyem/hemibrain.


Matching EM and light microscopy data

No two flies are identical, and brain samples differ in size and orientation. Furthermore, different preparation methods cause tissues to swell and shrink by varying amounts. Therefore, the first step when comparing the features of different brains is registration to a common reference frame.

Some of these differences are illustrated in. Compared to the hemibrain EM data, the confocal laser scanning microscopy images of the previous brain atlas (Ito et al., 2014) are about 17% smaller, and the JRC2018 unisex template brain used for the registration of EM and light microscopy brain images (Bogovic et al., 2020) is about 30% smaller. Since unfixed brains right after dissection in saline are 15–20% larger than the antibody-labeled brains mounted in 80% glycerol – similar to – a raw female brain will be nearly the same size as the hemibrain EM stack.

The orientation of the brain samples may also vary. There is about 18.5° of tilt between the hemibrain EM stack and the 2014 brain atlas, and about 14° of tilt between hemibrain EM and the JRC2018 template. To create matching vertical or horizontal sections, therefore, each image stack should be re-sliced after applying the corresponding rotation.

The raw EM data, segmentation, and skeletons (as displayed in Neuprint) were all computed in a reference frame corresponding to, whereas the light lines and tools such as Color_MIP_mask search (Otsuna et al., 2018) use the reference frame of. Therefore, registration is required to map between the EM and light representations.

We registered the hemibrain EM data to the JRC2018 Drosophila template brain using an automatic registration algorithm followed by manual correction. We began by using the automated T-bar predictions (described in section on synapse prediction) to generate a T-bar density volume rendered at a resolution comparable to those from light microscopic images. This hemibrain synapse density volume was automatically registered to the template brain using elastix (Klein et al., 2010). The resulting registration was manually fine-tuned using BigWarp (Bogovic et al., 2016). The total transform is the composition of the elastix and BigWarp transformations, and can be found at https://www.janelia.org/open-science/jrc-2018-brain-templates. We estimated a corresponding inverse transformation and make that available as well.

Using these transformations, an implementation that matches EM to light lines, and vice versa, is publicly accessible at https://neuronbridge.janelia.org/. This matching software is accessible directly from the Neuprint browser, where it can be launched from the tabular display of selected neurons. For those not familiar with NeuronBridge, an explanatory video explains the matching process. The details of the underlying algorithm will be covered in a separate paper by Otsuna et al., but are briefly sketched here.

If starting from an EM neuron of interest, researchers can use NeuronBridge to identify GAL4 lines labeling that neuron. First, the EM representation of the neuron is spatially transformed into the JRC 2018 unisex template space where GAL4 driver line images are registered. The EM neuron is then used to create a mask (Otsuna et al., 2018) that narrows the search space considerably, making it easier to find corresponding neurons even in crowded GAL4 driver line images.

The opposite direction, finding an EM neuron that corresponds to a light neuron, is also supported. In this case the scoring of a potential match must be modified, since the light image contains the entire neuron, but many EM neurons are trunctated by the limits of our reconstructed volume. Both of these cases are discussed in the upcoming paper, with examples.

As another option, since hemibrain neurons are skeletonized, users can query GAL4 neuronal skeleton databases using NBLAST (Costa et al., 2016).


Longer term storage of data, and archival references

Historically, archival data from biology data have been expressed as files that are included with supplementary data. However, for connectivity data this practice has two main problems. First, the data are large, and hard to store. Journals, for example, typically limit supplemental data to a few 10s of megabytes. The data here are about 6 orders of magnitude larger. Second, connectome data are not static, during proofreading and even after initial publication. As proofreading proceeds, the data improve in their completeness and quality. The question then is how to refer to the data as they existed at some point in time, required for reproducibility of scientific results. If represented as files, this would require many copies, checkpointed at various times - the ‘as submitted’ version, the ‘as published’ version, the ‘current best version’, and so on.

We resolve this, at least for now, by hosting the data ourselves and making them available through query mechanisms. Underlying our connectome data is a versioned database (DVID) so it is technically possible to access every version of the data as it is revised. However, as it requires effort to host and format this data for the Neuprint browser and API, only selected versions (called named versions) are available by default from the website, starting with the initial versions, which are ‘hemibrain:v1.0’ and the much improved ‘hemibrain:v1.1’. Since multiple versions are available, when reproducibility is required (such as when referencing the data in a paper) it is best to refer explicitly to the version used by name (such as ‘hemibrain:v1.1’) because we expect new milestone versions every few months, at least at first. We will supply a DOI for each of these versions, and each is archived, can be viewed and queried through the web browser and APIs at any time, and will not change.

The goal of multiple versions is that later versions should be of higher quality. Towards this end we have implemented several systems for reporting errors so we can correct them. Users can add annotations in NeuroGlancer (Perlman, 2019), the application used in conjunction with Neuprint to view image data, where they believe there are such errors. To make this process easier, we provide a video explaining it. We will review these annotations and amend those that we agree are problems. Users can also contact us via email about problems they find.

Archival storage is an issue since, unlike genetic data, there is not yet an institutional repository for connectomics data and the data are too large for journals to archive. We pledge to keep our data available for at least the next 10 years.


Analysis

Of necessity, most previous analyses have concentrated on particular circuits, cell types, or brain regions with relevance to specific functions or behaviors. For example, a classic paper about motifs (Song et al., 2005) sampled the connections between one cell type (layer five pyramidal neurons) in one brain region (rat visual cortex), and found a number of non-random features, such as over-represented reciprocal connections and a log-normal strength distribution. However, it has never been clear which of these observations generalize to other cell types, other brain regions, and the brain as a whole. We are now in a position to make much stronger statements, ranging over all brain regions and cell types.

In addition, many analyses are best performed (or can only be performed) on dense connectomes. Type-wide observations depend on a complete census of that cell type, and depending on the observation, a complete census of upstream and downstream partners as well. Some analyses, such as null observations about motifs (where certain motifs do not occur in all or portions of the fly’s brain) can only be undertaken on dense connectomes.


Compartment statistics

One analysis enabled by a dense whole-brain reconstruction involves the comparison between the circuit architectures of different brain areas within a single individual.

The compartments vary considerably. shows the connectivity statistics of compartments that are completely contained within the volume, have at least 100 neurons, and have the largest or smallest value of various statistics. Across regions, the number of neurons varies by a factor of 74, the average number of partners of each neuron by a factor of 36, the network diameter (defined as the maximum length of the shortest path between any two neurons) by a factor of 4, the average strength of connection between partner neurons by a factor of 5, and the fraction of reciprocal connections by a factor of 5. The average graph distance between neurons is more conserved, differing by a factor of only 2.


Paths in the fly brain are short

Neurons in the fly brain are tightly interconnected, as shown in, which plots what fraction of neuron pairs are connected as a function of the number of interneurons between them. Three quarters of all possible pairs are connected by a path with fewer than three interneurons, even when only connections with ≥5 synapses are included. If weaker connections are allowed, the paths become shorter yet. These short paths and tight coupling are very different from human designed systems, which have much longer path lengths connecting node pairs. As an example, a standard electrical engineering benchmark (S38584 from Brglez et al., 1989) is shown alongside the hemibrain data in. The connection graph for this example has roughly the same number of nodes as the graph of the fly brain, but pair-to-pair connections involve paths more than an order of magnitude longer – a typical node pair is separated by 60 intervening nodes. This is because a typical computational element in a human designed circuit (a gate) connects only to a few other elements, whereas a typical neuron receives input from, and sends outputs to, hundreds of other neurons.


Distribution of connection strength

The distribution of connection strengths has been studied in mammalian tissue, looking at specific cell types in specific brain areas. These findings, such as the log-normal distribution of connection strengths in rat cortex, do not appear to generalize to flies. Assuming the strength of a connection is proportional to the number of synapses in parallel, we can plot the distribution of connection strengths, summing over the whole central brain, as shown in. We find a nearly pure power law with an exponential cutoff, very different from the log-normal distribution of strengths found by Song et al., 2005 in pyramidal cells in the rat cortex, or the bimodal distribution found for pyramidal cells in the mouse by Dorkenwald et al., 2019. However, we caution that these analyses are not strictly comparable. Even aside from the very different species examined, the three analyses differ. Both Song and Dorkenwald looked at only one cell type, with excitatory connections only, but one looked at electrical strength while the other looked at synapse area as a proxy for strength. In our analysis, we use synapse count as a proxy for connection strength, and look at all cell types, including both excitatory and inhibitory synapses.


Small motifs

As mentioned earlier, there have been many studies of small motifs, usually involving limited circuits, cell types, and brain regions. We emphatically confirm some traditional findings, such as the over-representation of reciprocal connections. We observe this in all brain regions and among all cell types, confirming similar findings in the antennal lobe (Horne et al., 2018). This can now be assumed to be a general feature of the fly’s brain, and possibly all brains. In the fly, the incidence varies somewhat by compartment, however, as shown in.


Large motifs

We define a large motif as a graph structure that involves every cell of an abundant type (N ≥ 20). The most tightly bound motif is a clique, in which every cell of a given type is connected to every other cell of that type, with synapses in both directions. Such connections, as illustrated in, are extremely unlikely in a random wiring model. Consider, for example, the clique of ER4d cells found in the ellipsoid body, as shown in. In the ellipsoid body, two cells are connected with an average probability of 0.19. Therefore, the odds of finding all 600 possible connections between ER4d cells, assuming a random wiring model, is.

In the fly’s brain, only a few cell types form large cliques, as shown in. All true cliques are among the ring neurons in the central complex, with a near-clique among the KCab-p cells of the mushroom body. The cell types PFNa and PFNd are included although they do not form a clique as shown in. However, these neurons are part of symmetrical structures, the noduli, that occur on both sides of the brain. Within each side, the cells form a clique, as shown in. The cliques within the central complex, and their potential operation, are discussed in detail in the companion paper on the central complex by Jayaraman et al.

The next most tightly bound motifs are individual cells that connect both to and from all cells of a given type, but are themselves of a different type. This is illustrated in. Such a motif is often speculated to be a gain or sparseness controlling circuit, where the single neuron reads the collective activation of a population and then controls their collective behavior. A well-known example is the APL neuron in the mushroom body, which connects both to and from all the Kenyon cells, and is thought to regulate the sparseness of the Kenyon cell activation (Lin et al., 2014).

We search for this motif by looking at cells with few instances (one or two) connecting bidirectionally to almost all cells (at least 90%) of an abundant type (N ≥ 20). We find this motif in three regions of the brain – it is common in the CX (73 different cells overseeing 22 cell types), the optic lobe circuits (19 cells overseeing 14 types), and somewhat in the MB (12 types overseeing nine types). A spreadsheet containing these cell types, who they connect to, and the numbers and strengths of their connections is described in the appendix and included as supplementary data. We only analyze the optical circuits here, since the mushroom body and central complex are the subjects of companion papers. We observe three variations on this motif - a single cell connected to all of a type (found five times), a single cell with bidirectional connections to many types (found once), and multiple cells all connected bidirectionally to a single type, found three times. We find one circuit that is a combination: There is one cell that connects bidirectionally to all the LC17 neurons, and then a higher order cell that connects bidirectionally to a larger set (LPLC1, LPLC2, LLP1, LPC1, and LC17). In this case, these are all looming-sensitive cells and hence these circuits may regulate the features of the overall looming responses. It is tempting to speculate that the more complex structures of arose from the simpler structures of (a) through cell type duplication followed by divergence, but the connectomes of many more related species will be needed before this argument could be made quantitative.

The least tightly bound large motif is a cell that connects either to or from (but not both) all cells of a given type, as shown in. Examples include the mushroom body output neurons (Takemura et al., 2017). This is a very common motif, found in many regions. We find more than 500 examples of this in the fly’s brain.


Brain regions and electrical response

How does the compartmentalization of the fly brain affect neural computation? In a few cases this has been established. For example, the CT1 neuron performs largely independent computations in each branch (Meier and Borst, 2019), whereas estimates show that within the medulla, the delays within each neuron are likely not significant for single column optic lobe neurons, and hence the neurons likely perform only a single computation (Takemura et al., 2013). Similarly, compartments of PEN2 neurons in the protocerebral bridge have been shown to respond entirely differently from their compartments in the ellipsoid body (Green et al., 2017; Turner-Evans et al., 2019).

Our detailed skeleton models allow us to construct electrical models of neurons. (In what follows, we use the word ‘compartment’ to mean a named physical region of the brain, as shown in, as opposed to the electrical sub-divisions used in simulation.) In particular, to look more generally at the issues of intra– vs inter–compartment delays and amplitudes, we can construct a linear passive model for each neuron. Our method is similar to that elsewhere (Segev et al., 1985), except that instead of using right cylinders, we represent each segment of the skeleton as a truncated cone. This is then used to derive the axonic resistance, the membrane resistance, and membrane capacitance for each segment. To analyze the effect of compartment structure on neuron operation, we inject the neuron at a postsynaptic density (input) with a signal corresponding to a typical synaptic input (1 nS conductance, 1 ms width, 0.1 ms rise time constant, 1 ms fall time constant, 60 mV reversal potential). We then compute the response at each of the T-bar sites (outputs). Since the synapses, both input and output, are annotated by the brain region that contains them, this allows us to calculate the amplitudes and delays from each synapse (or a sample of synapses) in each compartment to each output synapse in all other compartments.

In general, we find the compartment structure of the neuron is clearly reflected in the electrical response. Consider, for example, the EPG neuron with arbors in the ellipsoid body, the protocerebral bridge, and the gall (the gall is a sub-compartment of the LAL, the lateral accessory lobe). shows the responses to synaptic input in the gall. Within the gall, the delays are very short, and the amplitude relatively high and variable, depending somewhat on the input and output synapse within the gall. From the gall to other regions, the delays are longer (typically a few milliseconds) and the amplitudes much smaller and nearly constant, largely independent of the exact transmitting and receiving synapse. There is a very clean separation between the within-compartment and across-compartment delays and amplitudes, as shown in. The same overall behavior is true for inputs into the other regions - short delays and strong responses within the compartment, with longer delays and smaller amplitudes to other compartments.

This simple pattern motivates a model that describes delays and amplitudes not as a single number, but as an matrix, where N is the number of compartments. Each row contains the estimated amplitude and delay, measured in each compartment, for a synaptic input in the given compartment. This gives a much improved estimate of the linear response. For the example EPG neuron above, with nominal values for, and, if we represent all delays by a single number then the standard deviation of the error is 0.446 ms. If instead we represent the delays as a 3 × 3 matrix indexed by the compartment, the average error is 0.045 ms, for 10x greater accuracy. Similarly, the average error in amplitude drops from 0.168 mv to 0.021 mv, an eightfold improvement. While the improvement in error will depend on the neuron topology, in all cases it will be more accurate than a point model, for relatively little increase in complexity.

The absolute values of delay and amplitude are strongly dependent on the electrical parameters of the cell, however. A wide range of electrical properties has been reported in the fly literature and it is plausible that these vary on a cell-to-cell basis. In addition gap junctions, which are not included in our model, could affect the apparent value of. In light of these uncertainties, we simulate with minimum, medium, and maximal values of and, for a total of 9 cases, as shown in. All are needed since the resistance parameters interact non-linearly. We fix the value of at 0.01 F/m2 since this value is determined by the membrane thickness and is not expected to vary from cell to cell (Kandel et al., 2000). The results over the parameter range are shown in for the case of the EPG neuron above for delay from the gall to the PB. The intra-compartment and between-compartment values are well separated for any value of the parameters (not shown).

Programs that deduce synaptic strength and sign by fitting a computed response to a connectome and measured electrical or calcium imaging data (Tschopp et al., 2018) may at some point require estimates of the delays within cells. If this is required, the above results suggest this could be accomplished with reasonable accuracy with a compartment-to-compartment delay table and two additional parameters per neuron, and. This is relatively few new parameters in addition to the many synaptic strengths already fitted.

A number of neurons have parallel connections in separate compartments. This motif is common in the fly’s brain – about 5% of all connections having a strength ≥6 are spread across two or more non-adjacent compartments. Given the increased delays and lower amplitudes of cross-compartment responses, this type of interaction differs electrically from those in which all connections are contained in a single compartment. A point neuron model cannot generate an accurate response for such connections – a synapse in region A will result in a fast response in A and a slower, smaller response in B, and vice versa, even though both of these events involve communication between the same two neurons. It is not known if this configuration has a significant influence on the neurons’ operation.

From these models, we conclude (a) the compartment structure of the fly brain shows up directly in the electrical response of the neurons, and (b) the compartment structure, although defined anatomically, matches that of the electrical response. From the clear separation in, it is likely that the same compartment definitions could be found starting with the electrical response, although we have not tried this. (c) These results suggest a low dimensional model for neural operation, at least in the linear region. A small region-to-region matrix can represent the delays and amplitudes well. (d) Absolute delays depend strongly (but in a very predictable manner) on the values of axial and membrane resistance, which can vary both from animal to animal and from cell to cell. (e) Neurons that have parallel connections in separate compartments have a different electrical response than they would have with the same total number of synapses in a single compartment.


Rent’s rule analysis

Rent’s rule (Lanzerotti et al., 2005) is an empirical observation that in human designed computing systems, when the system is packed as tightly as possible, at every level of the hierarchy the required communication (the number of pins) scales as a power law of the amount of contained computation, measured in gates. Rent’s rule is an observed relationship, not derived from underlying theory, and the relationship is not exact and still contains scatter. A biological equivalent might be the observation that brain size tends to vary as a power law of body size (Harvey and Krebs, 1990), across a wide range of species occupying very different ecological and behavioral niches. Rent’s rule is roughly true over many orders of magnitude in scale, and for almost every system in which it has been measured. Somewhat surprisingly, Rent’s rule applies almost independently of the function performed by the computation being performed, and at every level of a hierarchical system. It also applies whether the compactness criterion is minimization of communication (partitioning) or physical close packing.

Rent’s rule is expressed as

where a is a scale factor (typically in the range 1–4), and b is the ‘Rent exponent’ describing how the number of connections to the compartment varies as a function of the amount of computation performed in the compartment. The Rent exponent has a theoretical range of 0.0 to 1.0, where 0 represents a constant number of connections, with no dependence on the amount of computation performed, and 1.0 represents a circuit in which every computation is visible on a connection. Human designed computational systems occupy almost the full range, from spreadsheets in which every computation is visible, to largely serial systems in which minimizing communication (pins) is critical. This relationship is shown in. However, when the overriding criterion is that the system must be packed as tightly as possible, Rent observed that the exponent of the power law falls in a close range of roughly 0.5–0.7.

For electrical circuits, the computation is measured in gates, and the connections are measured by pin count. These ranges are shown in for circuits that are roughly the size of the fly’s brain, packed in either two (Yang et al., 2001) or three (Das et al., 2004) dimensions.

Also shown in this plot are the values for the fly’s brain computational regions. In this case, the computation is measured as the number of contained T-bars, and the connection count is the number of neurons that have at least one synapse both inside and outside the compartment. (Very similar results are obtained if the computation is measured as the number of PSDs, or the number of unique connection pairs). Almost all the fly brain compartments fall well within the range of exponents expected for packing-dominated systems, while the ellipsoid body (EB) falls just outside the expected area. This is perhaps due to the large number of strongly connected clique-containing circuits in the ellipsoid body, since such circuits have relatively few connections for the amount of synapses they contain.

Both human designed and biological systems have huge incentives to pack their computation as tightly as possible. A tighter packing of the same computation yields faster operation, lower energy consumption, less material cost, and lower mass. A natural speculation, therefore, is that both the human-designed and evolved systems are dominated by packing considerations, and that both have found similar solutions.


Conclusions and future work

In this work, we have achieved a dream of anatomists that is more than a century old. For at least the central brain of at least one animal with a complex brain and sophisticated behavior, we have a complete census of all the neurons and all the cell types that constitute the brain, a definitive atlas of the regions in which they reside, and a graph representing how they are connected.

To achieve this, we have made improvements to every stage of the reconstruction process. Better means of sample preparation, imaging, alignment, segmentation, synapse finding, and proofreading are all summarized in this work and will form the basis of yet larger and faster reconstructions in the future.

We have provided the data for all the circuits of the central brain, at least as defined by nerve cells and chemical synapses. This includes not only circuits of regions that are already the subject of extensive study, but also a trove of circuits whose structure and function are yet unknown.

We have provided a public resource that should be a huge help to all who study fly neural circuits. Finding upstream and downstream partners, a task that until now has typically taken months of challenging experiments, is now replaced by a lookup on a publicly available web site. Detailed circuits, which used to require considerable patience, expertise, and expertise to acquire, are now available for the cost of an internet query.

More widely, a dense connectome is a valuable resource for all neuroscientists, enabling novel, system-wide analyses, as well as suggesting roles for specific pathways. A surprising revelation is the richness of anatomical synaptic engagements, which far exceeds pathways required to support identified fly behaviors, and suggests that most behaviors have yet to be identified.

Finally, we have started the process of analyzing the connectome, though much remains to be done. We have quantified the difference between computational compartments, determined that the distribution of strengths is different from that reported in mammals, discovered cliques and other structures and where these occur, examined the effect of compartmentalization on electrical properties, and provided evidence that the wiring of the brain is consistent with optimizing packing.

Many of the extensions of this work are obvious and already underway. Not all regions of the hemibrain have been read to the highest accuracy possible, insofar as we have concentrated first on the regions overlapping with other projects, such as the central complex and the mushroom body. We will continue to update other sections of the brain, and distributed circuits such as clock and modulatory neurons that are not confined to one region, but spread throughout the brain.

There is much more to be learned about the graph properties of the brain, and how these relate to its function.

The two sexes of the Drosophila brain are known to differ (Auer and Benton, 2016). so that reconstructing a male fly is critical to compare the circuits of the two sexes. A ventral nerve cord (VNC) should be reconstructed, preferably attached to the brain of the same individual, since the circuits in the VNC are known to be crucial for fly motor behavior (Yellman et al., 1997). At least one optic lobe should be included to simplify analysis of visual inputs to the central brain. A whole brain connectome is preferable to the hemibrain, since then most cell types would have at least two examples, left and right, which would lend increased confidence to our reconstructions. It would also provide complete reconstruction to the many neurons that span the brain, especially the clock and modulatory neurons, and are incomplete in the hemibrain. These four goals are combined in a project that is currently underway, to image and reconstruct an entire male central nervous system (CNS) including the VNC and optic lobes.

We continue to improve sample preparation, imaging, and reconstruction both to decrease the efforts expended on reconstruction and to speed reconstruction of more specimens. Improvements include multi-beam imaging, etching methods (Hayworth et al., 2020) that can handle larger areas, and yet better reconstruction techniques. These improvements, however, will still rely on FIB-SEM technology, and additional methods will likely be required to fill in other information. Gap junctions will continue to be difficult to see in FIB-SEM, and other methods such as optical labeling, expansion microscopy, and RNA-SEQ (to find which neurons express gap junction proteins) will be required. Methods for estimating the extent of diffusion of the secreted modulatory transmitters and gaseous signal molecules such as NO remain to be established. Different staining methods (and expression driver lines) may be needed to study glia to the same extent we currently study neurons. A wide variety of techniques will be needed to understand the subcellular architecture of the neurons we have reconstructed. Finally, larger animal brains beckon, such as the brain of a mouse and eventually a human. The data we present here is only a start.


Appendix 1


Sensory inputs and motor outputs

The dataset covers most of the antennal lobe (AL) glomeruli, which house the presynaptic terminals of the olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) from the antennae. The ORNs are named after their innervating glomeruli, for example ORN_DA2, and the olfactory receptors they express, as well as their ligands, and have been identified through various physiological studies (Couto et al., 2005; Fishilevich and Vosshall, 2005; Hallem and Carlson, 2006). The olfactory signals are then transmitted by the olfactory projections neurons (PNs) to the calyx (CA) of the mushroom body, the lateral horn (LH) and beyond.

While a large fraction of the optic lobe (OL) neuropils are missing, more than half of the lobula (LO) and small pieces of the lobula plate (LOP) and medulla (ME) are within the dataset. Many neurons connecting the OL and the central brain, called visual projection neurons (VPNs), are identified and annotated, along with their synaptic terminals in the central brain, and in the optic lobe when possible. Among them, the columnar VPNs, including the lobula columnar (LC), lobula plate columnar (LPC), lobula-lobula plate columnar (LLPC), and lobula plate-lobula columnar (LPLC) neurons (Ache et al., 2019; Fischbach and Dittrich, 1989; Klapoetke et al., 2017; Otsuna and Ito, 2006; Wu et al., 2016), account for the vast majority of the population and are more or less densely identified. Since the distribution of the columnar neurons in the optic lobe follows the arrangement of the photoreceptor cells in the compound eye, the retinotopy can be traced even in their terminals in the central brain in some cell types, while in others the retinotopy is apparently lost in the central brain. In most cases, these neurons terminate in synapse-rich structures called the optic glomeruli in the ventrolateral neuropils, where they relay visual information to higher-order neurons (Panser et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2016).

The antennal mechanosensory and motor center (AMMC) is located lateral and ventral to the esophagus foramen. It houses terminals of the Johnston’s organ neurons (JONs), the mechanosensory neurons from the Johnston’s organ in the second segment of the antennae, as well as their synaptic partners. The AMMC is subdivided into five functionally and anatomically segregated zones, A, B, C, D, and E (Kamikouchi et al., 2006). Since the neuropil is partially truncated, especially in the medial and ventral part corresponding to the zones D and E in the hemibrain dataset, only a limited number of the JONs innervating zones A, B, and C have been annotated, as JO-ABC.

The gustatory receptor neurons (GRNs) from the labellum and maxillary palp terminate in the gustatory sensory centers in the gnathal ganglia (GNG) and the prow (PRW) (Hartenstein et al., 2018; Ito et al., 2014; Miyazaki and Ito, 2010). Both of them are mostly out of the imaging range of the dataset and therefore no GRNs have been identified.

We have identified 51 types of descending neurons (out of a total of 98 types identified by the LM study) that play a key role in behavior. These neurons were annotated based on the nomenclature described in a previous study (Namiki et al., 2018), namely the classes of DNa, DNb, DNg, and DNp. Due to the lack of ventral region in the current dataset, we are not able to specify other cell types that run in the neck connective. In addition we identified three types of descending neurons that go out of the brain at the esophogus foramen without going via the neck connective (DNES1, 2, and 3).


Sample preparation

We employed the Progressive Lowering of Temperature dehydration with Low temperature en bloc Staining (PLT-LTS), a modified conventional chemical fixation and en bloc staining method. This method, mentioned in our previous papers (Hayworth et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2017; Lu et al., 2019), is here abbreviated as ‘C-PLT’. PLT-LTS is an optimization method to give tissue advanced high contrast staining and minimize artifacts such as extraction, and size and shape variation, by treating tissue under 0°C to −25°C in acetone or ethanol based uranyl acetate and osmium tetroxide after routine fixation. PLT-LTS samples show highly visible membranes with fewer deflated and collapsed profiles and conspicuous synaptic densities in FIB-SEM images.

Five-day-old adult female Drosophila, of the genotype Canton S G1 x w1118, were used in this experiment. They were raised on a 12-hr day/night cycle, with dissection performed 1.5 hr after lights-on. Isolated whole brains were fixed in 2.5% formaldehyde and 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer at pH 7.4 for 2 hr at 22°C. After washing, the tissues were post-fixed in 0.5% osmium tetroxide in double distilled H2O for 30 min at 4°C. After washing and en bloc staining with 0.5% aqueous uranyl acetate for 30 min and then further washing in water, for 20 min in 0.8% osmium tetroxide, a Progressive of Lowering Temperature (PLT) procedure started from 1°C when the tissues were transferred into 10% acetone. The temperature was progressively decreased to −25°C while the acetone concentration was gradually increased to 97%. The tissue was incubated in 1% osmium tetroxide and 0.2% uranyl acetate in acetone for 32 hr at −25°C. After PLT and low temperature incubation, the temperature was increased to 22°C, and tissues were rinsed in pure acetone following by propylene oxide, then infiltrated and embedded in Poly/Bed 812 epoxy (Luft formulation).


Hot knife cutting


Ultrathick sectioning

The hemibrain is too large to image by FIB-SEM without artifacts so we used our ultrathick sectioning ‘hot knife’ procedure (Hayworth et al., 2015) to first slice the brain into 20-μm-thick slabs which were better suited to FIB-SEM imaging. The Epon-embedded Drosophila brain block’s face was trimmed to present a width of just over 1 mm to the knife during sectioning (with the brain centered in this width). The length of the blockface was trimmed to be >3 mm so that each cut section would have a large enough region of blank plastic surrounding the tissue to allow forceps to grasp it during later processing steps. All sides of the block were trimmed to be perpendicular to the face except the trailing edge which was trimmed to slope away at ≈ 45° (to prevent this trailing edge from deforming during hot knife sectioning). Hot knife sectioning was performed on our custom ultrathick sectioning testbed (Hayworth et al., 2015). The block was cut at a speed of 0.1 mm/s into a total of 37 slices, each 20 μm thick, using an oil-lubricated (filtered thread cutting oil, Master Plumber) diamond knife (Cryo 25° from Diatome). The knife temperature was adjusted at the beginning of the run to ensure sections flowed smoothly across the knife surface without curling (too cold) or buckling (too hot). The knife temperature was measured to be 61°C at the end of the run. The knife was forced to oscillate via a piezo at 39 kHz during sectioning. A laser vibrometer (Polytec CLV-2534) was used to measure the amplitude of vibration at 0.5 μm peak-to-peak. Each thick section was collected individually from the knife surface by pressing a vacuum aspirator (extended fine tip plastic transfer pipette, Samco Scientific, attached to lab vacuum) onto the surface of the section. Each section was transferred to an individual well in the top of a 96-well microplate (Costar) into an awaiting oil drop. Once all sections were collected, they were transferred via forceps under a dissection microscope to a glass slide. The slide was placed on a hot plate (200°C) long enough (≈ 10 s) to flatten any residual curl in the sections. Each section was then imaged in a 20x light microscope to evaluate its quality.


Flat embedding

Each of the 20-μm-thick Epon-embedded fly brain sections was re-embedded in Durcupan resin to allow high quality FIB-SEM imaging. Durcupan re-embedding was required because FIB milling of Epon-embedded tissue without a Durcupan front covering resulted in milling streaks which mar the SEM images (Xu et al., 2017). Residual oil left over from the cutting process was first removed from each thick sections by dipping the section in Durcupan resin. Four drops of Durcupan resin were spaced out in sequence on a fresh glass slide. Each section was manually grasped with forceps (under a dissecting microscope) and dipped and lightly agitated sequentially in each Durcupan drops. Sections were gently wiped against the glass slide between each dipping to remove excess Durcupan and oil. After the final dipping, each section was placed (blockface side up) onto the heat-sealable side of a strip of 25 μm thick PET film (PP24I, Polymex Clear one side heat sealable/one side untreated polyester film, Polyester Converter Ltd.). Flat embedding tissue sections against this PET backing provided the strength needed for later mounting and handling. The PET film had been previously affixed to a glass slide for support, separated from the slide by a thin Kapton film designed to allow easy stripping of the PET. A gasket made from 50 μm thick adhesive-backed Kapton was positioned so as to surround all of the sections making a well for Durcupan resin to be poured into. This arrangement of sections was placed in a 65°C oven for ≈1 hr to partially cure the Durcupan so as to ‘tack’ the sections into position against the PET film. Then fresh Durcupan was poured to fill the well to its brim, and several large area pieces of 20-μm-thick Durcupan (previously cut from a blank block) were placed above the tissue sections to act as spacers during flat embedding to ensure that at least a 20 μm layer of Durcupan would exist in front of each tissue section during FIB milling. A piece of 25 μm Kapton film was laid on top of the Durcupan along with a glass slide and a weight was placed on top to press excess Durcupan out of the well. This flat embedding stack up was cured at 65°C for 2 days.


Tab mounting, laser trimming, X-ray imaging

Each individual brain slab to be FIB-SEM imaged was cut out of this flat embedding using a scalpel, and the resulting ‘tab’ was affixed with cyanoacrylate (Super Glue) to a metal stud. An ultraviolet laser (LaserMill, New Wave Research) was used to trim away excess blank resin to minimize the FIB-milling time required. An X-ray micro-CT scan (Versa 520, Zeiss) was then performed on each tab prior to FIB-SEM imaging.


Imaging

For the hemibrain, thirteen such slices were imaged using two customized enhanced FIB-SEM systems, in which an FEI Magnum FIB column was mounted at 90° onto a Zeiss Merlin SEM. Three different imaging conditions were used for different sections with details listed in. In general, SEM images were acquired at 8 nm XY pixel size with a 4-nA beam with 1.2 kV landing energy, but other parameters were tuned for best imaging quality. Slices 24 to 27 were imaged with the specimen biased at + 600 V to prevent secondary electrons from reaching the detector, so that only backscattered electrons were collected. The electron beam energy was lowered to 600 V accordingly to maintain the same 1.2 kV landing energy. The remaining slices were imaged with specimen grounded at 0 V, and both secondary and backscattered electrons were collected to improve signal-to-noise ratio. As a result, SEM scanning rates were set at 2 MHz for slabs with specimen bias and 4 MHz for those without specimen bias. FIB milling was carried out by a 7-nA 30 kV Ga ion beam. Since optic lobes are typically more heavily stained than the central brain, the FIB milling step size in sections 22 to 30 was set to 2 nm, while the step size on sections 31 to 34 was set at 4 nm, to compensate for staining nonuniformity while preserving throughput and signal-to-noise ratio. The total FIB-SEM imaging time for the entire hemibrain was roughly four FIB-SEM-years: two years of on and off operation with two machines.


Slab alignment

From each of the flattened sections, we generated a multi-scale pyramid of the section faces. The highest resolution pyramid level sat exactly at the surface plane, had a thickness of 1 pixel and showed a significant amount of cutting artifacts. Lower levels of the pyramid were increasingly thicker, projecting deeper into the volume and showed larger structures.

The alignment was initialized with a regularized affine alignment for the complete series of face pairs using the feature based method by Saalfeld et al., 2010. The pyramid of section face pairs was then used to robustly calculate pairwise deformations between adjacent sections. The faces are of notable size (>30k2 pixels) and expose many preparation artifacts such that off the shelf registration packages failed to process them reliably. We therefore developed a custom pipeline that was able to robustly align the complete series without manual corrections. Using the same feature-based method as above, an increasingly fine grid of local affine transformations was calculated and converted into a smooth and increasingly accurate interpolated deformation field. The resulting deformation field was further refined using a custom hierarchical optic flow method down to a resolution of 2 pixels. Optic flow minimizing the normalized cross correlation (NCC) was calculated for a pyramid of square block-sizes. For each pixel, the translation vector with the highest number of votes from all block-sizes was selected, and the resulting flow-field was further smoothed with an adaptive Gaussian filter that was weighted by the corresponding NCC.

The deformation fields were then applied to each section volume by smoothly interpolating between the deformation field at the top face and the affine transformation at the bottom face.

The block-based N5 format (https://github.com/saalfeldlab/n5; Saalfeld, 2020a; copy archived at https://github.com/elifesciences-publications/n5) was used to store volumes, multi-scale face pyramids, deformation fields, meta-data, and to generate the final export. Apache Spark was used to parallelize on a compute cluster. The pipeline is open source and available on GitHub (https://github.com/saalfeldlab/hot-knife; Saalfeld, 2020b; copy archived at https://github.com/elifesciences-publications/hot-knife).


Segmentation


Image adjustment with CycleGANs

To reduce photometric variation, we first normalized the contrast of the aligned EM images at full resolution ([8 nm]3/voxel) with CLAHE in planes parallel to the hot-knife cuts. In experiments targeted to small subvolumes we observed that segmentation quality decreased in certain areas of the hemibrain volume due to variations in the image content arising from, for example, fluctuations in staining quality as well as reduced contrast near the boundaries of the physically distinct 13 hot-knife ‘tabs’ that partitioned the original tissue volume. To compensate for these irregularities, we trained and applied CycleGAN (Zhu et al., 2017) models. This unsupervised machine learning method was originally introduced to adjust the appearance of images from one set A (e.g. photos) to be similar to those from another set B (e.g. paintings), without being given any explicit pairings between elements of both sets. Here, we extended this method to 3D volumes, and used model architectures and training hyperparameters as previously described (Januszewski and Jain, 2019), but without utilizing the flood-filling module.

We trained separate CycleGAN models to make data from every tab visually similar to that of a reference area spanning tabs 26 and 27 at [32 nm]3 and [16 nm]3 voxel sizes (i.e. using 4x, and 2x downsampled images, respectively), yielding a total of 20 CycleGAN models (no model was trained for tabs 26 and 27 at 32 nm and for tabs 23, 24, 26, and 27 at 16 nm). The reference area was chosen based on similarity to the region in which training data for segmentation models was located. The images in tabs 26 and 27 were sufficiently similar that no additional adjustment was required. The bounding boxes within the hemibrain volume used for training the CycleGAN models are specified in.

During training, a snapshot of network weights ('checkpoint') was saved every 30 min. CycleGAN inference was performed over a tab- and resolution-specific region of interest (ROI;) with every saved checkpoint from the tab- and resolution-matched model. We then segmented the resulting volumetric images with a resolution-matched flood-filling network (FFN) model, and screened the segmentations for merge errors. Merge errors were identified by visually inspecting the largest objects (by the number of voxels) in the segmentations using a 3D mesh viewer (Neuroglancer). For every CycleGAN model, we selected checkpoints resulting in the minimum number of mergers, and then among these, selected the checkpoint corresponding to a segmentation with the maximum number of labeled voxels in objects containing at least 10,000 voxels.

We then performed CycleGAN inference with the selected checkpoint for every tab-resolution pair over the part of the aligned hemibrain volume corresponding to that tab. The stitched inference results were used as input volumes for tissue classification and neuron segmentation. CycleGAN normalization was not done at the native [8 nm]3/voxel resolution because there was insufficient evidence that the 8 nm FFN model could generalize well to different tabs.


Tissue classification

We manually labeled voxels in 4 tabs of the hemibrain volume as belonging to one of 7 classes: ‘broken white tissue’, trachea, cell bodies, glia, large dendrites, neuropil, or ‘out of bounds’. We used these labels to train a 3D convolutional network that receives as input a field of view of 65 × 65 × 65 voxels at (16 nm)3/voxel resolution. The network uses 'valid' convolution padding and 'max' pooling operations with a kernel and striding shape of 2 × 2 × 2, with convolution and pooling operations interleaved in the following sequence: convolution with 64 features maps and a 3 × 3 × 3 kernel shape, max-pooling, convolution with 64 feature maps, max-pooling, convolution with 64 feature maps, max-pooling, convolution with 3 × 3 × 3 kernel size and 16 feature maps, convolution with 4 × 4 × 4 kernel shape 512 feature maps (i.e. fully connected layer), and finally a logistic layer output with eight units (the first unit was unused in the labeling scheme). The network was trained with data augmentation in which the order of the three spatial axes was randomly and uniformly permuted for each example during construction of the 16-example minibatch. For each example, the order of voxels along each spatial axis was also inverted at random with 50% probability. Examples from the seven classes were sampled randomly with equal probability. The model was implemented in TensorFlow and training was performed with asynchronous SGD on eight workers using NVIDIA P100 GPUs. The results can be viewed using NeuroGlancer at https://hemibrain-dot-neuroglancer-demo.appspot.com/#!gs://flyem-views/hemibrain/v1.0/mask-view.json.

The resulting classifier output was, on certain slices of the hemibrain, manually proofread using a custom tool (‘‘Armitage’’). The inference and proofreading process was then iterated seven times in order to expand and improve the set of ground truth voxels, resulting in a final ground truth set with the following number of examples in each class (sizes in Mxv, or megavoxels): 9.7 Mvx broken white tissue, 22.9 Mvx trachea, 42.1 Mvx cell bodies, 5.6 Mvx glia, 17.7M Mvx large dendrites, 71.4 Mvx neuropil, and 208.1 Mvx out of bounds.


Mitochondria classification

We detected and classified mitochondria within the hemibrain volume using the same neural network architecture and training setup as that used for tissue classification. Ground truth data was collected through iterative annotation (two rounds) in Armitage, in which voxels within hemibrain were manually annotated as belonging to one of 4 classes: ‘background’ (33.7 Mvx), ‘regular’ (0.7 Mvx), ‘special’ (0.5 Mvx), and ‘intermediate’ (0.5 Mvx).


Automated neuron segmentation with FFNs

We trained three FFN models composed of the same architecture as detailed in previous work (Januszewski et al., 2018) for FIB-SEM volumes, targeted specifically for 8 nm, 16 nm, and 32 nm voxel resolution data. For the 8 nm model we used manually generated ground truth spread over six subvolumes (5203 voxels each) located within the ellipsoid body, fan-shaped body and protocerebral bridge. The 16 nm and 32 nm models were trained with a proofread segmentation contained within a 8600 × 3020 × 9500 voxel region spanning tabs 26 and 27. For the 32 nm model, training examples were sampled from objects comprising 5000 or more labeled voxels at 32 nm/voxel resolution. In total, 4.2 Gvx of labeled data were used for the 16 nm model and 423 Mvx for the 32 nm model.

We split the training examples into ‘probability classes’ similarly to Januszewski et al., 2018. Classes 13–17 were not sampled when training the 8 nm model in order to bias it toward small-diameter neurites. For 16 nm and 32 nm models fewer classes were used and the first class comprising all initial training examples with the fraction of voxels set to. Other than the changes regarding the probability classes, we followed the same procedures for training example sampling, seed list generation, field-of-view movement, and distributed inference as detailed previously (Januszewski et al., 2018).

FFN checkpoints were selected in a screening process. We generated tab 24 segmentations at 16 and 32 nm voxel resolution for every available checkpoint. We then screened these segmentations for merge errors, annotating every such error with two points, one in each distinct neurite. The segmentation generated with an FFN checkpoint that avoided the most errors was selected. For the 8 nm segmentation, we followed the same procedure but restricted to a 5003 subvolume within tab 24, located at 23284, 1540, 12080.


Pipeline for segmentation of hemibrain with flood-filling networks


Multi-resolution and oversegmentation consensus

We built the hemibrain segmentation with a coarse-to-fine variant of the FFN pipeline (Januszewski et al., 2018) combining partial segmentations generated at different resolutions. First, we used the 16 nm and 32 nm FFN models to segment the dataset at the corresponding resolution, with voxels identified by the tissue classifier as glia and out-of-bounds excluded from FFN FOV movement (‘tissue masking’), and voxels classified as ‘broken white tissue’ excluded from seed generation. Voxels located within 128 nm from every hot knife plane were removed from the image data, and segmentation proceeded as if these regions did not exist. The resulting segmentation was extended back to the original coordinate system by nearest neighbor interpolation to fill the unsegmented spaces.

We then removed objects smaller than 10,000 voxels from the 32 nm segmentation (we will refer to the resulting segmentation as S32), isotropically upsampled it 2x, and combined it with the 16 nm segmentation using oversegmentation consensus (Januszewski et al., 2018). The resulting segmentation (S16) was used as the initial state for 8 nm FFN inference. In addition to tissue masking which was applied in the same way as in the case of lower resolution segmentations, we also masked areas within 32 voxels (at 8 nm/voxel resolution) from each hot-knife plane.

FlyEM proofreaders analyzed the roughly 200,000 largest objects in the segmentation, and manually split supervoxels identified as causing merge errors. This was done in three iterations – two targeting neuropil supervoxels, and one targeting cell bodies. The resulting corrected segmentation (S8) was used as the base segmentation for further work.


Agglomeration

For agglomeration, we modified the scheme described in Januszewski et al., 2018 for use with resolution-specific FFN models. First, we established a class for every segment by performing a majority vote of the tissue classification model predictions over the voxels covered by the segment. For every S16 segment (A, B), we also identified the maximally overlapping segment in S32 (denoted respectively, below). For each of the S32, S16, and S8 segmentations, we then computed candidate object pairs and agglomeration scores, restricting object pairs to ones involving both segments classified as either neuropil or ‘large dendrite’. For S8, the object pairs were additionally restricted to those that included at least one object not present in S16.

For every evaluated segment pair (A, B) and the corresponding segments (A*, B*) generated during agglomeration, we computed the scores originally defined in Januszewski et al., 2018 that is the recovered voxel fractions (and, where is the fraction of B found in A*, and so on), the Jaccard index JAB between A* and B*, and the number of voxels contained in A* or B* that had been 'deleted' (i.e., during inference their value in the predicted object mask fell from to) during one of the runs (dA, dB).

We then used the following criteria to connect segments A and B. In S32, we connected segments that were scored as In S16, we connected segments that either (a) were scored as or were both classified as neuropil, and, or (b) were both classified as neuropil, or and. In S8, we connected segments that were scored as.

Given the application of oversegmentation consensus in the process of building S16, objects created in S32 could have a different shape in S8. To compensate for this possibility, when agglomeration scores were being computed for S32 segments A and B, for each we computed up to eight maximally overlapping objects (A’, B’) in a downsampled version of S8 with matching voxel resolution, subject to a minimum overlap size of 1000 voxels and considered the agglomeration decision to apply to all combinations of A’ and B’.


Agglomeration constraints

From the procedure above, we used the agglomeration scores to organize segment connection decisions into priority groups and assign them a single numerical priority score. The decisions were then sorted in ascending order of the priority score, and sequentially processed, removing any decisions that would cause two cell bodies (as defined by manual annotations), or two segments previously separated manually in S8 proofreading to be connected was removed. Additionally, once all decisions with score <10 were processed, we also disallowed any remaining decisions that connected together any objects larger than 100 Mvx.


Speculative agglomeration

Any body (or set of segments connected by the agglomeration graph) larger than 10 Mvx was considered to be an ‘anchor’ body. We connected smaller bodies to these anchor bodies in a greedy procedure to further reduce the total number of bodies in the agglomerated segmentation. We formed body pair scores using segment pair agglomeration scores as. We then merged every body with its highest scoring candidate partner, as long as this would not connect two anchor bodies, and the body pair score was >0.1. This procedure was repeated seven times.


Synapse prediction


Ground truth

For training and validation, we collected dense synapse annotations within small cubes, spread through different brain regions. In total, we collected 122 such cubes, using 25 for classifier training, and the remaining 97 for validation. At each cube location, proofreaders manually annotated all T-bars within a 4003 window, and further annotated all PSDs attached to T-bars within a smaller 2563 sub-window. In total, 7.6k T-bars were annotated, split between 1.8k for training and 5.8k for validation, and 11.7k PSDs were annotated, split between 3k for training and 8.7k for validation.


Method

Details of the T-bar and PSD detection algorithms we used can be found in Huang et al., 2018. For reference, the T-bar classifier is a 3D CNN using a U-Net architecture (Ronneberger et al., 2015), with a receptive field size of 403 voxels and 770 k parameters.

At inference, we leverage the tissue classification results mentioned above by discarding any predictions that fell outside of tissue categories of large dendrites or neuropil.

As mentioned in the main text, after collecting ground-truth throughout additional brain regions, we found that our initial T-bar classifier was giving lower than desired recall in certain areas. Therefore, we trained a new classifier, and combined the results in a cascade fashion, which we found gave better results than simply replacing the initial predictions. Specifically, we added any predictions above a given confidence threshold made by the new classifier for synapses that were not near an existing prediction, and removed any existing predictions that were far from predictions made by the new classifier at a second lower/conservative threshold.

One difficulty in placing a single T-bar annotation at each presynaptic location is a certain ambiguity with respect to ‘multi T-bars’, cases in which two distinct T-bar pedestals lay in close proximity, within the same neuron. Such a case can be difficult to distinguish from a single large synapse, both for manual annotators as well as the automated prediction algorithm. To make such a distinction reliably would require obtaining many training examples for both cases (multi T-bar versus single large synapse), and would only have a slight effect on the final weights of the connectome (but not the unweighted connectivity). Therefore, we make no attempt to predict multi T-bars, and instead as a final post-processing step, collapse to a single annotation any T-bar annotations that are in close proximity and in the same segmented body.

Finally, we observed that in certain brain regions, there are instances of T-bars in separate bodies but in close proximity to one another. These often form a ‘convergent T-bars’ motif, in which multiple T-bars closely situated in distinct bodies form a synapse onto the same PSD body. The proximity of such T-bars is often less than the distance threshold used in the non-maxima suppression (NMS) that is applied to generate the T-bar annotations from the pixel-wise U-Net predictions. Given the NMS, a number of these types of T-bars would be missed by our predictor.

To address this issue, we modified the post-processing of pixel-wise predictions so as to use a ‘segmentation-aware NMS’. Specifically, we constrain the NMS applied to each pixel-wise local maxima to largely be limited to the specific segment in which the maxima occurs. Each segment is dilated slightly to avoid additional predictions that only fall a very small number of voxels outside the segment containing the maxima. (Note that unlike standard NMS, this procedure does require that the automated segmentation be available prior to inference.) We apply the segmentation-aware NMS only in brain regions where convergent T-bars were observed, as occurs in the mushroom body and fan-shaped body.


Evaluation

gives the precision-recall plot for T-bar prediction, averaged over all the available ground-truth validation cubes. As mentioned above, we do not attempt to predict multi T-bars; therefore, for the purposes of evaluation, we also collapse any ground-truth T-bars within close proximity in the same body to a single annotation. As can be seen from the figure, the cascade predictions are able to increase recall while maintaining precision. One of the primary error modes that leads to a difference between automated accuracy and manual agreement rate is the case of convergent T-bars, noted above. For instance, in of the main text, the brain region with lowest recall is b’L in the mushroom body; closer analysis revealed many convergent T-bars in the annotated ground-truth cubes for b’L.

below in the next subsection gives the corresponding precision-recall plot for end-to-end synapse prediction, averaged over all the available ground-truth validation cubes. As with both (Huang et al., 2018) and (Buhmann et al., 2019), we do not attempt to predict autapses, and remove any predicted connections that lie within the same neuron. For evaluation, any occasional ground-truth autapses are filtered out.


Additional classifier

As an independent check on synapse quality, we also trained a separate classifier proposed by Buhmann (Buhmann et al., 2019), using the ‘synful’ software package provided. We additionally made several modifications to the code, including: adding an ‘ignore’ region around synapse blobs where predictions were not penalized, using focal loss (Lin et al., 2017) to help with class imbalance, using batch normalization (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015) and residual layers (He et al., 2016), and adding explicit T-bar prediction as an additional network output. We found this multi-task learning (adding explicit T-bar prediction to PSD prediction and partner direction prediction) to be beneficial, similar to the use of cleft prediction in Buhmann et al., 2019, most likely due to the T-bar pedestals being a more reliable and prominent signal in our hemibrain preparation/staining than the PSDs. We refer to this network and its resulting synapse predictions as ‘synful+’.

shows the overall end-to-end precision-recall plots for each of the classifiers. As mentioned in the main text, we combined the predictions from the cascade and synful+ classifiers to yield a ‘hybrid’ classifier that achieved both better recall and precision than the two individual classifiers. Specifically, we modified the cascade predictions by (1) adding any PSDs that were predicted with strong confidence by synful+ and attached to existing T-bars, and (2) removing any PSDs that were predicted with weak confidence by the cascade classifier and not predicted by synful+ even at a very low confidence threshold.


Pathway analysis

Given two independent sets of synapse predictions (cascade and synful+), we further conduct an analysis of their respective connectivity graphs. We construct connectomes from each set of synapse predictions, limited to the 21,000+ traced bodies. At the level of individual synapses, the two sets of predictions have an agreement rate of about 80%.

However, we can look at connections of a given strength in one set of predictions, and see whether the other set of predictions gives a corresponding connection of any strength. For instance, among bodies that are connected with at least five synapses in the cascade predictions, less than 1% have no connection in the synful+ predictions, and similarly, among bodies that are connected with at least five synapses in the synful+ predictions, less than 2% have no connection in the cascade predictions. This suggests some level of stability in edges with a stronger connection, so that using a different classifier would be still likely to maintain that edge.

We also further manually assessed the small percentage of outlier edges. We sampled 100 synapses from the strongest of the edges in the cascade predictions that are not present in the synful+ predictions, and similarly 100 synapses from the synful+ predictions. For the cascade predictions, we find an overall accuracy of 64%, lower than the general accuracy of the cascade predictor, but we did not observe a pathway in which all sampled synapses were false positives. For the synful+ predictions, we found that all sampled synapses were false positives, resulting from improper placement of the T-bar annotation, thereby assigning the T-bar to an incorrect body. This suggests another use for such pathway analysis, in potentially discovering particular error modes of a classifier and allowing for re-training/refining to address such errors.

As a related measure of connectome stability, we also looked at how often the magnitude of the pathway connections were comparable. For instance, we can examine connections consisting of at least 10 synapses in one prediction set, and see how often those connections are within a factor of 2 in the other prediction set. We find that this holds for 93% of the connections of strength greater than 10. shows a plot comparing pathway connection strength between the two sets of predictions.


Logistics and management

The hemibrain reconstruction required a large-scale effort involving several research labs, Janelia shared services, about ten staff scientists, and about 60 proofreaders. The overall initiative planning, including the choice of biological regions to image and reconstruct, timeline, and budget, was orchestrated by the FlyEM project team at the Janelia Research Campus with a guiding steering committee composed of several experts within the institute. The Connectomics Group at Google Research collaborated extensively with FlyEM developing key technology to segment the hemibrain volume.

Extensive orchestration by project staff and Janelia shared services was required to manage the team of proofreaders and the reconstruction effort. Our proofreading team consisted of full-time technicians hired specifically for proofreading. To satisfy the ambitious reconstruction goals of the hemibrain effort, we hired close to 30 people in a few months to augment the existing proofreading resources, requiring a streamlined system of recruitment and training. We found that the average proofreader required around 2 months of training to become reasonably proficient in EM tracing, which entailed working on carefully designed training modules and iterative feedback with more experienced proofreaders or managers. Ongoing training was necessary for both new and experienced proofreaders to meet the needs of different reconstruction tasks. The team of proofreaders had frequent meetings, and a Slack channel, with the software staff to improve proofreading software. We found that for a project of this size, several additional software personnel were required for data management, monitoring, orchestrating, and streamlining proofreading assignments.

The hemibrain reconstruction involved several different reconstruction steps or workflows, many discussed in the paper. The primary workflows were cleaving, false split review, focused proofreading, and orphan linking. Cleaving is the task of splitting a falsely merged segment. False split review entails examining a neuron, using 3D morphology, for potential false splits. Focused proofreading is a ‘merge’ or ‘don’t merge’ protocol based on automated suggestions from the segmentation algorithm. Orphan linking is fixing small detached segments that should either be annotated as exiting the hemibrain dataset, or be merged to a larger, already proofread body. Overall, we estimate that we undertook ≈ 50–100 proofreading years of reconstruction effort.


Anatomical names in the central complex

provides two names for CX neurons: a short name useful for searching databases and an anatomical name that reveals morphological insight indicated by the input and output neuropils in the name. Previously published neurons (e.g. PB, NO, AB, EB ring neurons) now have short names, but their anatomical names are largely unchanged. Slight modifications were made to two neuron names to eliminate duplications with names in other brain regions or species: LN was changed to LNO1 and LGN to LGNO. In addition, the hyphens used in the abbreviated neuron names in Wolff and Rubin, 2018 have been eliminated. The new anatomical names are limited to three neuropils: two input followed by an output brain region. Neurons that arborize in only two structures are named by the input followed by output neuropil. Two-letter abbreviations are used for the CX brain regions: PB, FB, EB, NO, and AB. All remaining neuropils follow the three-letter abbreviations established in Ito et al., 2014.

For fan-shaped body columnar and tangential cell anatomical names, numbers that follow ‘FB’ indicate layers, and layer numbers followed by a lower case ‘d’ or ‘v’ indicate the arbor is restricted to the dorsal or ventral half of the indicated layer (e.g. FB6d). Many FB arbors extend vertically to span more than one layer, a form that is indicated by sequential numbers separated by commas (e.g. FB2,3,4 indicates a single, vertical arbor that extends across layers 2, 3, and 4 of the FB). Some FB neurons have two distinct arbors in different layers; these are indicated by a gap in the layer numbers (e.g. FB2,6 has one arbor in layer 2 and a second in layer 6).

Inevitably, the large number of cell types and three-neuropil limit for anatomical names results in redundancy in neuron names. To give a unique identity to each name, ‘_#’ is appended to otherwise indistinguishable names (e.g. LALCREFB2_1 and LALCREFB2_2).

The nomenclature system for the anatomical names was designed to enable visualization of a neuron’s morphology. High synaptic density generally correlates with more prominent arbors in light level images and therefore provides a visual depiction of the neuron’s overall shape. In most cases, synaptic density was therefore used as the primary metric in naming neurons. Synapse counts were retrieved from the neuPrint database. Only fully traced neurons from the right hemisphere were used in this analysis.

Different criteria were applied to FB tangential and columnar neurons when selecting neuropils to include in neuron names. The FB tangential neurons exhibit the greatest number of both presynaptic and postsynaptic terminals within a single FB layer, so naming these neurons based on neuropils with highest synaptic density would limit morphological insight. For example, FB layer 2 tangential neurons would be named FB2-neuropil X-FB2, FB2-neuropil Y-FB2, etc. Furthermore, since only a small number of neuropils are frequently arborized by the FB tangential neurons (e.g., SLP, SIP, SMP, CRE), names would be highly redundant. Instead, a more complete visual representation of a cell’s morphology is achieved by using the brain regions with the second and third greatest number of input synapses (the first and second neuropils in the name). FB layer information is included in the third, or output, neuropil since presynaptic arbors are greatest in the FB in tangential neurons.

Occasional exceptions were made to include neuropils that would provide deeper insight into morphology. For example, according to the rules above, CRENO2FB4_2 (FB4M) should be named CRELALFB4 or CRESMPFB4 since 10–12% of input synapses are in the LAL and in the CRE, whereas only 6% are in NO2. An exception was made in this cell’s name since arbors in the noduli distinguish this cell from other CRELALFB4 and CRESMPFB4 cells. Similarly, for neurons with equivalent synaptic density in several neuropils, those neuropils that best portrayed the neuron’s unique morphology were chosen (e.g. SIPSCLFB2, or FB2H_a and FB2H_b).

In contrast to the FB tangential neurons, the FB columnar neurons project terminals to generally more than one layer of the FB. In addition, unlike the nine glomeruli in the PB, there is not a fixed number of vertical columns in the FB. Rather, column number is a function of cell type, so column number is an important feature of each cell type. Finally, a subset of the columnar neurons is intrinsic to the FB, whereas the remaining columnar neurons project terminals to additional neuropils. Nomenclature rules differ for these classes of neurons.

Intrinsic columnar FB neurons have multiple arbors in the FB. While most arbors comprise a mixture of dendrites and axons, one arbor type usually predominates. The predominantly input or output arbors are either vertically arranged within a single column of the FB, in which case they include the prefix ‘v’ in the short name and D0 in the anatomical name (see below), or horizontally distributed across different columns, in which case they include the prefix ‘h’ in the short name and D# in the anatomical name (see below for details). The horizontal class of neurons includes one or more input arbors vertically arranged within a single column that are separated by a given number of columns from an output arbor on the contralateral side of the FB. The distance between the input and output arbors, measured as the difference of column numbers, is unique to each cell type but is always half the width of the FB. The number of columns between the input and output arbors is referred to as ‘delta’ and is indicated in these neuron’s names by a capital ‘D’ followed by the number of skipped columns between horizontally distributed input and output arbors. Two, three, five or seven columns have been documented to separate input from output arbors. As with the FB tangential neurons, input neuropils are indicated first in the neuron’s name, followed by output neuropils. The total number of columns per brain for a given cell type equals (Delta + 1) x 2. For example, FB2,3,5d,6vD3FB6v (hDeltaG) has input arbors in FB layers 2, 3 and 1 that spans the dorsal layer 5 and ventral layer 6. A gap of 3 columns (D3) separates the input arbors from the output arbor, which is located in the ventral portion of layer 6. For this cell type, there are (3+1) x 2 or eight columns per brain. In some instances, output arbors were easier to count than input (dendritic) arbors, so column counts were based on output arbors. While columns for some cell types are unambiguous, in other cases, best guesses were made based on anatomy and connectivity. For cells with arbors that overlap, column number was defined by the minimal number of arbors (in other words, non-overlapping) that achieved full coverage of the cell’s layer.

Neurons with input and output arbors that are vertically arranged within the same column have a displacement of zero columns, or a Delta0 (D0). This vertical alignment is reflected in the neuron’s anatomical name by D0 and in the short name with the prefix ‘v’. Column numbers were not calculated for these cell types.

The remaining columnar neurons exhibit both dendritic and axonal arbors within the FB as well as axonal arbors in additional neuropils. Although the vast majority of synapses are in the FB, it is the axonal synapses outside the FB that provide the best insight into gross morphology and are therefore indicated as the output neuropil. For example, while only 1% of the output for the FB2,5,6CRE (FC3) neuron is in the CRE, the neurite that projects to the CRE is distinctive and informs morphology. Column numbers were also not calculated for these cell types.


Sparse to many motifs

The attached spreadsheet ‘SparseToMany.xlsx’ describes the sparse-to-many motifs illustrated in. Shown are all instances where sparse type (N ≤ 2) connects bidirectionally to at least 90% of all instances of an abundant type (N ≥ 20). The two sheets have identical data, but one is sorted by the name of the sparse type, and one the abundant type. The data contained is:

Column A: The brain region and threshold used. All entries here are for the full brain and threshold 1.

Column B: The name of the sparse type.

Column C: The number of instances of the sparse type. This is most commonly 2, as most neurons are bilaterally symmetric. However there are cases where only a single instance was reconstructed in our volume.

Column D: The bodyID of the sparse type.

Column E: The instance name of the sparse type. This normally distinguishes the left and right examples.

Column F: The name of the abundant type.

Column G: The count of the abundant type.

Column H: The number of connections from the sparse to the abundant type.

Column I: The average strength of such connections.

Column J: The number of connections from the abundant type to the sparse type.

Column K: The average strength of such connections.


Funding Statement

The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.


Contributor Information

Louis K Scheffer, Email: schefferl@janelia.hhmi.org.

Stephen M Plaza, Email: plazas@janelia.hhmi.org.

Eve Marder, Brandeis University, United States.

Michael B Eisen, University of California, Berkeley, United States.


Funding Information

This paper was supported by the following grants:

Howard Hughes Medical Institute Internal funding to Louis K Scheffer, C Shan Xu, Zhiyuan Lu, Shin-ya Takemura, Kenneth J Hayworth, Gary B Huang, Kazunori Shinomiya, Stuart Berg, Jody Clements, Philip M Hubbard, William T Katz, Lowell Umayam, Ting Zhao, David Ackerman, John Bogovic, Tom Dolafi, Dagmar Kainmueller, Khaled A Khairy, Nicole Neubarth, Donald J Olbris, Hideo Otsuna, Eric T Trautman, Masayoshi Ito, Jens Goldammer, Tanya Wolff, Robert Svirskas, Erika Neace, Christopher J Knecht, Chelsea X Alvarado, Dennis A Bailey, Samantha Ballinger, Jolanta A Borycz, Brandon S Canino, Natasha Cheatham, Michael Cook, Marisa Dreher, Octave Duclos, Bryon Eubanks, Kelli Fairbanks, Samantha Finley, Nora Forknall, Audrey Francis, Gary Patrick Hopkins, Emily M Joyce, SungJin Kim, Nicole A Kirk, Julie Kovalyak, Shirley A Lauchie, Alanna Lohff, Charli Maldonado, Emily A Manley, Sari McLin, Caroline Mooney, Miatta Ndama, Omotara Ogundeyi, Nneoma Okeoma, Christopher Ordish, Nicholas Padilla, Christopher M Patrick, Tyler Paterson, Elliott E Phillips, Emily M Phillips, Neha Rampally, Caitlin Ribeiro, Madelaine K Robertson, Jon Thomson Rymer, Sean M Ryan, Megan Sammons, Anne K Scott, Ashley L Scott, Aya Shinomiya, Claire Smith, Kelsey Smith, Natalie L Smith, Margaret A Sobeski, Alia Suleiman, Jackie Swift, Satoko Takemura, Iris Talebi, Dorota Tarnogorska, Emily Tenshaw, Temour Tokhi, John J Walsh, Tansy Yang, Jane Anne Horne, Ruchi Parekh, Patricia K Rivlin, Vivek Jayaraman, Kei Ito, Stephan Saalfeld, Reed George, Ian A Meinertzhagen, Gerald M Rubin, Harald F Hess, Stephen M Plaza.

Google Internal funding to Michal Januszewski, Jeremy Maitlin-Shepard, Tim Blakely, Laramie Leavitt, Peter H Li, Larry Lindsey, Viren Jain.

Wellcome 203261/Z/16/Z to Philipp Schlegel, Feng Li.


The brain in motion: How ensemble fluidity drives memory-updating and flexibility

William Mau, Michael E Hasselmo, Denise J Cai, Laura L Colgin, Laura L Colgin — eLife, 2020. PMC7771967, CC BY 4.0.

While memories are often thought of as flashbacks to a previous experience, they do not simply conserve veridical representations of the past but must continually integrate new information to ensure survival in dynamic environments. Therefore, ‘drift’ in neural firing patterns, typically construed as disruptive ‘instability’ or an undesirable consequence of noise, may actually be useful for updating memories. In our view, continual modifications in memory representations reconcile classical theories of stable memory traces with neural drift. Here we review how memory representations are updated through dynamic recruitment of neuronal ensembles on the basis of excitability and functional connectivity at the time of learning. Overall, we emphasize the importance of considering memories not as static entities, but instead as flexible network states that reactivate and evolve across time and experience.


Introduction

Memories are neural patterns that guide behavior in familiar situations by preserving relevant information about the past. While this definition is simple in theory, in practice, environments are dynamic and probabilistic, leaving the brain with the difficult task of shaping memory representations to address this challenge. Dynamic environments imply that whatever is learned from a single episode may not hold true for future related experiences and should therefore be updated over time. If not, memory systems will fail to generalize to future retrieval episodes in which conditions may have changed, leading to suboptimal behaviors (Richards and Frankland, 2017). Hence, the ‘goal’ of a memory system is not to remember individual events with the greatest possible precision, but rather to continually adapt its contents in order to build more and more accurate models of the world. To do this, the brain employs ‘memory-updating’, which we define as the process of modifying existing firing patterns to support the integration of new information into previously learned memories. Consistent with this concept, studies on reconsolidation have previously described how memories can become labile during retrieval allowing for memory-updating (Dudai, 2012; Misanin et al., 1968; Nader et al., 2000) and these memory modifications continue indefinitely over an animal’s lifetime (Dudai, 2012; McKenzie and Eichenbaum, 2011; Nadel et al., 2012). While reconsolidation studies have greatly contributed to our understanding of continual learning, these studies typically rely on amnesic pharmacological agents that offer limited insight to how memory modification occurs at the neurophysiological and population level. However, recent studies utilizing approaches to observe and manipulate large-scale neuronal populations have reinvigorated the search for the flexibility of memory traces. Indeed, as we will describe in this review, these observations support the concept of continual memory-updating and complement the findings regarding molecular mechanisms in the reconsolidation literature (Tronson and Taylor, 2007). Rather than discrete and fixed neural representations, we propose that memories are stored in flexible activation patterns that are continuously modified over experience, on the order of minutes to lifetimes.


Stability versus flexibility in long-term memory

There is consensus that, generally speaking, memories are stored in activity patterns and synaptic weights of neuronal ensembles brain-wide, and that these ensembles are reactivated when recalling the memory (Frankland et al., 2019; Gelbard-Sagiv et al., 2008; Guzowski et al., 1999; Liu et al., 2012; Reijmers et al., 2007; Wilson and McNaughton, 1993). These ensembles can persist over long timespans measured over days to weeks, making them attractive substrates for long-term memory storage (Josselyn et al., 2015; Tonegawa et al., 2015). The foundation for these ideas came from Donald Hebb, whose theories on synaptic plasticity and the stabilization of cell ensembles laid the groundwork for contemporary ideas in memory representations within neuronal networks (Hebb, 1949). For instance, demonstrations of ensemble stability were found in hippocampal place cells (pyramidal neurons that fire according to the animal’s position in space) (O’Keefe and Nadel, 1978) that were found to be stable over many weeks (Thompson and Best, 1990). Stability of neuronal ensembles was also supported by studies using localization of immediate-early gene expression in the hippocampus—exploration of two identical environments 20 min apart induced activity-dependent Arc expression in highly overlapping populations of CA1 neurons (Guzowski et al., 1999). In the amygdala, reactivation of a neuronal ensemble active during learning was correlated with memory recall several days later, indicating a stable neural correlate for fear memory (Reijmers et al., 2007). Based on these and related studies, modern theories suggest that dedicated populations of neurons (‘engram cells’) encode and store memories in the manner of a Hebbian cell ensemble (Hebb, 1949; Josselyn et al., 2015; Tonegawa et al., 2015).

While groundbreaking, the discovery of stable ensembles as substrates for memories is an incomplete account of how memory systems operate over the course of an animal’s lifetime. Above all, these principles do not explain how the brain can integrate new experiences with old memories. In practice, some degree of flexibility must complement persistence in the successful implementation of memory (Richards and Frankland, 2017). The ‘stability-plasticity dilemma’ describes the necessary compromise between these two opposing forces, allowing new learning to occur while preserving existing knowledge (Grossberg, 1982). Indeed, modeling studies have shown that an overly rigid neural network actually encumbers the acquisition of new information. In an inflexible network, existing knowledge can interfere with the encoding of new information (proactive interference) and is also subject to erasure during new learning (catastrophic forgetting) (Hasselmo and Wyble, 1997; McClelland et al., 1995; McCloskey and Cohen, 1989). Therefore, in addition to understanding how memories can persist in neural populations, it is equally important to understand how memory systems can overcome collisions between old and new memories. To that end, dynamic memory ensembles encapsulate how memories can be both persistent and fluid. This idea is in line with the research on reversal learning (Izquierdo et al., 2017), reconsolidation (McKenzie and Eichenbaum, 2011), schema learning (Bartlett, 1932; Gilboa and Marlatte, 2017; Tse et al., 2007), and systems consolidation (Kumaran et al., 2016; McClelland et al., 1995; Nadel et al., 2012), which all describe how previously learned behaviors can be modified to accommodate new learning. In particular, prominent theories on systems consolidation stress the importance of both persistence and flexibility—the hippocampus is often thought of as the flexible learner that trains neocortical networks to store memories long term (McClelland et al., 1995). However, neocortical networks still undergo continual modifications as the animal learns over a lifetime (Kumaran et al., 2016).

Although much is known about the flexibility of behaviors, we know much less about how the memories enabling those behaviors are updated at the neurophysiological level. While the flexibility of memory has been well appreciated in synaptic neurobiology (Holtmaat and Svoboda, 2009; Rumpel and Triesch, 2016; Ziv and Brenner, 2018) and cognitive psychology (Nadel et al., 2012), it has been largely neglected by neurophysiologists with a few recent notable exceptions (Chambers and Rumpel, 2017; Clopath et al., 2017; Richards and Frankland, 2017; Rule et al., 2019). We begin by highlighting recent longitudinal observations of slow fluctuations in neural activity and synaptic structure that complement the ‘stable engram’ hypothesis (Josselyn et al., 2015; Tonegawa et al., 2015). Intrinsic fluctuations that alter synaptic connectivity and cellular excitability provide an ever-present reservoir of flexibility in population activity patterns to store a memory. We propose that these slow fluctuations act like a conveyor belt that continuously supplies potential new storage sites of future memories, as suggested by previous studies on 'memory allocation' and 'memory-linking' (Cai et al., 2016; Josselyn and Frankland, 2018; Rashid et al., 2016; Yokose et al., 2017). Neurons encoding these future experiences may overlap with existing engrams, updating past memories. In the following section, we describe how ‘unstable’ ensembles are not in fact paradoxical, but instead are necessary for flexible memory and behavior. Then, we outline the steps of the memory-updating process which entails (1) a partial reactivation of a previously formed engram, (2) recruitment of neuronal populations into existing engrams based on their excitability and functional connectivity, (3) deployment of plasticity processes that modify these networks by integrating the new population, and (4) temporal coordination of neural activity within and across regions for brain-wide memory-updating.


The benefit of dynamism: how drift aids memory flexibility


Representational drift: findings from neurophysiology

With the advent of functional imaging methods that can enable longitudinal tracking of single neurons over days to weeks, a picture is starting to emerge that memory representations are not as fixed as we might expect. Despite experimenters’ efforts to keep external environments consistent and with no observed changes in the animal’s behavior, the firing patterns of neuronal populations continue to evolve, a phenomenon known as ‘representational drift’ (for reviews see Chambers and Rumpel, 2017; Clopath et al., 2017; Rule et al., 2019). Repeated exposures to the same conditions produce neural representations of these highly familiar experiences that nonetheless fluctuate on the order of hours to weeks, even with stereotypical behavior. For instance, hippocampal ensemble activity deviates over time, as measured by population vector correlations to a reference point, despite no deviations in the behavioral task (Bladon et al., 2019; Hainmueller and Bartos, 2018; Mankin et al., 2012; Manns et al., 2007; Mau et al., 2018; Rubin et al., 2015; Ziv et al., 2013). Similar fluctuations have been reported in barrel cortex (Margolis et al., 2012), motor regions (Liberti et al., 2016; Peters et al., 2017; Rokni et al., 2007), lateral entorhinal cortex (Tsao et al., 2018), and parietal cortex (Driscoll et al., 2017), suggesting that while all these regions differentially contribute to memory, drift may be a ubiquitous feature of neural systems that seems to threaten memory stability. Alternatively, drift could actually reflect the inherent flexibility of the neural code and stem from numerous parallel neurobiological processes including spontaneous synaptic remodeling (Ziv and Brenner, 2018), and dynamic changes in cellular excitability (Chen et al., 2020; Slomowitz et al., 2015). Next, we will consider how these processes could potentially contribute to the way in whichdynamic neural codes can support memory flexibility.


Synaptic turnover: contributions to representational drift

Synapses are constantly being remodeled, which could be one underlying factor for drift in ensemble codes (Buzsáki, 2010; Rumpel and Triesch, 2016; Ziv and Brenner, 2018). While neural activity is a well-known mediator of synaptic plasticity (Bi and Poo, 1998; Bliss and Collingridge, 1993), the reverse relationship is also possible—synaptic structure and weights could influence neural activity patterns (Buzsáki, 2010; Fauth et al., 2015; Kalle Kossio et al., 2020; McKenzie et al., 2019; Turrigiano and Nelson, 2004). Along those lines, when action potentials are blocked in cell cultures, synapses continue to turn over across days, demonstrating that spontaneous synaptic remodeling occurs even in the absence of neuronal firing, and that these intrinsic remodeling events could impact the participation of individual neurons within ensembles (Minerbi et al., 2009; Yasumatsu et al., 2008). Hippocampal dendritic spines have been found to completely turn over within weeks, presumably contributing to fluctuations in neuronal firing patterns via rearrangement of synaptic weights (Attardo et al., 2015; Pfeiffer et al., 2018). Supporting this possibility, one experiment described how local activity patterns at CA1 dendrites predicted longitudinal place field stability based on somatic calcium activity. The experimenters found that place cells were more likely to lose their field if the dendritic activity of those cells was more variable on a trial-by-trial basis (Sheffield and Dombeck, 2015). This suggests that the computations occurring in dendritic compartments could be disturbed by synaptic turnover, which in turn could potentially destabilize place fields across the whole population. Recent modeling efforts have shown that synaptic turnover can give rise to drifting ensembles (Kalle Kossio et al., 2020). However, direct evidence for synaptic turnover as a major source for representational drift has not yet been shown and would require technically challenging feats of simultaneously imaging spines and somatic activity over long timescales.


Stable memories from tenacious networks

While seemingly disruptive, there is substantial evidence that constant flux does not preclude memory persistence. Although dendritic spines are routinely formed and eliminated, a significant proportion is estimated to persist over an animal’s lifetime (Yang et al., 2009), suggesting that long-term memories could be stored in the synapses located at those spines. These persistent spines are more common in the neocortex than in the hippocampus (Attardo et al., 2015), consistent with systems consolidation theories suggesting that neocortical networks play a larger role in storing relatively more stable representations. Nonetheless, up to 15–25% of hippocampal CA1 neurons retain the same spatial firing patterns across weeks, which is sufficient for accurate spatial decoding (Shuman et al., 2020; Ziv et al., 2013). Such patterns may persist in part due to the relatively high resilience of larger dendritic spines (Holtmaat and Svoboda, 2009; Holtmaat et al., 2005), which has been observed in both hippocampal (Pfeiffer et al., 2018) and neocortical spines (de Vivo et al., 2017). Additionally, modeling work has suggested that repeated offline reactivation of specific ensembles could maintain potentiated synaptic weights (Fauth and van Rossum, 2019). Thus, long-term memories may be supported by a ‘backbone’ of stable spines and neurons that store gross features while the remainder might continually undergo plasticity to encode more detailed representations (Buzsáki and Mizuseki, 2014; Grosmark and Buzsaki, 2016; Sweeney and Clopath, 2020). A complementary ‘memory indexing’ theory has proposed that hippocampal neurons reinstate neocortical activity patterns for memory retrieval (Goode et al., 2020; Tanaka et al., 2018; Teyler and DiScenna, 1986). In such a regime, neocortical storage sites may house relatively more stable memories that hippocampal computations incrementally modify (Kumaran et al., 2016).

Even with the stability of a ‘backbone’ neural network, a nontrivial portion of neural networks is dynamic. Still, this does not appear to hinder memory or behavior. Performance on a variety of spatial navigation tasks remained stable across days despite continuous reorganization of firing patterns in parietal cortex and hippocampus (Driscoll et al., 2017; Kinsky et al., 2020; Levy et al., 2020). Most surprisingly, motor patterns are unchanged despite drift in neural activity from motor areas (Liberti et al., 2016; Rokni et al., 2007, but see Katlowitz et al., 2018). Perhaps behavioral stability could be attributed to the consistency of the overall population regardless of the activity of individual neurons (Rule et al., 2020). Others have shown that from a population standpoint, the variability of any individual neuron is inconsequential to the fidelity of the overall neural code (Gallego et al., 2020; Gonzalez et al., 2019; Rokni et al., 2007; Rule et al., 2019; Rule et al., 2020). A recent study proposed that downstream readers can hypothetically compensate for drift, suggesting that as long as the interpreter of an upstream neural code is capable of re-weighting its inputs, a stable readout can still be achieved (Kalle Kossio et al., 2020; Rule et al., 2020). Although the neurobiological principles governing this re-weighting have yet to be determined, they may hinge upon neuromodulatory feedback signals such as dopamine or acetylcholine (Duszkiewicz et al., 2019; Hasselmo, 2006). Taken together, these studies indicate that memory retrieval can tolerate some degree of dynamism provided that some core backbone of the collective network remains intact or if downstream readers adjust their outputs in accordance with their fluctuating inputs.


Drift as a mechanism for continuous remodeling

What is the function of drift in memory systems? We posit that drift can slowly and stochastically provide neural substrates that can bind new information (Rumpel and Triesch, 2016), both for forming new memories and for updating old ones. In order to form new memories or update past memories, neural networks are faced with the formidable problem of having to potentiate the appropriate synaptic patterns among the huge number of possibilities that make up the synaptic connectivity space. Structural synaptic turnover through continuous spine degradation and formation could facilitate future learning by maximizing sampling across this synaptic connectivity space (Frank et al., 2018; Holtmaat and Svoboda, 2009; Kappel et al., 2015; Minerbi et al., 2009; Rumpel and Triesch, 2016; Xu et al., 2009), increasing the likelihood of achieving certain spiking patterns, and ultimately potentiating their corresponding synaptic weights. Consistent with this logic, spine turnover is critical for birdsong acquisition, fear conditioning, and spatial navigation in zebra finches and mice (Castello-Waldow et al., 2020; Frank et al., 2018; Roberts et al., 2010). Frank et al., 2018 measured spine turnover in the mouse retrosplenial cortex and found that turnover rates, even before fear conditioning and spatial exploration, positively correlated with individual ability to learn each memory. In other words, high spine turnover rates provided a greater number of new spines available for memory encoding but may have also enabled faster sampling across synaptic space and therefore a quicker arrival to a synaptic connectivity pattern that adequately encoded the new information (Castello-Waldow et al., 2020; Frank et al., 2018; Rumpel and Triesch, 2016; Xu et al., 2009). Changes in synaptic connectivity could also heterogeneously influence the likelihood of spiking (intrinsic excitability) in neuronal subpopulations, which would in turn increase their likelihood of participating in future memory-encoding ensembles (i.e., memory allocation; Buzsáki, 2010; Chen et al., 2020; Rogerson et al., 2014; Yiu et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2009). In this way, the brain could prioritize different rosters of neurons to diversify eligibility for memory encoding or updating (Margolis et al., 2012; Rogerson et al., 2014; Trouche et al., 2016). Such a framework is consistent with systems consolidation where information is constantly redistributed across the neocortical-hippocampal loop (Kumaran et al., 2016; McClelland et al., 1995). In summary, spontaneous synaptic remodeling can supply additional synapses and neurons in which memories can be laid down as they are being experienced, contributing to memory flexibility.


Neurogenesis and plasticity aid memory-updating

Drift may also facilitate the updating of previously learned memories by partially weakening old activity patterns in favor of strengthening new ones. In particular, hippocampal adult neurogenesis has been shown to play an important role in synaptic and circuit remodeling, supporting memory-updating and flexibility (Aimone et al., 2009; Burghardt et al., 2012; Denny et al., 2014; Epp et al., 2016; Frankland et al., 2013; Rangel et al., 2014; Richards and Frankland, 2017; Saxe et al., 2006). The addition of newborn neurons in the dentate gyrus reconfigures existing hippocampal activity by decaying previously potentiated synapses (Alam et al., 2018; Frankland et al., 2013; Kitamura et al., 2009). At first glance, this may appear disruptive for memory, but integration of these newborn neurons into hippocampal circuits can be useful because network-wide synaptic reorganization can erase obsolete patterns while making room for new ones (Alam et al., 2018; Frankland et al., 2013; Richards and Frankland, 2017; Toni et al., 2008). This feature is especially advantageous for memory-updating, which requires circuit reconfiguration in order for previous memories to accommodate potentially conflicting new information. In alignment with this hypothesis, exercise and environmental enrichment (which both increase neurogenesis) enhanced navigational flexibility when a goal was relocated (Epp et al., 2016; Garthe et al., 2016). In these studies, mice with increased neurogenesis were better able to learn by modifying their expectations of where the goal was likely to be, but this ability was abolished when neurogenesis was inhibited (Burghardt et al., 2012; Epp et al., 2016; Garthe et al., 2016). Importantly, neurogenesis was not required for initial memory acquisition, but only when the mice had to reverse their behavior (Burghardt et al., 2012; Epp et al., 2016). This suggests that neurogenesis plays an important role in memory-updating, and not just in acquisition of a new memory (Meshi et al., 2006). Taken together, these findings suggest that after integration of adult-born neurons, the consequent synaptic reorganization (Toni et al., 2008) allows experienced brains to acquire yet more information to integrate with previously learned associations.

Aside from neurogenesis, spontaneous synaptic remodeling is a critical feature for permitting memory-updating through the exploration of synaptic connectivity space using prior knowledge as a starting point. Modeling studies have demonstrated that continual reconfiguration of synaptic weights is necessary for a network to adapt once dynamic conditions are imposed (Ajemian et al., 2013; Duffy et al., 2019; Kappel et al., 2018). One particular study used a neural network to perform a simulated motor task where specific outputs were rewarded (Kappel et al., 2018). The authors then changed the output of a subset of model neurons relative to the motor task, thereby perturbing the neural network’s ability to produce the correct motor actions. However, because the neural network was able to continuously explore alternative solutions through a drift-like synaptic rewiring mechanism, it quickly adapted to the perturbation and regained high accuracy (Kappel et al., 2018). This suggests that slow synaptic turnover may facilitate the ability to draw from a prior knowledge base (by storing connectivity patterns that are slow to decay) while still flexibly exploring related options through stochastic probing of new potential connectivity patterns, built atop existing ones. Such an implementation may underlie flexible behaviors that are based on memories for past outcomes. In other words, as long as a memory is retrievable and the ensemble encoding that memory is sufficiently plastic, it can be updated; but suppressing retrieval (Yokose et al., 2017) or plasticity (Guo et al., 2018) blocks memory-updating. The notion of memory modification after retrieval has also been previously discussed in the context of reconsolidation, when memories are subject to modification after they are retrieved (Dudai, 2012; McKenzie and Eichenbaum, 2011; Misanin et al., 1968; Nader et al., 2000). In the next section, we examine how the brain modifies these memories.


Neural mechanisms of memory-updating


Memory retrieval is associated with a re-visitation of neural state space

There is a large body of evidence showing that memories are not created de novo and instead draw upon prior knowledge stored in biophysical configurations of synapses and population activity (Bliss and Collingridge, 1993; Dragoi and Tonegawa, 2014). As such, memory-updating relies on instantiating an internal representation of past events, comparing expectations to current sensory input, and modifying the representation to improve predictive power (Gershman et al., 2017). For example, in humans, viewing specific images reactivates the firing patterns observed during initial presentation of the stimulus (Gelbard-Sagiv et al., 2008). In rodents, similar neuronal populations are reactivated upon re-exposures to familiar environments (Guzowski et al., 1999; Reijmers et al., 2007; Rubin et al., 2015; Shuman et al., 2020; Thompson and Best, 1990; Ziv et al., 2013), and activation of neuronal populations previously activated during the initial learning will induce memory retrieval (Liu et al., 2012; Ramirez et al., 2013; Robinson et al., 2020).

Reactivation of neural patterns during memory retrieval may constrain the brain to these state spaces, restricting the degrees of freedom for exploring possible solutions for new encoding. These states may act as continuous attractors (Leutgeb et al., 2005; Tsodyks, 1999; Wills et al., 2005) and function as workspaces for memory-updating within that time window. Such a mechanism would imply that learning something associated with a previously learned stimulus would reactivate that previous memory. This view is again consistent with reconsolidation experiments where a reminder cue reinstates a previous memory, creating an opportunity for modification of that memory (Gisquet-Verrier et al., 2015; Hupbach et al., 2007; McKenzie and Eichenbaum, 2011; Nadel et al., 2012). Functional imaging experiments in the human brain found that presentations of reminders triggered reactivation of hippocampal and prefrontal networks, which facilitated learning of new, related items (Schlichting and Preston, 2014; Zeithamova et al., 2012). Rodent studies have also found reactivation of hippocampal ensembles during memory-updating (Dupret et al., 2010; McKenzie et al., 2013; McKenzie et al., 2014). Previous training on memory tasks with one set of stimuli accelerated their ability to form new associations with different stimuli. Upon introduction of these new stimuli, neurons that encoded previous, related stimuli were reactivated, suggesting that this population acted as a scaffold upon which new, related stimuli were embedded (McKenzie et al., 2013; McKenzie et al., 2014). This reactivation facilitates the connection of related experiences across time, allowing for the integration of events through the co-activation of neurons encoding past and present experiences. Such a mechanism is consistent with reports of optogenetic stimulation to co-activate ensembles to update previous memories with experimenter-defined ‘false memories’ (Ohkawa et al., 2015; Ramirez et al., 2013; Vetere et al., 2019).


Memory-updating through temporal integration

To determine which experiences get integrated into a past memory, the relevance of input patterns might be weighted by temporal proximity to when the memory was encoded—events that occur close in time can become linked within neural networks (Clewett et al., 2019; Howard et al., 2014; Rogerson et al., 2014; Schlichting and Preston, 2014; Yetton et al., 2019). A functional imaging study in humans found that over two encoding episodes, subjects were more likely to combine their memories of overlapping items (object pairs) if they occurred within 30 min of each other (Zeithamova and Preston, 2017). Within encoding episodes (defined by minutes-long temporal blocks), there is high similarity in hippocampal activity patterns in both humans (Ezzyat and Davachi, 2014; Hsieh et al., 2014) and rats (Bulkin et al., 2020), suggesting that the network resides in the same state space during these episodes. Likewise in mice, two contextual experiences within 5 hr of each other became represented by a common set of hippocampal CA1 neurons, but not when they were separated by 7 days (Cai et al., 2016). Furthermore, not only were those two experiences represented by an overlapping ensemble, but when one of those contexts was subsequently paired with shock, animals transferred the fear from the shocked context to the neutral context. This indicates that the two memories became linked, which was sufficient to update a recent neutral memory with an aversive association (Cai et al., 2016). In another study, mice were fear conditioned with two different tones, separated by 6 hr, and these two tone-shock associations were represented in the amygdala by a common set of neurons (Rashid et al., 2016). When one of the tones was repeatedly presented without shock (a paradigm known to lead to extinction of freezing), it also reduced freezing for the other tone, suggesting that the two memories became linked within those 6 hr. These effects were not seen when longer time intervals separated the two encoding events. Yet another study was able to link a conditioned taste aversion to a fear conditioned response through an overlapping population encoding the two conditioned stimuli (Yokose et al., 2017). These ‘temporal memory-linking’ studies demonstrate that events occurring in close temporal proximity can mutually impact and modify memory representations of surrounding events.


Excitability and synaptic dynamics ensure a constant supply of neurons for memory-updating

During memory-updating, how does the network determine which neurons are integrated into an existing memory? Accumulating evidence indicates that excitability and functional connectivity influence the allocation of neurons into memory ensembles. This theory, known as the ‘memory allocation hypothesis’, suggests that the excitability of a neuron predisposes it for encoding a memory (Rogerson et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2009). Moreover, the excitability and connectivity of neuronal populations are constantly changing, which would suggest that different sets of neurons encode or update memories as these neurons increase in prominence from the perspective of the network (Buzsáki, 2010; Chen et al., 2020; Minerbi et al., 2009; Slomowitz et al., 2015). In other words, drift, as a result of constantly fluctuating excitability (Chen et al., 2020; Rogerson et al., 2014; Slomowitz et al., 2015), synapses (Holtmaat and Svoboda, 2009; Rumpel and Triesch, 2016; Xu et al., 2009; Yang et al., 2009; Ziv and Brenner, 2018), and intracellular proteomes (Rogerson et al., 2014), define the degree to which single neurons compete to participate in encoding a memory (Han et al., 2007) based on their excitability and connectivity to an existing memory engram.

During memory-updating, in order to homeostatically maintain ensemble sizes (Stefanelli et al., 2016), other neurons must also decrease their roles in memory encoding, ‘exiting’ the ensemble by reducing their contribution to the memory representation. Because synaptic potentiation is saturated in engram neurons (Choi et al., 2018), a neuron’s exit from an ensemble might reflect depotentiation, reducing its likelihood of being co-activated with the remainder of the ensemble and potentially allowing it to encode other information. Depotentiation could result from a new competing ensemble suppressing the activity of neurons from a previous ensemble (Han et al., 2007; Rashid et al., 2016). For example, ensembles formed during extinction may be inhibiting ensembles formed during fear learning (Lacagnina et al., 2019). As secondary evidence, optogenetic inhibition of an engram results in recruitment of an alternative engram (Rashid et al., 2016; Schoenenberger et al., 2016; Trouche et al., 2016), implying that the ensemble that might have been ‘next in line’ to compete with the first acts as a fail-safe to encode the present experience, ensuring functional homeostasis. Such competition may also underlie the loss of firing selectivity (e.g., receptive fields) over time in some neurons, decreasing their contribution to reliable memory encoding of the original memory (Liberti et al., 2016; Mankin et al., 2012; Manns et al., 2007; Mau et al., 2018; Rubin et al., 2015; Sheffield and Dombeck, 2015; Trachtenberg et al., 2002; Ziv et al., 2013). The gradual departure of those neurons may allow a transition to another set of neurons that surface with new information to integrate into the existing memory.

During memory-updating, memory allocation on the basis of neuronal excitability promotes the overlap between ensembles encoding memories close in time. High excitability biases neurons encoding one memory to be recruited to encode another event, thereby linking the two memories through a shared neuronal ensemble (‘allocate-to-link’ hypothesis) (Cai et al., 2016; Rashid et al., 2016; Rogerson et al., 2014). But how could associations be made between experiences that are more temporally distant? One possibility is through ensemble reactivation during memory retrieval, which prepares an old ensemble to integrate new ensembles (Yokose et al., 2017). Because memory retrieval involves a reactivation of a neuronal ensemble, excitation of those cells could trigger a physiological state that primes them for integrating the activity patterns of new neurons into their network. In line with this idea, learning increases neuronal excitability (Chandra and Barkai, 2018; Disterhoft et al., 1986). Early studies found that eyeblink conditioning (Disterhoft et al., 1986) and operant conditioning (Saar et al., 1998) increased neuronal excitability in CA1 and piriform cortex by decreasing the magnitude of slow after-hyperpolarizations (due to decreases in the calcium-dependent hyperpolarization current that follows spike bursts). Additionally, recent experiments have shown that during encoding and retrieval episodes, excitability is elevated in specific populations—the engram cells (Cai et al., 2016; Pignatelli et al., 2019). By reactivating these engram cells during memory retrieval, they become re-excited along with newly excited cells at the next encoding event, which could induce synaptic potentiation between these ensembles (Abdou et al., 2018; Choi et al., 2018; Nabavi et al., 2014). In doing so, this would combine memories that are related in content (yet encoded distant in time) in a common set of neurons. Simply put, the brain could recruit neurons encoding new information to fire alongside engram cells into an ensemble that now incorporates elements of new and old firing patterns (Ohkawa et al., 2015). This modified ensemble then represents the updated memory.


Pre-existing temporal motifs influence neuronal recruitment patterns

While excitability could determine the identity of the neurons to be recruited into an ensemble during memory-updating, pre-existing firing patterns (i.e., functional connectivity) at the time of encoding could mediate the temporal structure of the new neural motif destined for eventual potentiation (Dragoi and Tonegawa, 2014; McKenzie et al., 2019). The temporal structure of spiking patterns could then be interpreted by downstream reader regions (Buzsáki and Tingley, 2018). An observed phenomenon that supports the hypothesis of pre-existing temporal patterns is hippocampal ‘preplay’. Preplay refers to an ensemble of CA1 neurons that produces reliable sequential activity prior to spatial learning, which is then recapitulated by firing in the same order while exploring physical space (Dragoi and Tonegawa, 2011; Dragoi and Tonegawa, 2014, but see Silva et al., 2015). This finding again implies that memory representations are not created de novo and instead that pre-existing functional connections and premature synaptic patterns can become potentiated by experience. That is, there is always likely to be a neuronal sequence that occurs more often than others by virtue of the current state of synaptic connectivity (Buzsáki and Mizuseki, 2014), and this sequence becomes most likely to encode the next upcoming memory. In this way, the current state of the network as it drifts is connected to ongoing experience through the storage of information in neuronal ensembles with precise temporal coordination.

Neural sequences derived from preplay templates may undergo cyclical refinement, consistent with our views on continuous memory-updating and how pre-existing temporal structure can shape the patterns that emerge. Once a preplay pattern is potentiated, increasing its occurrence rate, it is considered to be ‘replay’ (Dragoi, 2020; Foster, 2017; Liu et al., 2019) and it is likely that replay patterns could then take on the role of preplay templates to integrate upcoming, related events (Dragoi, 2020). Modification of these sequence templates would therefore be an efficient mechanism for flexibly learning new information that is consistent with pre-established networks, without the need for widespread restructuring (McClelland et al., 2020). In support of this idea, pre-existing sequences are relatively preserved after learning but reorganization is still apparent; new neurons are added to a backbone sequence after spatial exploration (Grosmark and Buzsaki, 2016). One study investigated the properties of neurons that begin to co-fire with an established sequence after spatial exploration of a novel environment (Grosmark and Buzsaki, 2016). This study found that newly recruited neurons contained higher spatial information, suggesting that the neurons that are most informative about spatial regularities in the environment are preferentially added to specific positions along the sequence. Moreover, consistent with the memory allocation theory, the neurons that were recruited tended to have higher firing rates than those that were not (Fernández-Ruiz et al., 2019; Grosmark and Buzsaki, 2016). Finally, the recruitment of neurons is dependent on the degree of temporal coordination between those neurons both prior to and during experience, demonstrating that functional connectivity among the ensemble participants is critical for recruitment (Farooq and Dragoi, 2019; Farooq et al., 2019). Thus, both excitability and functional connectivity bias the composition and temporal coordination of recruited neurons during memory-updating. But to actually induce physical changes in the synaptic strengths of these ensembles, the brain must modify synapses using plasticity proteins in concert with temporally coincident neural activity.


Deployment of plasticity proteins enables subsequent synaptic potentiation of new ensembles

How do slowly drifting synaptic configurations and spiking patterns actually stabilize to store information? One major factor is the upregulation of experience-dependent plasticity, which can temporarily stabilize memory ensembles. Experience-dependent plasticity can then potentiate activity patterns of memory ensembles to allow for those patterns to be retrieved for the next time they are to be updated. Indeed, there is enhanced expression of plasticity-related proteins such as cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB) in numerous brain regions following memory retrieval and updating (Hall et al., 2001). Artificial memory retrieval, through activation of engram cells, triggers plasticity in those cells and memory modification at the behavioral level. For instance, after fear-conditioning, chemogenetically activating CREB-expressing amygdala engram neurons induces freezing and also triggers reconsolidation-associated protein signaling cascades that may prime memory-updating (Kim et al., 2014). Blocking plasticity with protein synthesis inhibition prevents memory-updating and impairs learning-associated changes in firing patterns and synaptic turnover (Dragoi and Tonegawa, 2013; Dupret et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2014; Li et al., 2017; Tse et al., 2011). The myriad protein signal pathways triggered by learning also diversifyneuronal electrophysiological properties, such as excitation and inhibition patterns. These signaling cascades may enable complex interplay among a heterogeneous population to support and balance different aspects of memory, such as stability and flexibility (Sweis et al., 2020; Yap and Greenberg, 2018). For example, a recent study found that Fos- and Npas4-expressing granule cell ensembles in the dentate gyrus were respectively responsible for generalization and discrimination of contextual fear memory (Sun et al., 2020). Further study is required to fully understand how constellations of molecular components interact in the cellular and network milieu to support high order cognition.


Temporal coordination of neuronal ensembles promotes neuronal recruitment and memory-updating

In addition to the mobilization of plasticity mechanisms, neurons also need to spike in a temporally coordinated fashion in order to be recruited (Bi and Poo, 1998). Once neurons become coordinated at the millisecond scale, the resultant ensembles can then persist over longer timescales owing to synaptic potentiation (Bi and Poo, 1998; Bliss and Collingridge, 1993). Oscillatory patterns in the brain represent an organizational framework for grouping the spike timing of neuronal subpopulations, which has led to a large body of literature on how rhythms could subserve experience-dependent plasticity, and therefore also memory-updating. In the hippocampus, plasticity is thought to be mediated by temporally coordinated neuronal ensembles within brief time windows such as the sharp-wave ripple (SPW-R) envelope (Buzsáki, 2015) and individual cycles of the 4–12 Hz theta rhythm (Colgin, 2013; Hasselmo et al., 2002; Larson et al., 1986). Both theta oscillations and SPW-Rs are powerful instigators of plasticity and long-term potentiation (LTP). In vitro, theta-paced stimulation is the optimal frequency for inducing LTP in hippocampal slices (Larson et al., 1986). Importantly, the theta phase is critical for determining whether LTP or synaptic depression occurs (Hyman et al., 2003), meaning that not only is the magnitude of theta important, but also the spike timing of neuronal ensembles within theta cycles (Colgin, 2013; Dragoi and Buzsáki, 2006). Recent studies have shown that CA1 neuronal spiking needs to be temporally organized within theta cycles in order to be recruited into SPW-R events after learning (Chenani et al., 2019; Dragoi, 2020; Drieu et al., 2018; Farooq and Dragoi, 2019; Farooq et al., 2019). Thus, theta oscillations corral ensembles for potentiation and memory-updating.

After temporal coordination, SPW-Rs may accelerate the rate of plasticity among the newly recruited neurons during memory-updating to integrate them into the ensemble. Artificial induction of SPW-Rs strengthens Schaffer collateral synapses in vitro (Sadowski et al., 2016), but curiously also causes long-term depression in synapses that were not recently active (Norimoto et al., 2018). This result suggests that recently activated ensembles are preferentially strengthened while connectivity with less relevant neurons is eroded, resulting in enhanced signal-to-noise. Consistent with this view, hippocampal SPW-Rs refine and stabilize place field maps in animals learning novel environments (Dupret et al., 2010; Gridchyn et al., 2020; Roux et al., 2017; van de Ven et al., 2016). This process is facilitated by upregulating SPW-R prevalence during learning. As a rat learns a spatial memory task, SPW-Rs increase in duration, and optogenetically prolonging SPW-Rs increases behavioral performance and recruits neurons that have spatial fields in behaviorally relevant locations (Fernández-Ruiz et al., 2019). This preferential recruitment implies a mechanism for prioritizing integration of neurons that encode pertinent information and consequently serve important functional roles (Kinsky et al., 2020; Michon et al., 2019). SPW-Rs likely bind old and new memories by co-activating the appropriate ensembles. The end product is an updated ensemble whose spiking patterns convey updated information about recently learned stimuli (Dupret et al., 2010; Fernández-Ruiz et al., 2019; Grosmark and Buzsaki, 2016; O'Neill et al., 2008; Roux et al., 2017; van de Ven et al., 2016).


Sharp-wave ripples coordinate cross-regional memory-updating

Hippocampal SPW-Rs could also recruit extrahippocampal neurons, which might help transmit and integrate recent hippocampal computations with knowledge stored in the neocortex to facilitate brain-wide memory-updating (Kumaran et al., 2016; McClelland et al., 1995). The reorganization of neocortical spiking patterns could then readjust local (cortical) synaptic weights in a way that promotes meaningful activation patterns, synthesizing updated memories that may support schemas (Benchenane et al., 2010; Gilboa and Marlatte, 2017; Kumaran et al., 2016; Maingret et al., 2016; Rothschild et al., 2017). This cross-regional dialogue is a signature of systems consolidation, where the hippocampus is thought to train neocortical ensembles by developing and reinforcing population patterns over a lifetime of experiences (Kumaran et al., 2016; McClelland et al., 1995). Indeed, widespread activation of cortical regions is time-locked to hippocampal SPW-Rs (Logothetis et al., 2012), and SPW-R coupling between neocortex and hippocampus becomes upregulated after learning (Khodagholy et al., 2017). After learning, hippocampal SPW-Rs trigger spiking in downstream cortical ensembles, and also couple with cortical oscillatory events such as ripples, spindles, and delta waves (Alexander et al., 2018; Benchenane et al., 2010; Khodagholy et al., 2017; Latchoumane et al., 2017; Maingret et al., 2016; Rothschild et al., 2017; Todorova and Zugaro, 2019). These neocortical oscillatory events might themselves facilitate local plasticity. Although the individual functions of each frequency band remain an active area of research, generally, cross-regional coherence triggers spike pattern reorganization in downstream readers of hippocampal SPW-Rs that could be the neurophysiological readout of memory-updating (Benchenane et al., 2010; Kumaran et al., 2016; Maingret et al., 2016; Rothschild et al., 2017). Recent evidence suggests that SPW-Rs can route specific content, suggesting that different memories can be individually communicated to downstream readers and updated separately (Gridchyn et al., 2020). Hippocampal sequences, and their downstream neo- and subcortical readers, could reflect a modified ensemble structure that balances both parsimony and newly acquired information after undergoing experience-dependent plasticity.


Concluding remarks

In this review, we have discussed forms of memory-updating and their neurophysiological signatures. We have proposed that these processes can be understood through the modification of neuronal ensembles whose membership is determined by both existing circuitry between neurons and intrinsicdynamics within neurons. Our framework is based on the idea that the integration of ensemble activity creates functional affinities (i.e., related memories). The organization of the neurons within these ensembles is heavily influenced by a combination of cellular excitability and functional connectivity (pre-existing temporal activity patterns) and the enactment of plasticity that modifies synaptic weights. While substantial work has shown that ‘stable’ engram neurons underlie memory retrieval (Josselyn et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2012; Tonegawa et al., 2015), they do not necessarily persist indefinitely without modification. Instead, to satisfy the stability–plasticity dilemma, ensemble activities across brain regions must necessarily be fluid in order to update past memories with new information.

While our review discusses how engrams change over time and experience, there is much still unknown about how the brain resolves the end products of memory-updating. How do these new modifications reconcile with established patterns? Previous studies have found that learning induces enduring changes: population activity does not revert to its original state when a familiar rule is reintroduced (Dupret et al., 2010; Grewe et al., 2017; Malagon-Vina et al., 2018; McKenzie et al., 2013). These findings suggest that interleaved learning episodes can have lasting effects on the computational outputs of mnemonic systems, reflecting acquisition of new knowledge (Kumaran et al., 2016). One particularly interesting idea is that this new knowledge might be integrated with the old via the recombination of sub-ensembles, facilitating the formation of new relational topologies (Sweis et al., 2020; Ghandour et al., 2019).

An interesting effect of dynamic ensembles is that ‘tuning’ from neuronal populations relative to the external world deteriorates over time, which explains many observations of apparent neural instability (Chambers and Rumpel, 2017; Driscoll et al., 2017; Mankin et al., 2012; Mau et al., 2018; Rubin et al., 2015; Rule et al., 2019; Ziv et al., 2013). That is, the patterns of neuronal responses related to external stimuli are short-lived. Instead, the internal mappings between neurons persist through time. From the reference frame of the environment, the neural code for some variable (e.g., spatial location) may be drifting, but from the reference frame of the neurons, representations might remain stable due to compensatory adaptation at the network level (Kalle Kossio et al., 2020; Gonzalez et al., 2019; Kinsky et al., 2018; Rule et al., 2019; Rule et al., 2020). Such an outcome may arise from slow, coherent representational shifts such that different brain regions collectively shift in a coordinated manner. Among these regions may be ‘readers’ that interpret the messages of memory ensembles, and if those networks remodel coherently with upstream inputs, this could support the continuity of memories over time (Buzsáki, 2010; Kalle Kossio et al., 2020; Rule et al., 2020) while also providing a means to update those memories. Thus, it is important to consider how inter-cellular activity patterns are modified during learning, and one major future avenue of research should be to determine how memory-updating rearranges internal activity patterns in an organized manner that retains past information while integrating new data. Most importantly, this perspective forces us to re-assess our very notions of stability. Nearly all central nervous system neurons are many synapses away from direct contact with physical stimuli, so if the upstream populations that do supply their input are inherently dynamic, we should rarely expect a neuron to maintain a stable relationship to an external variable even in the context of memory. Instead, we take the view that brain dynamics help generate unique combinatorial patterns onto which both new and familiar experiences are embedded.

While many outstanding questions persist, emerging technologies will prove critical for enhancing our understanding of the dynamic brain. In particular, voltage imaging (Adam et al., 2019; Piatkevich et al., 2019) has the advantage of being able to track neurons longitudinally while also providing exquisite temporal resolution and sensitivity to signals that are undetectable with calcium imaging (e.g., subthreshold depolarizations). Combining this with other optical techniques in freely behaving animals (Cai et al., 2016; Ziv et al., 2013) will allow us to advance our understanding of the dynamic brain.

- What is the neurobiological milieu that determines the rate of representational drift? Do neuromodulators, sleep, or neuroendocrine signals exert influence?

- Are drift rates in brain regions related to their local intrinsic synaptic volatility (Attardo et al., 2015)? What are the consequences of these differences and how might this relate to the rate of memory-updating in hippocampal versus neocortical structures (Kumaran et al., 2016)?

- How does ensemble remodeling occur in order to retain stored information while adding new information?

- Downstream of memory representations, what are the circuits and computations that transform these firing patterns into behavioral decisions?


Funding Statement

The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.


Contributor Information

William Mau, Email: william.mau@mssm.edu.

Denise J Cai, Email: denise.cai@mssm.edu.

Laura L Colgin, University of Texas at Austin, United States.

Laura L Colgin, University of Texas at Austin, United States.


Funding Information

This paper was supported by the following grants:

NIH F32AG067640 to William Mau.

NIH R01MH052090 to Michael Hasselmo.

Office of Naval Research ONR MURI N00014-19-1-2571 to Michael Hasselmo.

NIH R01MH095297 to Michael E Hasselmo.

NIH DP2MH122399 to Denise Cai.

One Mind Institute One Mind Otsuka Rising Star Award to Denise Cai.

McKnight Foundation McKnight Memory and Cognitive Disorders Award to Denise Cai.

Mount Sinai Health System Mount Sinai Distinguished Scholar Award to Denise Cai.

Brain Research Foundation Brain Research Foundation Award to Denise Cai.

Brain and Behavior Research Foundation NARSAD Young Investigator Award to Denise Cai.

Office of Naval Research MURI N00014-16-1-2832 to Michael Hasselmo.

NIH MH120073 to Michael Hasselmo.

Esther A. and Joseph Klingenstein Fund Klingenstein-Simons Fellowship Award in Neuroscience to Denise Cai.

NIH R01 MH120162 to Denise J Cai.


Designing and understanding light-harvesting devices with machine learning

Florian Häse, Loïc M Roch, Pascal Friederich, Alán Aspuru-Guzik — Nature Communications, 2020. PMC7486390, CC BY 4.0.

Understanding the fundamental processes of light-harvesting is crucial to the development of clean energy materials and devices. Biological organisms have evolved complex metabolic mechanisms to efficiently convert sunlight into chemical energy. Unraveling the secrets of this conversion has inspired the design of clean energy technologies, including solar cells and photocatalytic water splitting. Describing the emergence of macroscopic properties from microscopic processes poses the challenge to bridge length and time scales of several orders of magnitude. Machine learning experiences increased popularity as a tool to bridge the gap between multi-level theoretical models and Edisonian trial-and-error approaches. Machine learning offers opportunities to gain detailed scientific insights into the underlying principles governing light-harvesting phenomena and can accelerate the fabrication of light-harvesting devices.

Subject terms: Light harvesting, Energy transfer, Excited states, Statistics


Introduction

Converting sunlight into energy is an essential metabolic step for many organisms and thus one of the key fundamental processes driving life on Earth. The abundance of solar power, and the fact that plants can leverage photochemical processes to convert it into chemical energy, provides the opportunity to use it as a massive renewable energy resource. Indeed, the energy provided by the sun is expected to be sufficient to satisfy the worldwide energy consumption. As such, developing scalable, cost-efficient systems to harness solar energy offers a roadmap to approach some of the key societal challenges of the 21st century, including the development of sustainable clean energy technologies. The key to viable artificial light-harvesting systems are operations at high power conversion efficiencies with long life times and low production costs.

Biological organisms capable of producing chemical energy from sunlight, a process catalyzed by photon-induced charge separation, inspire the design of artificial light-harvesting devices for various applications: photovoltaic systems create electrical voltage and current upon photon absorption, excitonic networks are developed for efficient excitation energy transport, and functional materials powered by sunlight enable carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction and water splitting, to name a few. While artificial solar energy conversion is on the rise, current technologies need to be advanced to expedite the transition to a net-zero carbon economy. Detailed mechanistic understanding and structural insights into the physiological processes in biological organisms to harvest sunlight could inspire the design of artificial light-harvesting devices.

Over millions of years, photoautotrophs, notably cyanobacteria and plants, have developed efficient and robust strategies to achieve direct solar-to-fuel conversion with photosynthesis. In this process, chemical energy is produced in the form of carbohydrate molecules, e.g. sugars, which are synthesized from water and CO2. These reactions are driven by the absorption of photons collected from sunlight. The primary steps of natural photosynthesis involve the creation of spatially separated electron-hole pairs upon photon absorption in the light-dependent reactions. The resulting electric potential drives the oxidation of water to oxygen in the light-independent reactions. This water-splitting process is at the heart of the energetics of photosynthesis. The key processes of the light-dependent reactions are facilitated by self-assembled light-harvesting pigment–protein complexes at high energy conversion efficiencies and robustness: the formation of electronic excitations induced by photon absorption as the primary energy conversion step, followed by excitation energy transport (EET) and finally charge-separation, via charge-transfer (CT) excitations, to drive chemical reactions.

With optimal environmental conditions, photosynthetic organisms can convert almost all absorbed photons into stable photoproducts and thus operate at nearly 100% quantum efficiency. However, solar energy conversion efficiency must ultimately be assessed from the perspective of complete life cycles. While artificial light-harvesting devices can achieve almost as high quantum efficiencies, their overall power conversion efficiency is typically higher than those of photosynthetic organisms, which typically does not exceed 1% for crop plants, and 3% for microalgae. Indeed, photosynthetic organisms are more concerned about survival (i.e. fitness) than high biomass production (i.e., growth). Adverse, rapid changes in the incident photon flux are accounted for by small structural changes of one or more of the light-harvesting proteins to open up energy dissipation pathways and thus limit the formation of harmful photoproducts such as reactive oxygen species. For this reason, the vital property of the photosynthetic apparatus is functional robustness despite constantly fluctuating environments (i.e., disorder) on all levels of organization. Solar technologies based on low-cost molecular materials such as polymers, organic semiconductors, and nanoparticles face similar challenges of fluctuating environments and phototoxicity and may benefit greatly when steered by the design principles on which natural photosynthesis is operating.

Designing light-harvesting devices requires a well-founded understanding of the emergence of macroscopic materials properties from their microscopic structures. Computational models can help to unveil these structure-property relations and thus accelerate the targeted development of artificial light-harvesting systems. However, challenges of the current computational models lie in the computational cost associated with the quantum mechanical treatment of the relevant mechanisms dominated by EET and CT events as well as material degradation pathways. Established theoretical descriptions to quantify these processes are under active development, but are oftentimes computationally involved, and sometimes cover only a subset of the phenomena relevant in experimental settings. In fact, one of the outstanding challenges in computational materials science consists in closing the gap between the length-scales of single molecules and macroscopic materials as well as the time-scales, bridging ultrafast electronic events to slow collective nuclear motions. In many cases, only empirical models are available to approximately describe structure-property relations.

Artificial intelligence (AI), notably machine learning (ML), has experienced rising interest by the scientific community–. Recent progress in the field of AI allows to rethink current approaches and design methods with accuracies comparable to state-of-the-art theoretical models at a fraction of the computational cost. ML, as a subdiscipline of AI, presents a particularly promising approach to this endeavor. By identifying patterns in data, ML can leverage statistical correlations—in contrast to the laws of physics—to predict the properties of the system of interest. Such transformative phenomenological models have the potential to accelerate scientific discovery–.

In this perspective, we outline recent successes of ML to drive the scientific understanding of phenomena and applications of light-harvesting. Specifically, we highlight the benefits of ML to complement quantum mechanical models for estimating EET and CT properties, as well as the opportunities to predict macroscopic device properties, notably related to device stability, directly from microscopic structures. Despite these successes, there are promising new venues to explore and to leverage from ML approaches, which are currently explored by the community, as overviewed hereafter. We conclude this perspective by spotlighting potential applications to foster a deeper integration of ML into established scientific workflows to tackle today’s energy challenge at a faster pace.


Computational models for light-harvesting

From photon capture to charge transfer, quantum mechanical phenomena are at the heart of the fundamental processes governing photosynthesis. Full theoretical descriptions and detailed understanding of these processes are most desirable to derive roadmaps for the design of artificial light-harvesting devices. Over the last decade, EET and CT events in large photosynthetic complexes, such as the light-harvesting complex II (LHII) or the Fenna–Matthews–Olson (FMO) complex, have been a topic of interest from both a theoretical and experimental perspective–. However, full quantum mechanical treatments of all degrees of freedom in these molecular systems is computationally infeasible due to their large sizes (exceeding 100,000 atoms) and the relevant time-scales ranging from ultrafast electronic processes (fs to ps) to slow reorganization events (μs to ms).

Computational models to study EET and CT excitations in biological light-harvesting complexes rely on hybrid quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) simulations, where the electronic structure of a subsystem, typically the molecular pigments, is modeled quantum mechanically while the surrounding bath, e.g. the protein scaffold or the solvent, is described by a classical force field. Molecular excitations are commonly assumed to be mostly governed by excitations between the ground and the first excited states, and are modulated by thermal fluctuations in the nuclear geometry of the pigments and their surroundings. Although non-adiabatic excited state dynamics calculations could reveal the EET processes, only reduced models which treat the dynamics of the bath implicitly, can currently be afforded to study the governing principles of photosynthesis.

In a first approximation, excitation energy correlation functions can be determined from low-level quantum chemistry methods for estimating excitation energies of molecular pigments in conformations generated with classical molecular dynamics,. Extensions to this approach include quantum mechanical corrections to molecular geometries at increased computational costs, or ground state dynamics calculations based on density functional theory (DFT). In a second step, EET properties are determined via open quantum system dynamics schemes. Numerically accurate approaches that account for the non-Markovian transfer process, e.g. the hierarchical equations of motion (HEOM), are computationally demanding, and can only be afforded for selected systems.

Although bio-inspired design of molecules and materials for light-harvesting applications has been of interest for decades, the computational cost for describing EET and CT excitation events with aforementioned theoretical models poses major challenges to large-scale ab initio studies. Computational descriptions of solar cells, for example, require elaborate and costly multi-scale models. Solar cells constitute devices which, inspired by the light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis, convert sunlight into electrical energy by generating spatially separated electron-hole pairs upon photon absorption. Several device architectures have been proposed for solar cells, differing in their material constitutions and compositions. The efficiency of the light-to-energy conversion process is determined by the electronic properties of the constituting materials that regulate photon absorption and exciton dissociation events.

In the case of inorganic solar cells, charge separation is a spontaneous process. Most of the commercially available first-generation solar cells are based on pn-junctions created by doped polycrystalline or single-crystal silicon. Second-generation thin film solar cells include cadmium telluride (CdTe), and copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) technologies. Recently, perovskite solar cells (PSCs), have experienced increased attention as breakthroughs in materials and device architectures boosted their efficiencies and stabilities. PSCs are typically composed of inorganic lead halide matrices, and contain inorganic or organic cations. Power conversion in PSCs is achieved by the direct absorption and conversion of incoming photons into free electrons and holes which are then extracted through p- and n-type contacts.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) constitute another class of solar cell technologies that uses phase-separated mixtures of two or more materials in a bulk-heterojunction architecture to absorb light and split the exciton into electron-hole pairs at the interface between the two (or three) materials,. Thus, OSCs fall somewhere between the limits of photosynthesis and crystalline solar-cell materials with desirable properties often limited by energetic and structural disorder,. They have a number of appealing advantages over their inorganic counterparts, such as mechanical flexibility, lower energy payback time, being free of heavy metals and they can be successfully stabilized. Early OSCs have been proposed with fullerenes as acceptor materials due to their excellent electron-transporting properties and favorable bulk heterojunction morphology,. However, fullerene-based OSCs present critical limitations related to fundamentally constrained energy levels, and photochemical instability. In fact, the efficiency of organic solar cells based on fullerene derivatives as acceptor materials was limited to <12% and mostly saturated between 2012 and 2017. A major advance in engineering efficient OSC candidates was the discovery of several families of non-fullerene acceptor molecules,. Currently, these acceptors replace C60/C70 derivatives in all highly-efficient organic solar cells, reaching power conversion efficiencies well beyond the highest PCEs achieved with fullerene-based acceptors. The large number of degrees of freedom arising from the complex aromatic structures allows to fine tune their electronic properties such as the optical gap, exciton diffusion length, exciton binding energy, the energy level alignment between the donor and acceptor materials, or the charge-carrier mobility. Further development is required to make OSCs based on non-fullerene acceptors ready for commercial applications, mostly to make non-fullerene acceptors chemically less complex and thus cheaper to produce on a large scale.

Computational tools employed to determine these properties often balance accuracy and computational cost. Time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) is nowadays a widely used quantum chemical method to study excited states, notably due to its relatively low computational demands. However, errors from TD-DFT calculations can be significant particularly for large organic chromophores, and are highly influenced by the parametrization of the exchange-correlation functional,. A complementary approach to the computation of excitation properties relies on the Green’s function formalism to derive first-principles GW-BSE (Bethe-Salpeter), based on a one-electron Green’s function, G, and a screened Coulomb potential, W. GW constitutes a quasi-particle many-body theory, which is known to accurately estimate electronic excitations described by electron addition and removal processes, as has been shown, for example, for corannulene-based materials, organic molecules for photovoltaics and fullerene-porphyrin complexes.

One known phenomenon which is particularly challenging to describe theoretically or observe experimentally is the reduction of open-circuit voltage in organic solar cells due to non-radiative decays that adversely affect the efficiency of solar-cell devices. In the absence of complete and tractable theoretical models, the identification of empirical evidence for this hypothesis requires a lot of effort. For instance, Vandewal and coworkers have presented evidence for a universal relation between non-radiative decay rates of molecules used in OSCs and losses in open-circuit voltage and thus in power conversion efficiency. The challenge in finding the relation between molecular structure and non-radiative decay rates consists in the fact that non-radiative decay is closely coupled to molecular vibrations and electron–phonon interactions. These phenomena are non-trivial to describe with ground-state methods based on the Born-Oppenheimer approximation such as DFT. The complexity of device architectures and the large number of materials properties, which determine device efficiencies and stabilities pose major obstacles to the microscopic understanding of macroscopic properties. Designing and engineering promising device candidates, therefore, remains to be a challenge and faster and more accurate computational tools are needed for in silico studies of solar cell efficiencies and stabilities.


Advances in machine learning

ML is emerging as a promising tool to accelerate resource-demanding computations and experiments in the physical sciences–. ML, as a subdiscipline to AI, generally encompasses algorithmic systems and statistical models capable of performing defined tasks without being provided specific instructions. Instead, ML models infer task-relevant information from provided data and thus learn how to solve these tasks. To this end, ML seeks to provide knowledge to computers through data that encodes observations and interactions with the world or parts of it.

The ability of ML models to identify and exploit statistical correlations from examples offers opportunities in the physical sciences. ML has the potential to bridge the gap between the construction of elaborate and costly multi-theory models and resource demanding Edisonian trial-and-error approaches. This offers opportunities to leverage ML, for example, to speculate about the performances of hypothetical, not yet fabricated OPV devices or materials based on measurements on other devices collected in the past. ML could, therefore, inspire the formulation of hypotheses, design principles, and scientific concepts.

The versatile applicability of AI in the sciences has already been realized decades ago. One of the earliest applications has been introduced with the Dendral and Meta-Dendral programs, which sought to develop an artificial expert level agent to determine molecular structures of unknown compounds from mass spectrometry data. The Dendral initiative had first been launched in 1965 with the ambition to automate the decision-making process of organic chemists and many computational tools for mass spectrometry have been derived from Dendral since its beginnings. Other early examples from the late 1980s include the application of neural networks to predict secondary structures of proteins, the analysis of low-resolution mass spectra, drug discovery, or process fault diagnosis and comprehensive reviews of early ML applications before and around 1990 are provided by Burns et al. as well as Gasteiger and coworkers. While data-driven regression approaches are being used e.g. for drug discovery for a long time, recent breakthroughs in ML led to significant advancements in materials/drug design. These breakthroughs enabled further research directly related to light-harvesting applications, notably for the discovery of small molecules for organic light-emitting diodes, and photofunctional molecules with desired excitation energies as we will outline in more detail further on in the manuscript. The versatility of data-driven techniques in the sciences can be attributed to the rich pool of different models and formulations of ML strategies, which we will briefly review in the following.


Supervised learning

One common application of ML consists in supervised learning tasks. For such problems, ML models are trained to predict a set of outputs (targets) from a set of inputs (features). Hence, the models need to learn a mapping which projects given features to their associated targets, following the hidden causality of the feature-target relation. In the context of chemistry and materials science, supervised problems are encountered for example as property prediction tasks such as estimating CT excitation energies from molecular geometries. Given the molecular structures, and possibly the environment in which the structures are embedded, the ML model learns a function f to predict the set of desired properties, e.g. CT excitations.

During training, the model is presented with examples of (structure and environment vs. properties) pairs to infer the underlying structure-property relation. To this end, the model leverages statistical correlations from the dataset, instead of physical laws. It is important to mention that ML models for supervised tasks cannot identify or formulate dependencies of the properties on structural or environmental variables that are not included in the dataset. For example, a temperature dependence will not be discovered if temperature is not provided as one of the factors in the dataset. In fact, if the predicted properties are modulated by temperature changes, the properties of interest would be subject to a seemingly stochastic noise-level below which the prediction errors of the ML models could not be converged.

Active learning presents a special case, where labeled data is generated on-the-fly, interleaved with a prediction process and the labeled data is actively queried by the ML agent. As such, active learning relies on a closed-loop feedback mechanism and can be approached from the perspective of the supervised learning paradigm where the model actively queries a structure to be evaluated, or from the perspective of a reinforcement learning task where the model receives a reward to a set of chosen actions. Active learning is illustrated in Fig. c. Compared to standard supervised learning strategies, ML agents in an active learning framework do not require initial data to be trained on, which comes at the expensive of an iterative and thus less parallelizable workflow. Note, that active learning can be though of as the generalization of optimization tasks, where the difference lies in the choice of the reward function which determines the merit of each queried structure.


Unsupervised learning

Unsupervised learning strategies, in contrast, do not aim to directly predict properties from features. Instead, their focus is on inferring the a priori probability distribution p, e.g. p(property). Unsupervised learning thus has the potential to reveal patterns in the provided dataset which can then be interpreted by the researcher. Examples of unsupervised strategies include clustering and anomaly detection. However, if both structures and properties are available to an unsupervised model, the joint probability distribution, p(property, structure), can be learned. Such unsupervised models can be understood as generative models, which predict structures and properties of molecules or materials simultaneously. To this end, generative models typically rely on a latent space, from which properties and structures are predicted at the same time. Since both the properties and the structures are generated from the same point in the latent space, one can navigate that latent space in search for the desired property values and obtain structures directly with the expected properties. The search for a structure with desired property is formulated as a search for the point in the latent space which generates these desired properties. Since this latent space point can be decoded into a structure, both structures and properties are obtained at the same time. The inverse-design problem of finding a structure that satisfies desired properties thus no longer requires the assembly and subsequent exhaustive undirected screening of a large library of candidates. Instead, promising candidates can be identified in a more guided, and thus faster search following the structure of the latent representation.


Representations and models

Scientific questions pose unique challenges which are not frequently encountered in the traditional sample applications of ML research. For example, molecules and materials can obey particular symmetries, such as an ambiguity in the ordering of their atoms or the invariance of properties with respect to translations and rotations. Yet, the environment of a molecule might be of particular importance and could be intrinsically disordered and challenging to describe. Different representations of the structure can highlight different aspects of a molecule or material, and thus affect the predictive power of a ML model. In fact, the identification of most informative representations, a process commonly referred to as feature engineering, has shown to be of crucial importance.

Several representations have been proposed to boost the performances of ML models. One fundamental requirement on performant representations is uniqueness, i.e. the representation must be unique with respect to all relevant degrees of freedom. Among the earliest developed representations are SMILES strings, which encode molecules as text. Morgan fingerprints represent molecules as a bit-vector indicating the presence of molecular fragments in the molecule, and typically perform well in cases where specific functional groups govern the properties of interest. Coulomb matrices and other non-topological features have been introduced in the context of learning electronic properties of molecules. They are frequently used to predict, for example, ground and excited state energies, absorption spectra or thermochemical properties. Other representations include bag of bonds/angles/dihedrals, many-body tensors, atom-centered symmetry functions the smooth overlap of atomic positions (SOAP), or representations based on multidimensional Gaussians (FCHL). Recently, with the rise of generative models in chemistry, other text-based representations of molecules have been proposed. Among others, GrammarVAEs and SELFIES have been suggested to increase the robustness and diversity of text-based representations. In addition, application specific representations based on hand-selected sets of microscopic properties are frequently employed–.

Novel ML models have also been specifically designed for applications in the physical sciences to intrinsically account for some of the aforementioned symmetries and unique properties of molecules and materials. Deep tensor networks (DTNNs), for example, process molecular structures based on vectors of nuclear charges and matrices of atomic distances expanded in a Gaussian basis. This encoding preserves all information relevant to the prediction of electronic properties but achieves model invariance with respect to translations and rotations. ANAKIN-ME describes an approach to develop transferable neural network potentials based on atomic environment vectors. Shortly after, message passing neural networks have been introduced, which interpret molecules as unstructured graphs. The recently reported TensorMol architecture uses two neural networks, one trained to account for nuclear charges and the other trained to estimate short-ranged embedded atomic energies, for the prediction of properties such as atomization energies, thus extending prior work pioneered by Behler (see ref. for an in-depth review) An extension to DTNNs has been suggested using filter-generating networks to enable the incorporation of periodic boundary conditions. Only recently, inspired by the many-body expansion, hierarchically interacting particle neural networks (HIP-NN) have been developed to model the total energy of a molecule as a sum over local contributions, which are further decomposed into terms of different orders. The developed representations and models provide the toolset to support studies on natural and artificial light-harvesting systems with ML, as will be demonstrated in the remainder of this perspective.


Machine learning accelerates established workflows

Statistical methods have long been used to calibrate quantum mechanical calculations to experimental results. DFT, for example, could correctly describe the quantum nature of matter if the exact exchange-correlation functional was known and a complete basis-set was used. In reality, DFT relies on approximative exchange-correlation functionals, which determine the accuracy of DFT-based property predictions. It has, therefore, long been of interest to calibrate DFT-computed properties to experimental results with simple statistical models such as linear regression, for example in the context of predicting the 1H NMR shielding tensor, or pKa values. More elaborate neural network models have been used to predict corrections to molecular energies obtained with smaller basis sets based on results obtained with larger basis sets.

In TD-DFT calculations, exchange functionals tend to underestimate CT excitations due to self-interaction errors,. Potential energy surfaces estimated with TD-DFT can, therefore, be incorrect, which complicates excited state dynamics calculations. Yet, TD-DFT provides a relatively inexpensive alternative to obtain excited state properties compared to computationally more involved schemes, such as GW, EOM-MP2, EOM-CC, RPA or Full CI. As such, empirical corrections to TD-DFT results which alleviate the accuracy shortcomings without substantially increasing the computational demand like the aforementioned approaches have long been of interest, particularly to compute properties of candidate materials for solar cell applications. One example consists in the in silico estimation of the reachable open-circuit voltage, which corresponds to the maximum voltage available from a solar cell and is fundamentally limited by the bandgap of the candidate material. Notably, the Harvard Clean Energy Project (CEP) has shown that linear regression provides a robust method to calibrate the open-circuit voltage of photovoltaic devices to accurately reproduce experimental results at the <30 meV level. The database generated from the CEP results inspired further studies on the calibration of excitation energies with more complex models such as neural networks, as well as the development of molecular descriptors for the prediction of power conversion efficiencies. In addition, neural networks and support vector machines have been used for more than a decade to improve the accuracy of TD-DFT predictions, e.g. to predict absorption energies of small organic molecules,.

With the increasing availability of datasets, ML experienced a steep rise in interest for electronic structure predictions in the last years. Initial studies focused on the direct prediction of ground state properties, such as atomization energies from Coulomb matrices using kernel ridge regression. Promising prediction accuracies encouraged attempts to predict excited state properties shortly after. To systematically study and compare the performance of neural network models, a benchmark set consisting of all stable, synthetically accessible organic molecules with at most seven heavy atoms, referred to as QM7, was introduced. More extensive benchmark sets followed, such as the QM9 dataset as well as MoleculeNet as a collection of several datasets. These benchmark sets enabled more thorough investigations of the applicability of ML models to calibrate inexpensive approximate quantum methods to more accurate calculations and experiments: a variety of thermochemical properties including enthalpies, free energies, entropies and electron correlations have been predicted for small molecules; hierarchical schemes based on multilevel combination techniques have been introduced to combine various levels of approximations in quantum chemistry with machine learning; chemical shifts in NMR have been prediced with kernel ridge regression and the SOAP kernel; and ground state properties could be predicted at systematically lower errors than DFT calculations. The observed prediction accuracies, therefore, suggest that ML could indeed complement DFT as one of the most popular electronic structure approaches.

One step further, ML can also aid in the prediction of excitation spectra. It has been demonstrated that kernel ridge regression can be applied to calibrate electronic spectra obtained from TD-DFT calculations to CC2 accuracies in a Δ-learning approach. The possibility to directly predict excitation spectra from molecular structures has also been reported. Specifically, simple feed-forward neural network models were used to predict the positions and the spectral weights of peaks in molecular ionization spectra for small organic molecules encoded as Coulomb matrices. The prediction accuracies could be further improved with more elaborate convolutional neural network models and DTNNs. With the accurate prediction of excitation spectra, optical properties such as band gaps can be readily estimated for novel solar cell candidates, which accelerates the search for promising materials.


Prediction of dynamics

Studying the behavior of light-harvesting molecules and materials under operating conditions, including interactions with light, radiative, and non-radiative decay processes as well as degradation processes, requires highly accurate modeling of these systems over long time scales. However, computational modeling of large systems bridging orders of magnitude in time poses extreme challenges to conventional simulation methods. Molecular dynamics simulations enhanced with ML based force fields promise to accelerate simulations of molecular materials as well as crystalline materials and can provide deeper mechanistic insights. First molecular dynamics simulations with a purely ML-based ground state density functional have recently been reported. This study demonstrates how electron-densities can be predicted from approaches similar to kernel ridge regression and was used to time-evolve small molecular systems in their ground states. Ground-state molecular dynamics simulations have also been realized with Gaussian process regression, where forces are either predicted directly by the regressor or computed on-the-fly from DFT calculations. This active learning strategy to build an accurate ML model on-the-fly for MD simulations has further been demonstrated in the context of amorphous and liquid hafnium dioxide, and aqueous sodium hydroxide.

Moreover, ML has also been used for excited state predictions to study the dynamics of excitons in natural light-harvesting complexes. For example, the acceleration of exciton dynamics calculations with feedforward neural networks has been reported for the FMO pigment–protein complex. Furthermore, EET characteristics of nature-inspired excitonic systems have been estimated with neural network models, thus reducing the computational cost of computationally involved methods for open quantum systems dynamics. Recently, the on-the-fly construction of potential energy surfaces for non-adiabatic excited state dynamics calculations with kernel ridge regression has been reported for selected molecules. While demonstrating that excited state dynamics calculations can indeed be accelerated with ML techniques, the predicted potential energy surfaces initially showed large deviations in the vicinity of conical intersections, which required corrections from additional QM calculations. Deep-learning models have been suggested to alleviate this bottleneck and perform pure ML-based excited state dynamics calculations,. As the aforementioned studies only focused on selected molecules, transferability of the models to more diverse molecule classes has yet to be demonstrated. Nonetheless, these studies demonstrate that ML emerges as a promising tool to enable large-scale excited-state dynamics studies. Such tools can allow for detailed mechanistic studies of EET and CT processes in light-harvesting devices at the atomic level. For example, the behavior of complex perovskite structures could be investigated under operating conditions to observe effects such as the formation of ferroelectric domains or the migration of defects and ions on a microscopic scale. These observations could, in turn, inspire the design of more robust and long-lived devices.


Machine learning can transform established workflows

While the design and fabrication of light-harvesting devices require a profound understanding of EET and CT processes, further aspects need to be considered to design economically viable solutions. For example, the solubility and photostability of materials candidates and the cost to synthesize them are keys for a more complete and comprehensive description. However, computing such properties with ab initio approaches poses major challenges, as precise estimates can at best be obtained at high computational costs. Since ML leverages statistical correlations, rigorous physical descriptions of considered phenomena are not needed to quantify such secondary materials aspects. For example, a recent study demonstrated the construction of a data-driven model to estimate Hansen solubility parameters in two different approaches: one constructed model was based on molecular properties including sigma profiles, electrostatics, geometric and topological parameters evaluated with semi-empirical and DFT methods, while the other model only relied on inexpensive topological parameters (molecular fingerprints). Both models, based on Gaussian processes which are well suited for small and noisy datasets, were found to be similarly accurate in their prediction, despite the more diverse data available to the first model. Instead, relevant statistical correlations could be identified from the topological features alone, resolving the need for electronic structure calculations and thus accelerating the solubility parameter estimation by about 720x.

The potential of ML to assess device performances directly from a set of features describing materials properties has been demonstrated for the prediction of experimental power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of small molecule OPVs. Accurate theoretical PCE predictions require high-level quantum chemistry calculations to correctly account for all influential effects such as electron–electron interactions and electron–phonon couplings. Instead of accelerating quantum chemical approaches, gradient boosting models were used to directly predict PCEs from a set of 13 hand-picked microscopic molecular properties, which were known or hypothesized to affect the energy conversion process. Another study has shown that design principles for acceptor molecules in OPVs can be derived from a Gaussian process based calibration model. Bandgaps of hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites (HOIP) have also been predicted directly with several ML approaches. Initially, 30 properties were selected as features for each of the HOIP candidates, and the benefit of each descriptor to improve the predictive power of a gradient boosting regression was assessed. A subset of 14 features was then identified, where the tolerance factor, calculated from the ratio of ionic radii, was revealed to be the most influential descriptor. Both studies demonstrate the applicability of ML methods to estimate materials performances from a set of low-level descriptors without the need of extensive quantum chemistry calculations. Moreover, specific microscopic materials properties have been identified to be particularly influential, which can be used to derive design principles.


Unsupervised strategies for light-harvesting

Similarly to property predictions with supervised learning, the application of unsupervised strategies to light-harvesting is an active field of research. In fact, unsupervised strategies have recently been proposed to aid in the optimization of multi-junction solar cells toward maximized yearly energy yields instead of maximized efficiencies at standard conditions. Specifically, the cost-effective computation of the yearly energy yield from a set of reference solar spectra has been enabled by identifying the most informative subset of characteristic spectra via k-means clustering. Further, clustering strategies have been used to derive design principles for organic semiconductor design, which enabled the in silico discovery of molecular crystals with improved charge-transfer properties.

In addition to clustering strategies, generative models are applied for the de novo design of novel materials for light-harvesting. Variational autoencoders (VAEs) have first been suggested for automatic chemical design, and demonstrated on the generation of drug-like molecules and molecules for organic light-emitting diodes. Extensions to this work improved the validity of the generated molecules by adapting the SMILES-based molecule encoding, leading to e.g. grammar VAEs. These extended encodings have recently been employed to generate organic donor–acceptor candidates for polymer solar cells. The authors demonstrate that grammar VAEs can be efficiently applied when modifying the standard SMILES representation for a donor–acceptor molecule into a more coarse grained representation, where individual structural features are highlighted. While the introduced coarse grained representation narrows the search space, it also enables the grammar VAE to focus on relevant and promising molecules. Starting from a randomly selected training set of candidate polymers where only 11% of the polymers satisfy the chosen thresholds for LUMO levels and optical gaps, the authors demonstrate that a grammar VAE can be trained to generate promising polymer candidates at a rate of 61%.

The ChemTS library implements de novo molecular design by combining Monte Carlo tree searches with recurrent neural networks (RNN). ChemTS generates a shallow tree of incomplete text-based molecule encodings, and completes each branch with a RNN. The most promising branches are kept, while the others are discarded. Following this strategy, the discovery of five photofunctional molecules with desired lowest excitation levels has recently been reported. This study iteratively generated organic molecules and computed their excitation energies with TD-DFT in a closed-loop approach. Notably, out of the six molecule candidates discovered from this in silico screening, the expected properties could be experimentally verified for five of them.


Synthesis and fabrication planning

Although generative models have the ability to propose novel molecules and material candidates in silico, synthesis pathways or fabrication protocols might not be known. Thus, one of the main challenges for generative models is to ensure the transferability of computationally predicted lead candidates to synthesis and experiment. To alleviate this obstacle, quantitative estimates of the synthesizability can be included as targeted properties during the design process. Synthesizability is typically quantified via heuristics based on domain expertise or ground truth data, and multiple approaches have been developed–. Recently, an improved synthesizability score based on a neural network model trained on 12 million reactions has been suggested, targeting the inexpensive indication of synthetic accessibility of a compound. The development of ML tools for the direct prediction of chemical syntheses, either via forward synthesis or retrosynthesis techniques, has also experienced increased attention,. Yet, fast experimental verifications of the computationally predicted lead candidates might still not be possible due to additional hardware and reagent constraints. Instead, aspects about the synthesizability and the feasibility of selected synthesis pathways could be taken into consideration when generating a large library of realizable candidate materials. For example, coarse-grained molecular representations can encode molecules for which the synthesis path is known ahead of time. Active learning approaches can then be applied to navigate the search space for the most promising candidate, knowing how to synthesize every element of the search space.


Discussion and outlook

Data-driven approaches are emerging as versatile and viable technology for light-harvesting research, connecting complete and comprehensive bottom-up theoretical models with Edisonian trial-and-error strategies. Indeed, light-harvesting research, notably for the design of OSCs and PSCs, increasingly integrates data-driven tools into their workflows at various levels, including property screening, candidate selection, analysis, and interpretation,. We have highlighted some of the ML models specifically designed to find new light-harvesting materials,. The development of light-harvesting technologies is an elaborate process, which involves design choices based on theoretical models and hypotheses regarding the governing principles of light-harvesting, and the synthesis and characterization of light-harvesting materials and devices. With the capacity to infer causal structure-property relations from experiments and collected data, the applicability of ML can be found on both ends, device conception, and device testing, where the boundaries of state-of-the-art technologies can be pushed even further with data-driven approaches.

While ML has been shown to expedite both the theoretical and phenomenological understanding of the fundamental processes around light-harvesting, the applicability of an individual ML model is still mostly limited to specific aspects, and models need to be trained from the ground up for every new application. Image recognition has emerged as an example where parts of trained ML models can be reused when moving to a different application, such that patterns learned in previous studies are carried over to accelerate the learning process for new applications. Since light-harvesting applications are governed by the same fundamental quantum mechanical phenomena, transfer learning approaches could provide a more comprehensive picture of the structure-property relations of light-harvesting systems.

The remarkable successes of ML in modeling highly complex physical relations in light-harvesting applications have mostly been achieved with large datasets, assembled and collected with a lot of effort,. Structure-property relations have been constructed based on statistical correlations contained in these datasets. Apart from possible limitations arising from limited representations of the physical reality, and the resulting selection bias inherent to the datasets, the many computations or experiments required to assemble the datasets often cause substantial costs. A more sustainable approach, alleviating the data requirements, consists in active learning strategies, where ML models are enabled to actively incorporate new data in a closed-loop process. Yet, even with active learning, the models’ predictions solely rely on statistical correlations. Providing domain knowledge, i.e. leveraging the scientific understanding of light-harvesting to date, has the potential to substantially lower the data requirements. For example, it has been demonstrated that neural networks can be trained to predict the heights of objects under gravity from images and Newton’s equations of motion, but without being provided explicitly labeled data. Thus, ML models could be supplied with the relevant known laws of physics, which are impossible to be violated in the considered light-harvesting systems, and complete their interpretations of structure-property relations based on provided (or queried) examples. Such approaches have recently been demonstrated in the context of quantum chemistry calculations, where data-driven approaches by construction encode the physics of valid wave functions,.

Similarly, the statistical correlations identified by ML models provide opportunities for interpretations and the formulation of novel scientific concepts. The derivation of design principles by analyzing the architecture of trained ML models has already been demonstrated for feature engineering and applications in light-harvesting, specifically on the prediction of PCEs from molecular descriptors. However, trained ML models can also be used as an investigation tool for the inexpensive testing of hypotheses, which has recently been demonstrated in the context of predicting the timescales of the chemiluminescent decomposition of small molecules. Yet, these studies where ML technologies are used to gain scientific understanding present only isolated cases, as most existing ML models are not intrinsically interpretable but have focused on high prediction accuracies. Data-driven approaches need to generally transition from predictive models to explaining models to contribute to inspire insights and drive light-harvesting research further. We, therefore, consider the development of interpretable ML models for a large range of applications in light-harvesting research to be one of the outstanding challenges to advance the field.

Succeeding in these endeavors enables opportunities to gain insights into the challenging scientific questions around light-harvesting, such as understanding the interplay between microscopic features and mesoscale properties of natural pigment–protein complexes, the quantum mechanical effects modulating non-radiative decay rates in OSCs, or the influence of processing conditions on the stabilities and efficiencies of perovskite materials. These phenomena are only a few examples of the complex processes involved in light-harvesting, and are challenging to approach with conventional computational and experimental tools. The data-driven nature of ML models provides the opportunity to amplify the cutting edge theoretical models and experimental technologies for more elaborate and more efficient discovery workflows, which are emerging recently emerging in the field. The transition to predictive, intuitive, and interpretable ML models to complement theoretical studies and experimentation have the potential to provide important scientific insights and inspire design rules to improve materials, processing conditions, and eventually device properties of light-harvesting technologies.


Interactions with conspecific outsiders as drivers of cognitive evolution

Benjamin J Ashton, Patrick Kennedy, Andrew N Radford — Nature Communications, 2020. PMC7538913, CC BY 4.0.

The social intelligence hypothesis (SIH) posits that within-group interactions drive cognitive evolution, but it has received equivocal support. We argue the SIH overlooks a major component of social life: interactions with conspecific outsiders. Competition for vital resources means conspecific outsiders present myriad threats and opportunities in all animal taxa across the social spectrum (from individuals to groups). We detail cognitive challenges generated by conspecific outsiders, arguing these select for ‘Napoleonic’ intelligence; explain potential influences on the SIH; and highlight important considerations when empirically testing these ideas. Including interactions with conspecific outsiders may substantially improve our understanding of cognitive evolution.

Subject terms: Behavioural ecology, Social evolution, Social behaviour, Animal behaviour


Introduction

Cognitive evolution is one of the most hotly debated topics in biology, with considerable uncertainty remaining about the likely drivers. Some of the earliest hypotheses for the evolution of intelligence in non-human animals focused on ecological factors, such as the cognitive demands associated with locating spatially and temporally unpredictable food sources. Several comparative studies have supported the predictions of the so-called ecological intelligence hypothesis; for instance, environmental variation and diet have been identified as key selection pressures for brain-size evolution in birds and primates, respectively–. However, a major body of conceptual and empirical work indicates that the social environment can also play a crucial role in cognitive evolution–.

To date, predictions about the social drivers of cognitive evolution have largely focused on within-group interactions. Byrne and Whiten hypothesised that competitive interactions among groupmates (e.g., for food and/or mates) select for cognitively demanding behaviours, such as tactical deception, social manipulation and political manoeuvring. Conversely, Dunbar argued that the cooperative aspects of group living, including the need to create functional, cohesive, bonded groups to solve ecological problems, select for greater cognition. Positive actions between group members, such as the trading of commodities (e.g., grooming for coalitionary support) and the contingent rewarding of cooperative acts, may also generate cognitive demands–. Collectively, these within-group aspects of social life are argued to drive cognitive evolution, and form the basis of the social intelligence hypothesis (SIH) (see Dunbar and Shultz for a review of the SIH and its variants). The SIH was initially conceived with primates in mind and there is strong evidence to suggest that the social environment explains some of the cognitive variation observed in this taxonomic group (e.g., a positive relationship between group size and brain size). However, some primate studies have not found this relationship, and it is also not so apparent in other taxa; pair-bondedness (indicative of strong social relationships) is associated with large brains in some avian and non-primate mammalian species, but there are also a number of studies reporting no relationship between sociality and cognition in these taxa. The SIH, as currently framed, therefore receives somewhat equivocal support and leaves a significant amount of cognitive variation unexplained.

We argue that considerable cognitive variation may have remained unexplained because the SIH, and empirical tests of it, overlook a second major axis of social variation in animals: interactions with conspecific outsiders. From solitary species to those living in complex groups, in all animal taxa from invertebrates to primates, interactions with conspecific outsiders are commonplace– and their profound effects on sociality have become increasingly recognised–. Rival individuals, pairs or groups may compete for valuable resources such as mating opportunities, breeding positions, food or territories–. Such competition and associated threats and opportunities likely create selection pressures for cognitive traits that aid success. The idea that conspecific outsiders could influence cognitive evolution has been proposed before with respect to human evolution,. However, discussion of the cognitive consequences of outsider threats in non-human animals has largely focused on the challenges posed by predators; the possible influence of conspecific outsiders on cognitive evolution has been largely ignored and untested (for notable exceptions, see refs.). Conspecific outsiders differ in several important ways from predators. For example, although predators represent only a threat, conspecific outsiders can present threats and opportunities. In addition, some threats posed by outsiders, such as those to mating or breeding positions, are unique to conspecifics. Finally, the roles of ‘predator’ and ‘prey’ are split between different species, whereas the roles of both parties (i.e., threatener and threatened) are played by members of the same species in interactions with conspecific outsiders. Although interactions with heterospecifics—both antagonistic ones (e.g., with predators) and those of a cooperative nature (e.g., between cleanerfish and clients)—undoubtedly pose cognitive challenges and are worthy of study, we focus here on conspecific outsiders. We term the ability to exploit interactions with conspecific outsiders to an actor’s advantage as ‘Napoleonic’ intelligence, given the strategic intelligence synonymous with Napoleon Bonaparte.

Here we offer a case for the full inclusion of conspecific outsider interactions and resulting Napoleonic intelligence in the SIH. We begin by detailing the cognitive challenges presented by conspecific outsiders (hereafter referred to as ‘outsiders’), considering both those relevant across the whole social spectrum and additional challenges pertinent to group-living species. We then explain the potential influences of outsider interactions on the SIH: we describe the different selection pressures exerted by groupmates and outsiders, indicate how these social axes can interact additively or synergistically to influence cognition and assess intraspecific variation (e.g., between sexes) in selection pressures. Finally, we outline how the extension of the SIH to include outsider interactions can be tested empirically. Our argument is that both within-group and outsider interactions are crucial drivers of social intelligence (Fig.).


Cognitive challenges arising from interactions with conspecific outsiders

Outside threats and opportunities present a variety of cognitively demanding challenges that likely generate consequences both plastically within the lifetime of individuals and on an evolutionary scale. Animal contests in general have been proposed to favour cognitive traits underpinning three broad skillsets—opponent evaluation, own status evaluation and assessment strategies— all of which are applicable to interactions with outsiders. Individuals benefit from a capacity to assess rival characteristics and intent in relation to their own characteristics and to be able to appraise and respond to developments during encounters. More broadly, as individuals navigate the social context of competition with outsiders, there may be value in possessing abilities to change behaviour based on previous encounters, to remember rivals and spatial locations, to process varied, infrequent and unreliable information, and to make informed decisions. Cognitive traits relating to perception, learning and memory are therefore as applicable to interactions with outsiders as other conflict scenarios. We consider in turn those cognitive challenges presented by outsiders that are relevant across the full social spectrum (from solitary and pair-bonded animals to those living in groups) and those cognitive challenges that are of particular relevance to group-living species.


Cognitive challenges across the social spectrum

To maximise opportunities and to reduce the threats and costs associated with outsiders, decisions are needed about whether and how to engage with rivals. Decision-making regarding interactions with outsiders is often influenced by their identity. For example, opportunities to obtain breeding positions or extra-pair/extra-group matings vary between neighbouring territories,. Similarly, from a threat perspective, it may be adaptive to avoid rivals of greater resource-holding potential (RHP); relative RHP, and therefore the odds of winning a contest, can depend on the size of individuals, the strength of a pair bond or the size and composition of groups,. Furthermore, the decision to engage in territorial behaviour may require an ability to infer relatedness to specific groups (and therefore indirect fitness consequences of outsider interactions). In general, opponent recognition can arise from such processes as habituation learning, categorisation of different classes and even individual recognition. Deciding whether to engage in contests with conspecific outsiders is made all the more important given the inherent risks: although the potential benefits (e.g., in terms of resource acquisition) are high, the costs can be substantial as there may be escalation to violence and possible injury or death,. Even when the costs are not this extreme, engagement takes time and energy, and can have consequences for the harmony of pairs or groups,. During outsider interactions, strategic behaviour may be modified in relation to different third-party audiences (both insiders and outsiders). Acquisition, retention and assessment of relevant information helps individuals make complex decisions about, for instance, whether to invest in resource defence, attack a territorial neighbour or attempt dispersal or sneaky matings, and how to react during contests.

Enhanced spatial memory is also likely to be important in the context of outsider conflict and opportunities (e.g., remembering the position of territory boundaries and the locations of previous interactions). For example, the use of cognitive maps can allow avoidance of areas where costly contests with rivals tend to occur or behavioural preparation for potential encounters when in zones of conflict. Conversely, this information may also be used to identify opportunities for territory expansion. In many species, neighbours and non-neighbours (‘strangers’) present different threat levels; in some cases, strangers are more threatening (contexts in which neighbours are known as ‘dear enemies’), whereas sometimes neighbours present the greater threat (contexts in which neighbours are known as ‘nasty neighbours’),. Knowledge about the location of specific neighbouring territories is important to ensure a suitable response to neighbours vs. strangers, but also because, in dear-enemy situations, stronger responses are favoured towards neighbours on the ‘wrong’ territorial boundary compared to where they are expected spatially. Selection should favour a capacity to obtain, update and retain this spatial information.

To add to the cognitive challenge of monitoring and assessing outside threats and opportunities, relationships are dynamic and information about outsiders may only be available infrequently and often just from secondary cues. In territorial species, mortality, take-overs and dispersal mean that the identity of neighbours will change across time. The relationship with a given neighbour can also alter with repeated interactions. For instance, a recent incomer might initially be viewed as a nasty neighbour but could become a dear enemy as knowledge and familiarity increase; responses can also change dynamically if outsiders intrude more frequently or become more aggressive,. More generally, and equally relevant to non-territorial species, threats and opportunities can fluctuate with context; mating opportunities, e.g., will only be available when there are fertile females in the population. On a spatial scale, territorial boundaries can change, as owners expand or contract the area over which they control access. Compounding the cognitive challenge of tracking and reassessing such situations, information regarding outsiders might be received relatively infrequently; encounters with rivals or indicators of their presence may occur only every few days or weeks. Relevant information can be obtained from deliberate exchanges between rivals, or from secondary cues (e.g., faecal deposits). The cognitive demands of signal detection, deception, interpretation and response, as well as integrating information of differing reliability from direct and indirect sources, is likely considerable.


Additional cognitive challenges arising in group-living species

Group-living species encompass a range of social structures, from territorial, cooperatively breeding animals where a ‘group’ is easily defined to fission–fusion societies (where the ‘group’ is more ambiguous and could refer to the ‘parent group’ or ‘sub-groups’) and societies where ‘group’ identity varies with context. However, all can experience additional, and qualitatively different, cognitive challenges to those arising in species with simpler social structures. For instance, in the context of dynamic outsider characteristics, there can be changes in the identity of a whole neighbouring group, a subset of the group or just a single member. This alters both the collective threat and the potential threats and opportunities presented to individuals (e.g., from individual roving males seeking breeding opportunities). Furthermore, information about multiple group members, available from individually distinct scent marks and calls, requires more elaborate cognitive processing than that from single outsiders. Additional inferential challenges arise when others shift between ‘insider’ and ‘outsider’ status depending on social context (e.g., foraging groups vs. breeding groups).

Direct contests between groups may generate cognitively demanding dynamics. When groups fight, two main strategies are possible: members of a larger group could concentrate attacks on single-rival individuals or individuals from opposing groups could compete in one-on-one battles. Lanchester proposed that the former is governed by a ‘square law’, which predicts that numerical superiority leads to victory, whereas the latter is governed by a ‘linear law’ such that the fighting ability of individuals is the more important factor. Although initially conceived with humans in mind, Lanchester’s laws have been found to operate across a wide range of taxa, from primates to insects. Thus, assessment of the size and ability of rival forces is likely crucial when deciding how to engage with them in contests, both initially and if a change in strategy is required during an interaction. As relative group size is often a strong determiner of between-group contest outcomes, selection may favour a capacity to assess numerical differences (‘numerosity’) between own and rival groups. In general, learning will be important in developing contest skills, including signalling components, fighting tactics or the ability to adjust behaviour in response to ongoing dynamics.

Outsider threats can also affect within-group interactions. The motivations of individual actors with respect to between-group interactions have been repeatedly shown to differ substantially depending on, e.g., their age, sex, reproductive strategy, body condition and dominance status–. For instance, females often engage in between-group contests more frequently than males when the dispute is over resources such as territory or food, whereas males of many species engage in between-group contests more readily when disputes are over access to females,. Similarly, dominant and subordinate group members may have more or less to gain from defence against different outsiders,. Resolving such conflicts of interest can foster the emergence of within-group punishment and deterrence either during or after between-group interactions,. Conversely, when the interests of individual group members are aligned, individuals participating more in contests with rivals may receive rewards, such as increased affiliative behaviour,. The tracking of individual contributions and the decision-making processes leading to resultant within-group agonistic and affiliative behaviours likely requires considerable investment in memory and accounting about the status of different relationships. Furthermore, monitoring whether these behaviours have any effect on subsequent contributions to interactions with outsiders, especially interactions that occur relatively infrequently, introduces inferential challenges associated with between-group conflict.


Integration of outsider interactions in the SIH

A clear relationship between sociality and cognition, the main prediction of the SIH (Fig.), has not consistently emerged, and studies often report much unexplained variation. For instance, species with similar group sizes often show large variation in brain size that is not explicable when focusing solely on social intelligence associated with interactions within groups,. Existing proposed explanations for this brain-size variation include (1) differences in non-social ecological factors, (2) physical constraints on brain size and (3) resource constraints on energetically expensive brains. However, as the extent and nature of outsider interactions varies considerably between species, we argue that there are several reasons why including this social axis (and resulting Napoleonic intelligence) may improve the predictive power of the SIH.

Outsider interactions can select for higher cognitive abilities in both similar and different ways to within-group interactions. On the one hand, both require optimal responses to the behaviour (or predicted behaviour) of others. Here, the two axes may combine to promote higher cognition through selection on the same specific domain. On the other hand, outsider interactions often differ qualitatively from within-group interactions (Table). For instance, conflict within groups may favour a capacity for transitive reasoning in dominance hierarchies (based on individual recognition), which is likely often to be of limited use with respect to outsiders (but see ref. for transitive inference between territory-holders). By contrast, conflict with outsiders may favour long-term spatial memory, which is likely to be of limited use in terms of within-group conflict. In such cases, the two social axes may promote different domain-specific cognitive abilities and the combined pressure on multiple domains may contribute to enhanced selection on domain-general intelligence.

The selective pressures imposed by the two axes of sociality might interact in different ways. An additive scenario would involve a step along each axis boosting cognition by a fixed amount regardless of the value on the other axis (Fig.). Alternatively, a synergistic scenario would involve both axes combining to drive disproportionately high cognitive abilities in contexts where high levels of within-group conflict are matched by high levels of outsider conflict (Fig.). Two forms of synergistic effects can be envisaged. First, synergy may be a result of the way domain-general intelligence arises within the brain. Exposure to both within-group and outsider interactions may increase the diversity of social tasks. Consequent selection on several cognitive domains in parallel may boost domain-general intelligence more than selection on only a limited number of cognitive tasks. A second form of synergy may arise when an increase along one axis of sociality pushes the organism further along the other axis. Indeed, outsider threats may amplify the value of within-group social intelligence: within-group conflict can arise, for instance, through access to outgroup mates or disagreements about the optimum investment in between-group aggression. Such non-additive effects may reduce the chances of confirming the predictions of the SIH as currently framed: e.g., in a species with large groups and low outsider threat, the effects of group size on general intelligence (and, by implication, brain size) may be disproportionately lower than in an equivalent species with high outsider threat.

It is likely that the selection pressures exerted by the social environment on cognitive evolution will vary between individuals. For instance, threats from outsiders may generate sex-specific challenges that result in sexually dimorphic cognitive traits. Indeed, there is evidence that sexual selection drives sexual dimorphism in the brain and one element of outsider threat, extra-pair or extra-group paternity, has already been linked to sexually dimorphic brains in birds. High levels of breeding threat might select for behaviours such as territorial defence, elaborate courtship and mate guarding; as these behaviours entail several cognitive challenges, larger brains could evolve in the threatened sex. Particular components of outsider threats may generate cognitive selection pressures on specific types or classes of individuals.

Finally, we suggest a form of intrigue that may arise with respect to outsider interactions in group-living species: cognitive free-riding, where individuals might exploit the cognitive investment of others. For instance, a need to invest substantial cognitive effort into spatial memory to recall and monitor territorial boundaries may generate a collective-action problem. This is because cognition is individually costly—investment in cognition may come at the expense of lifespan or investments in other fitness-boosting functions, including digestion and immunity—and at least some of the benefits are realised by the group as a whole. Group members who ‘parasitise’ the cognitive investments of other group members may therefore enjoy a within-group advantage, freeing cognitive resources for self-interest. Parasitically outsourcing cognitive abilities is rational when they do not confer a significant within-group advantage to individuals (e.g., spatial memory; Table). Thus, investment in aspects of cognition may itself become a source of within-group conflict, driving the evolution of divergent cognitive strategies within species.


Testing predictions

To test our proposed expansion of the SIH, including both major axes of sociality, we advocate careful consideration of the metrics used to assess outsider interactions and when they are applicable, and the use of a complementary suite of intraspecific and interspecific approaches.


Outsider metrics

Clear metrics of outsider threats and opportunities are needed. We suggest three main categories to capture the level of competition with outsiders, all of which are relevant to individuals, pairs and groups (Fig.); as with predation, these range from measures of the overall risk level to those relating to specific events. First, quantification of the broad context—the landscape of outsider pressure (e.g., number of neighbours and territorial turnover rate). A high threat (or ‘shadow’) of conflict may actually cause neighbours to avoid escalation in their interactions but still play an important role in shaping social dynamics and, in turn, cognition. Second, quantification of the frequency of interactions within this contextual landscape, both in terms of the encounter rate between rivals (e.g., between-group interaction frequency) and the rate at which specific outcomes arise (e.g., extra-pair or extra-group paternity). Third, quantification of parameters relating to actual contests with outsiders (e.g., duration and level of escalation).

No single factor measures competition with outsiders in its entirety. One reason for this is that different types of threat, which are not necessarily strongly correlated, may be captured by different metrics. For instance, challenges to reproduction may best be indicated by extra-pair or extra-group paternity rates, whereas threats to territory space may be better captured by the occurrence of agonistic encounters between rival individuals, pairs or groups,. Moreover, a single metric may not provide a clear-cut reflection of competition level across species. For example, one primate study of brain size has used greater home-range overlap to indicate greater between-group competition for resources, but overlap could equally be indicative of higher tolerance in some species. Similarly, although pressure exerted by neighbours is often measured as the rate of between-group encounters, low rates might either represent low outsider pressure or indicate avoidance by rivals. Accordingly, using a plurality of metrics will be necessary to capture variation in outsider conflict within and between species; for any given comparison, the same metrics will be needed for all species being considered. Those metrics could be used as independent factors in analyses, potentially comparing between different threat types, or could be combined to form an index of overall threat. Recent work on between-group interactions in chimpanzees, for instance, has developed a single ‘neighbour pressure index’, integrating estimates of between-group interaction frequency, territorial position (with intrusions to the territory core being viewed as more threatening than those on the periphery) and disputed resource value (as indicated by usage by the resident group). This index was then coupled with a group’s competitive ability and within-group competition to consider influences on reproductive output. It is this integrated approach, considering both interactions within groups and with outsiders, that we are advocating with respect to cognition.

Careful thought is also needed about the categorisation of outsiders and when these outsider metrics should be measured. In the majority of cases, most obviously in those species that defend all-purpose territories, the classification of outsiders is clear: it is those individuals not part of the territorial unit (be that the individual, pair or group). In some species, individuals breed in pairs, defending a nest site or breeding territory together, but feed with others in temporary groups; here, outsiders in the breeding context may be groupmates while foraging, so we would advocate measurement of threat metrics with respect to just the former. Likewise, there are examples of group-living species that require further consideration as to what constitutes an outsider (e.g., fission–fusion societies, where group composition shifts dynamically as groups divide into sub-groups and later reassemble). In these cases, it might be valuable to quantify outsider threats at multiple levels of social organisation, as is already often the case with neighbours vs. strangers in territorial species.


Complementary approaches

With respect to intraspecific investigations of Napoleonic intelligence, we suggest three priority areas. First, we advocate a focus on the causes of individual variation in cognitive traits in relation to outsider interactions. This can be achieved by testing cognitive performance on psychometric tasks, or using neuroanatomical measures, such as brain size, size of brain regions or neuron density. In addition, longitudinal studies, quantifying cognition at regular time steps over the course of an individual’s life, may help to identify an effect of outsider threat on cognitive development. Quantifying individual cognitive performance in both domain-general cognitive tasks (e.g., associative learning) and socio-cognitive tasks (e.g., social competence) will be important in determining whether the cognitive consequences of outsider interactions are domain specific or if a ‘general intelligence factor’ exists. Second, investigation into the consequences of individual variation in cognition will help to determine whether outsider threats can have evolutionary implications. This can be achieved by examining the relationship between cognition and measures of fitness (such as reproductive success). Third, comparisons of sub-populations experiencing different selection pressures offer a window into the factors governing cognitive variation. As with predation risk, natural variation in outsider threat levels provides one option and it may also be possible to manipulate experimentally the level of threat. Recent studies examining the short-term consequences of outgroup conflict, in both laboratory and field settings, have demonstrated the feasibility of simulating outsider threats using call playbacks, faecal presentations and controlled intrusions,.

Interspecific approaches, using phylogenetic comparisons at varying scales, can complement intraspecific studies by revealing long-term evolutionary trends in cognitive evolution,. Using phylogenetic regressions, measures of brain size (relative or total brain size, or size of certain brain regions) may be modelled as a function of outsider threat as determined from the metrics outlined in Fig.. The use of neuroanatomical measures as cognitive indicators is a controversial issue (e.g., links between brain size and cognitive performance have been identified in some cases, but other researchers have argued that is unclear how they translate to differences in cognition). However, these proxies are the most viable option currently available for large-scale comparisons (e.g., across birds or primates). In addition, small-scale phylogenetic comparisons on clades of closely related species could use cognitive performance quantified in all the relevant species using identical psychometric methods and tests. Quantifying cognitive performance within a radiation would allow comparative analyses both to use direct measures of cognition and to mitigate the confounding effects that arise in making interspecific comparisons across disparate taxa. A combination of intra- and interspecific techniques would allow a powerful test of the central predictions about Napoleonic intelligence specifically and the expanded SIH more generally.


Conclusion

For over 50 years, sociality has been hypothesised as an evolutionary driver of animal cognition,. However, the focus has been predominantly on interactions occurring within groups. Although this focus has advanced our understanding of cognition in diverse taxa, the complexity of social interactions with conspecific outsiders (and their often surprising consequences for social evolution) is increasingly being recognised, –. Conflict with conspecific outsiders is prevalent across the social spectrum (from individuals to pairs, to groups) and represents a powerful selective force; adaptations have arisen that minimise the risks and allow exploitation of the opportunities arising from these outsider interactions. We argue that a complementary focus of the SIH should therefore be those pressures arising from conspecific outsider interactions: considering both major axes of sociality will likely improve our understanding of social intelligence and cognitive evolution.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

No new data were used in the preparation of this manuscript.


Brain (re)organisation following amputation: Implications for phantom limb pain

Tamar R Makin, Herta Flor — Neuroimage, 2020. PMC7422832, CC BY 4.0.

Following arm amputation the region that represented the missing hand in primary somatosensory cortex (S1) becomes deprived of its primary input, resulting in changed boundaries of the S1 body map. This remapping process has been termed ‘reorganisation’ and has been attributed to multiple mechanisms, including increased expression of previously masked inputs. In a maladaptive plasticity model, such reorganisation has been associated with phantom limb pain (PLP). Brain activity associated with phantom hand movements is also correlated with PLP, suggesting that preserved limb functional representation may serve as a complementary process. Here we review some of the most recent evidence for the potential drivers and consequences of brain (re)organisation following amputation, based on human neuroimaging. We emphasise other perceptual and behavioural factors consequential to arm amputation, such as non-painful phantom sensations, perceived limb ownership, intact hand compensatory behaviour or prosthesis use, which have also been related to both cortical changes and PLP. We also discuss new findings based on interventions designed to alter the brain representation of the phantom limb, including augmented/virtual reality applications and brain computer interfaces. These studies point to a close interaction of sensory changes and alterations in brain regions involved in body representation, pain processing and motor control. Finally, we review recent evidence based on methodological advances such as high field neuroimaging and multivariate techniques that provide new opportunities to interrogate somatosensory representations in the missing hand cortical territory. Collectively, this research highlights the need to consider potential contributions of additional brain mechanisms, beyond S1 remapping, and the dynamic interplay of contextual factors with brain changes for understanding and alleviating PLP.

Keywords: Neuroimaging, Cortical reorganisation, Phantom limb pain, Preserved function, Multivariate analysis, Pain treatment, Use-dependent plasticity


Introduction

Three decades ago it was first demonstrated that the sensory and motor maps in the adult primate brain can change as a consequence of injury as well as in response to training and stimulation (Jenkins et al., 1990; Kaas et al., 1990; Merzenich et al., 1983; Rajan et al., 1993; Sanes et al., 1988), and that these organisational changes are not limited to early brain development. This remapping has been attributed to an unmasking of normally inhibited connections between representational areas (Harding-Forrester and Feldman, 2018; Li et al., 2014), changes in subcortical projections to cortex (Jain et al., 2008) and even structural changes such as axonal sprouting (Florence et al., 1998; Jones and Pons, 1998) (though see (Chand and Jain, 2015) on changes after spinal cord injury). Subsequently, alterations in the organisation of sensory maps have been associated with a number of perceptual and behavioural changes, with many of them viewed as maladaptive, ranging from tinnitus to focal dystonia and phantom limb pain (PLP). However, these map changes have also been related to adaptive behaviors, such as improved sensory discrimination, advanced musical training and recovery from stroke (Flor and Diers, 2009). Here we review recent evidence on map changes in the primary somatosensory cortex (S1), and its association to PLP, based on recent neuroimaging studies in humans.


The sensorimotor homunculus – a neuroimaging perspective

Topographic body representation is one of the foundational organising principles in the brain. Multiple reports from the late 19th century observed that localised electric stimulation in animals evokes individualised movements of specific body parts (Ferrier, 1873). This work was refined by Penfield and colleagues, who reported a body-part map (somatotopy) along the human primary motor cortex (M1) (Penfield and Boldrey, 1937). Benefiting from verbal reports of their awake patients, Penfield and colleagues were able to infer that a second body map, relating to sensory perception, existed adjacently in the postcentral gyrus. These classical results, later elaborated in both animal (Romo et al., 1998, Tabot et al., 2013) and human cortical stimulation studies (Flesher et al., 2016; Hughes et al., 2020), established the role of S1 in eliciting key aspects of sensory bodily perception (e.g. stimulus modality, location, frequency and amplitude; note that S1 stimulation did not elicit painful sensations). More recent work, specifically focused on the causal role of S1, indicates that somatosensory perception might not be as heavily reliant on its processing (Medina and Rapp, 2014). Instead, S1 functioning may be particularly important for the consolidation of sensory and motor learning (Kumar et al., 2019; Mathis et al., 2017; Hong et al., 2018).

The consistent organisation of the sensorimotor maps was summarized in the canonical illustration of the human homunculus by Penfield and colleagues. However, despite this simplified illustration, the authors emphasised that the body map contains fuzzy boundaries, due to overlapping representations across body parts (Catani, 2017). Further work over the course of the 20th century revealed that although the motor map is best defined as crudely organised (Schieber, 2001), S1 contains detailed representations of specific body parts characterised by clearer boundaries (Kaas et al., 1979). The most striking, fine-grained organisation exists for the hand, where each of the digits and digit pads are represented separately and adjacently (Merzenich et al., 1983a), resulting in a detailed hand map.

The rise of neuroimaging allowed the investigation of somatotopic maps in the healthy human brain using PET (Fox et al., 1987), MEG (Nakamura et al., 1998), task-based fMRI (Glasser et al., 2016), resting-state functional connectivity (Yeo et al., 2011) and even structural neuroimaging techniques (e.g. DTI tractography (Behrens et al., 2003)). Unlike direct brain stimulation and recordings, human neuroimaging provided opportunities to identify body and hand representation beyond S1/M1 – namely in the cerebellum (Hahamy and Makin, 2019; Yeo et al., 2011), basal ganglia (Zeharia et al., 2015), operculum and insula (Brooks et al., 2005), supplementary motor cortex (Zeharia et al., 2012), occipitotemporal cortex (Orlov et al., 2010), parietal cortex (Huang et al., 2012; Zeharia et al., 2019) and more. Despite these findings indicating that body representation should not be studied in S1 in isolation (Longo et al., 2010), in the rest of this paper we will primarily focus on S1 body representation as identified with task-based fMRI (see for an illustrating example). We will not consider the literature on M1 (re)mapping nor will we discuss the interactions of S1 changes with peripheral factors, although we acknowledge their importance in understanding S1 organisation and PLP.

There are several methodological considerations that have constrained the study of S1 somatotopy, which should be taken into consideration before interpreting this wealth of literature. First, due to the need for multiple repetitions of each condition, and the limited time-frame of a typical neuroimaging session, very few studies attempted to reconstruct the full homunculus. With few exceptions (e.g. (Saadon-Grosman et al., 2015; Tal et al., 2017; Zeharia et al., 2019)), most studies focused on the relative layout of several distinct body parts, and most prominently the foot, hand and mouth. This leaves potential gaps in the layout of the human somatotopy (e.g., it is still debated whether the hand representation neighbours the upper (Moulton et al., 2009) or lower (Kuehn et al., 2017) face representation). Other studies have focused on detailed investigations of one body part (most commonly the hand). Here the classical studies were restricted by limited resolution, making the dissociation of individual digits relatively noisy (Overduin and Servos, 2004). Recent advances in fMRI, and in particular techniques that provide increased signal to noise ratio and spatial resolution (multiband sequences and 7T MRI), offer new opportunities to overcome some of these technical issues. These new advancements allow for characterisation of the S1 hand maps with unprecedented detail: 7T fMRI permits identification of individual-digit finger maps with high intra- and inter-subject consistency (Kolasinski et al., 2016; Sanchez-Panchuelo et al., 2010). Structural techniques provide a first glimpse into the anatomical constraints of this organisation, for example, the hand-face border (Kuehn et al., 2017).

A further constraint for S1 mapping relates to the means of stimulation available, particularly when considering the restricted environment of MRI scanners, safety considerations, limited physical space and magnetic field distortions. Additionally, the peripheral nervous system has been shown to display high adaptation rates to repeated tactile stimuli (O’Mara et al., 1988). For these reasons, many researchers opted to using active paradigms, where participants are cued to move different body parts resulting in robust S1 activity (Makin et al., 2013a; Zeharia et al., 2015). However, this approach raises its own confounds, in particular unreliable delineation of S1 from M1 with standard acquisition resolution and pre-processing techniques. Moreover, movement-related S1 activity differs from passive sensory stimulation S1 activity, in that it recruits multiple additional inputs, including efferent signals from the motor system (London and Miller, 2013), deep cutaneous and proprioceptive peripheral signals (Grigg, 1994) and even cognitive or multisensory top-down modulatory inputs (Kuehn et al., 2018; Puckett et al., 2017; Shokur et al., 2013), though see (Berlot et al., 2019) and (Sanders et al., 2019) for similarities across multiple representational features of the hand and (Striem-Amit et al., 2018) for similarities in homunculus remapping between active and passive paradigms.

Non-invasive research in humans has also opened up new opportunities to study the role of S1 in pain processing, and specifically what are the organising principles of nociception in S1. Combined with electrophysiological research in both animals and humans, the evidence is inconclusive. While some studies demonstrated that painful stimuli are being processed in S1 (Tommerdahl et al., 1998; Vierck et al., 2013), other studies suggested that the observed activity does not reflect the nociceptive input per se, but rather other aspects relating to pain such as attention, salience or expectation (Bushnell et al., 1999; Mouraux and Iannetti, 2009). The spatiotemporal attributes of pain versus touch representation in S1 have also been debated, with some studies showing overlap in topographic finger representation (Mancini et al., 2012), while others identified differential organisation (Ploner et al., 2000). In the context of our review, it is important to note that nerve injury such as following amputation is known to trigger central sensitisation, whereby painful stimulation can activate S1 indirectly, due to plasticity in the dorsal pathway in the spinal cord (Devor and Wall, 1978).


Altered body representation following arm amputation

As highlighted above, the organising principles of the S1 somatotopy beyond nociception are highly ubiquitous. As such, S1 somatotopy provides an ideal model to address the question of brain remapping – can the properties of the map change, and in particular the boundaries between distinct body parts, once these have been established? Previous electrophysiology research in monkeys has identified extensive changes to the map features following amputation of a single digit (Merzenich et al., 1984), deafferentation of a nerve (Merzenich and Jenkins, 1993) or the entire arm (Pons et al., 1991). Here it was found that once neurons are deprived of their primary input, they become responsive to stimulation that activates the cortical neighbours of the deprived area. This activity change results in shifted boundaries of the body part map, termed cortical reorganisation. However, considering the key contribution of unmasking of already existing inputs in driving the shifted boundaries of the body map (Merzenich et al., 1983b), this description might be misleading. Perhaps the most dramatic demonstration of remapping occurs following arm deafferentation. Here the hand area of monkeys becomes responsive to inputs from the lower face – whose representation neighbours the hand area (though note that the activity in the deprived cortex is considerably smaller in amplitude to native face activity; see Figure 5 in (Kambi et al., 2014) for an example). Since hand and face inputs are segregated throughout the somatosensory hierarchy leading to S1, and since only sparse connections normally exist across the hand-face boundary (Chand and Jain, 2015), this process might reflect more profound changes to organising features of the body map.

In humans, research characterising lower face representation in unilateral arm amputees has not identified clear facial activity in the missing hand cortex (Kikkert et al., 2018; Makin et al., 2013b) (C). Instead, multiple studies examining activity associated with stimulation of the lower face (both actively (Foell et al., 2014; Lotze et al., 2001; Makin et al., 2015b; Raffin et al., 2016) and passively (Elbert et al., 1994; Karl et al., 2001a; Yang et al., 1994) have found that the centre (or spatial extent) of the lip cluster becomes medially shifted in the deprived hemisphere, particularly with respect to the opposite (intact) hemisphere. Critically, the extent of this lip activity shift associates with PLP intensity (Flor et al., 1995; Karl et al., 2001). PLP is a sub-class of phantom sensations that amputees report as arising from their missing limb (Henderson and Smyth, 1948). While these sensations range in their specific characteristics (spanning an extensive range of tactile, proprioceptive and kinesthetic sensations) they are often also experienced as bothersome and painful (Kooijman et al., 2000), usually developing into a chronic condition, which is difficult to treat (Weeks et al., 2010). This is due to the fact that we still do not have a complete understanding of its neural basis (Aternali and Katz, 2019). As such, the observed correlation between S1 remapping and PLP intensity has opened up new avenues for exploring the mechanisms behind, and novel treatments for, PLP.

In particular, it has been proposed that the displaced facial inputs caused by the deprivation-triggered remapping prompt aberrant processing in the S1 hand area, which may in turn be interpreted as phantom sensation or pain arising from the missing hand (Flor et al., 2006; Yang et al., 1994). As mentioned above, it was found that people who experience worse PLP also show a greater shift of their lower face representation towards the missing hand cortex (Flor et al., 1995). A similar association was never established for non-painful phantom sensations, which have been in turn linked with frontal and parietal activity (Andoh et al., 2017). The finding of a positive association between S1 remapping and PLP has been replicated using multiple paradigms and participant groups (Diers et al., 2010; Lotze et al., 1999; MacIver et al., 2008). It provided first evidence that reorganisation of the S1 map bears functional consequences, maladaptive at that, with new opportunities for PLP treatment. However, it also opens up a host of questions about the potential relationship between brain remapping and PLP, in particular – how would displaced input to S1 interact with other pain mechanisms to manifest the pain sensation? What is the time-course of cortical remapping with respect to PLP? Is this relationship between remapping and PLP also found following remapping of other body parts into the missing hand cortex? (see (Mezue and Makin, 2017) for further considerations). Some of these questions are starting to unravel by neuroimaging studies that focus on neural changes following various treatment approaches to PLP, as described below.

Human neuroimaging studies have also examined the neural representation of the missing hand itself. As mentioned above, phantom sensations can manifest in the form of kinaesthesia – the sense of movement that amputees experience when volitionally trying to move their phantom hand (Weeks et al., 2010). Previous research has demonstrated that when amputees are instructed to move their phantom hand, this results in motor output to the denervated motor neurons as evidenced with EMG (Reilly et al., 2006), demonstrating engagement of the motor system. fMRI studies taking advantage of this simple manipulation have shown that phantom movements activate both M1 and S1 ((Raffin et al., 2012); A), albeit these original studies could not reliably differentiate activity profiles of these two neighbouring regions. It has been demonstrated that activity elicited by phantom hand movements in the sensorimotor missing hand cortex positively correlates with PLP – people who experience more chronic PLP also exhibit greater activity when moving their phantom hands (Kikkert et al., 2018; Makin et al., 2013b). This finding highlights that mechanisms pertaining to persistent hand representation may also be relevant for PLP, involving either bottom up (peripheral (Vaso et al., 2014)) or top down processes (e.g., from the motor system (Kikkert et al., 2017)). These associations, however, still await a mechanistic framework by which phantom movements relate to PLP and it is therefore currently not clear whether there is a direct causal relationship between persistent representation and PLP (Kikkert et al., 2018), see further discussion below).


Insights on remapping and phantom pain from clinical studies

The research on S1 remapping after amputation has yielded novel interventions that target the presumed maladaptive brain remapping. In mirror treatment, the intact hand is moved while the patient views it in the mirror and perceives the mirror image as the phantom hand, while the phantom hand moves along (Chan et al., 2007) or while no phantom hand movement was present (Foell et al., 2014). Diers et al. (2010) observed that not all amputees activated the cortical representation of the phantom hand during observation of phantom movements through mirror training, and those that did, experienced less PLP. In a later study (Foell et al., 2014), it was found that successful reduction of PLP by several sessions of mirror treatment normalised lip activity, as evidenced by the degree of representational shift away from the missing hand area in comparison to the intact hemisphere. Normalisation of lip activity was found to significantly correlate with treatment success. Interestingly, patients with telescoping – where the phantom hand moves towards the residual limb – did not significantly benefit from mirror treatment. This was potentially due to the disjunct of the intact hand viewed in the mirror and the telescoped phantom percept, creating a perceptual mismatch. Augmented reality applications can overcome some limitations of mirror treatment (Barbin et al., 2016), and have shown that patients with a telescoped phantom can also benefit from mirror training, as demonstrated by treatment-related reorganisation (Thogersen et al., 2020). In addition, activity of a region in the inferior parietal cortex, which has been associated with body image maintenance, was predictive of reduced PLP. The latter data suggest that the non-painful perception of the phantom also modulates brain changes and PLP in amputees. A further study (De Nunzio et al., 2018) used a combination of phantom limb movement and sensory feedback in a small sample of amputees, and observed a trend towards a change in lip representation after treatment. Similar changes were reported for motor imagery (MacIver et al., 2008). These studies show that S1 changes and treatment-induced reductions in PLP covary, but the direction of the relationship, i.e. if the brain changes are a cause or consequence of the change in PLP cannot be determined from these studies. Studies that can assess causal relationships are needed.

Further studies using brain stimulation techniques, such as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and direct current stimulation (tDCS), can begin to address the question of causality by inducing cortical change and potential alterations to PLP. TMS studies (as reviewed in (Nardone et al., 2019)) show that the phantom limb representation in motor cortex is shifted in amputees with PLP and that the representation of neighbouring body parts enlarged, in line with findings from S1. A recent tDCS study (Kikkert et al., 2019) investigated the consequences of successful PLP reduction and preserved phantom hand representation after stimulation over the S1/M1 missing hand area, involving a functional task (phantom hand movements). PLP reduction was found to correlate with reduced phantom hand activity, in contrast to the findings on mirror treatment. However, this could be attributed to different activation paradigms (active phantom movement versus mirrored movements), as well as use-dependent changes related to the intact hand which is engaged in the mirror paradigms (as discussed below). Importantly, activity of the posterior insula and additional regions involved in pain processing emerged as an important mediator of pain relief and activity changes relating to phantom hand representation. These pain-related regions have not yet been as actively studied in amputees with PLP, compared to patients with other types of chronic pain. For example, research of chronic musculoskeletal pain has been focused on widespread brain alterations and less on S1 (Lopez-Sola et al., 2017). In this context, the above mentioned activity could be due to a greater association of PLP with changes in sensory rather than affective processing (Fuchs et al., 2018; Larbig et al., 2019).

Other research studying the neural correlates of PLP relief has focused on peripheral contributions to PLP. For example, targeted muscle and sensory reinnervation (TMR) of the amputated limb, which involves connecting nerves leading to the amputated limb to specific muscles that can drive a prosthetic limb has been shown to reduce PLP ((Dumanian et al., 2018); though see (Aternali and Katz, 2019)) and there is similar initial evidence for intraneural stimulation (Petrini et al., 2019). Finally, brain computer interfaces (BCI) have been explored as modulators of brain activity and PLP (Yanagisawa et al., 2016). BCI’s are promising avenues for treatment as they can provide new insights by up- and downregulating brain activity in the phantom cortex and related areas, whilst examining associated pain changes. Here it is worth considering more global consequences of neuromodulation on somatosensation. To date, the relationship between amputation-triggered changes to S1 and altered somatosensation is far from clear, since no systematic studies exist that have related various sensory modalities to brain changes. Studies on psychophysical properties have found both enhanced and deficient sensory processing (Hunter et al., 2005; Li et al., 2015).


Additional contributors to remapping beyond deprivation

As mentioned above, remapping following amputation has been considered to be primarily triggered by the loss of sensory input, driving unmasking of weak or silent inputs (Merzenich et al., 1983b), and potentially promoting long-term potentiation mechanisms (Polley et al., 1999). According to this account, inputs that already have access to the deprived cortex, such as topographic neighbours, are more likely to be expressed in it following deprivation, resulting in a shift or expansion of an existing boundary. However, recent evidence in neuroimaging demonstrates violations of this rationale. For example, it was found that the residual arm, which is immediately neighbouring the missing hand cortex, does not remap into the deprived sensorimotor cortex in amputees, relative to controls (Makin et al., 2013a). Converseley, multiple studies have documented increased activity in the sensorimotor missing hand cortex for the intact hand (Bogdanov et al., 2012; Makin et al., 2013a; Philip and Frey, 2014; Raffin et al., 2016; Wesselink et al., 2019). Considering that the deprived cortex is normally inhibited by the intact hand cortex, it is difficult to resolve this finding with classical interhemispheric inhibition mechanisms (e.g. as suggested for stroke (Ward and Cohen, 2004)). Instead, it has been proposed that the remapping of the intact hand into the missing hand hemisphere relates to compensatory usage (Makin et al., 2013a).

It has long been observed that the receptive field (RF) properties of the remapped cortex gradually change over a long time-scale (Merzenich et al., 1983b). It has been suggested that the initial remapping triggered by deprivation will become refined by inputs due to daily hand usage involving compensatory behaviours (Churchill et al., 1998; Elbert et al., 1997). Since altered input is known to drive and shape brain organisation (Recanzone et al., 1992; Wang et al., 1995), it is reasonable to expect that adapted behaviour substituting for the missing hand function can shape remapping. This is akin to recent studies in individuals with congenital hand loss, who exhibit remapping of multiple body parts, which are used for compensatory behaviours, including the feet, residual arm and lips (Hahamy et al., 2017; Hahamy and Makin, 2019; Stoeckel et al., 2009) into the missing hand cortex. Considering that deprived cortex has been demonstrated to undergo network-level reorganisation in functional connectivity (Makin et al., 2015a), and that the connectome of the deprived cortex is wired to support hand function (Glasser et al., 2016; Graziano and Aflalo, 2007), inputs relating to typical hand function (e.g. manipulating objects) might consolidate more favourably. While still awaiting causal validation for a relationship between changed habitual behaviour and brain remapping in humans with congenital or acquired amputation (Dempsey-Jones et al., 2019), this potential process sheds new light on the classical findings. For example, consider the original studies in monkeys showing remapping of the mouth into the hand cortex. If these monkeys tended to use their mouth to substitute for their injured hand function, this could have contributed to the resulting remapping of the mouth into the hand area. It also provides new context to the aforementioned mirror-treatment studies which used intact hand movements to probe representations in the missing hand cortex (Diers et al., 2010). Currently, there is no systematic evidence that intact hand remapping associates with PLP, though few studies explored this potential link (Makin et al., 2013a; Philip and Frey, 2014; Raffin et al., 2016).

Prosthetic limb usage was also demonstrated to associate with cortical remapping and PLP (Lotze et al., 1999), but here again causality needs to be inferred with caution. It is known that individuals suffering from PLP are less likely to wear a prosthetic limb due to discomfort (Jang et al., 2011). It has also been demonstrated that individuals that use their prosthetic limb less (or more generally their residual arm (Makin et al., 2013a)), tend to use their intact hand more, presumably due to the need for alternative compensatory strategies. Any of these factors could potentially directly impact S1 organisation and beyond (van den Heiligenberg et al., 2018), or serve as an indirect moderating factor for a relationship between S1 remapping, PLP and persistent representation.

As already noted in section on clinical studies, contextual variables also influence S1 remapping. For example, telescoping, which is associated with PLP and greater S1 remapping, was related to less PLP reduction and less changes in the mouth to hand cortical distance following mirror treatment (Foell et al., 2014). Other evidence for the instability of the S1 finger maps provide further considerations, which could impact the evidence for remapping observed in amputees. For example, acute pain (which will differ across amputees during the scanning session) has been shown to increase cortical distances in S1 (Buchner et al., 2000). Furthermore, Braun and colleagues (Braun et al., 2000) observed that the hand map can change depending on task requirements and attentional focus. These results confirm earlier suggestions that the fine features of the body maps in S1 are under-determined to an extent, and as such, could dynamically adapt to internal and external conditions within short time periods. Consequently, the context of the experimental paradigm and the details of the analysis could massively impact the boundaries of the body map being described by the researcher. This does not preclude high stability of finger maps under similar conditions (Kolasinski et al., 2016). depicts some of the factors that can impact on remapping in S1.


Probing reorganisation using multivariate analysis techniques

Recent multivoxel analysis techniques offer a new lens through which somatotopic (re)mapping can be characterised by providing us with the means to quantify selectivity in terms of how distinct the representation of one body part is to another (for example, linear classifiers or the Mahalanobis distances observed between two representations in a given brain area). Moreover, these techniques provide the means to consider the type and extent of available information underlying the body map. The simple assumption here is that a brain area representing a given body part should contain distinct information about the functional features most relevant to the representation of that body part. For example, in S1 there are distinct neural representations of specific frequencies of tactile stimulus properties (Bensmaia, 2008), which might not be easily separable based on net activity levels, but result in distinct multivariate representational motifs (Kim et al., 2016). Representational similarity analysis (RSA) permits the consideration of functional attributes beyond selectivity of response. For example, it allows characterisation of inter-digit similarity or overlap (Diedrichsen and Kriegeskorte, 2017). Using this approach, it has been elegantly demonstrated that the canonical inter-digit representational structure in the S1 hand area can be best described in terms of daily hand use: those digits that form kinematic synergies to afford our daily interactions with objects and tools also show greater similarity in their representation (Ejaz et al., 2015).

7T fMRI and multivariate analysis approaches have been recently used to investigate S1 hand representation in amputees. With respect to persistent hand representation, 7T fMRI allowed us to uncover S1 digit maps, even up to three decades after amputation ((Kikkert et al., 2016); B). A complete digit map was also found in the missing hand cortex of an amputee with a brachial plexus avulsion (causing peripheral deafferentation), and was abolished when the participant was asked to imagine moving the phantom hand, rather than attempting to move it. As such, it appears that these maps reflect inputs from the motor system which are somatotopically structured. Multivoxel analysis techniques allow us to confirm that the representation of the missing hand, as probed using phantom hand movements (or at least attempted movements), shares the same representational features as a normal hand. In particular, we recently found that the unique configuration of inter-finger representational structure (previously linked with everyday experience), is entirely preserved after an average of 18 years since amputation (Wesselink et al., 2019). We found that across participants there was a significant relationship between the typicality of phantom hand representation and the sense of phantom kinaesthesia, specifically the number of digits that amputees perceived to be moving during the task. However, we found no significant correlations with either acute or chronic PLP, or the vividness of non-painful phantom sensations (as revealed in a linear regression model). In fact, typical hand representation was also found in the few amputees who did not experience any phantom sensations, suggesting it is a canonical organising principle, rather than a neural correlate of the phantom hand. A further study by Bruurmijn and colleagues, who used brain decoding to separate representations of multiple phantom hand gestures, was able to successfully decode the different gestures well above chance (Bruurmijn et al., 2017). Although decoding accuracy was reduced when compared with controls in the earlier sub-divisions of S1, this group difference was resolved in the higher sub-divisions (BA 1 and 2), indicating that the preserved representation of the phantom hand is at least partially maintained by higher order processing. Here again, no significant correlations were found with PLP (though considering the small sample size of n ​= ​8, this null result should be regarded with caution).

Similar techniques have also been used to study the intact hand, specifically the increased ipsilateral activity that has been previously observed in the missing hand cortex. Previous research in two-handed adults demonstrated that the ipsilateral hand area contains finger-specific information which mirrors the contralateral representation of the same finger (Diedrichsen et al., 2013; Diedrichsen et al., 2018). This approach allows us to ask whether information content is greater for the ipsilateral representation of amputees’ intact hand relative to controls. In a recent study we found that ipsilateral inter-finger dissimilarity, underlying digit selectivity, was not significantly different between amputees and controls. This result indicates that the increased intact hand activity reported in amputees might not underlie increased functional processing (Wesselink et al., 2019). Similar evidence from stroke (Ejaz et al., 2018) and focal dystonia patients (Ejaz et al., 2016), also showed no changes in inter-finger representational features using RSA. This is in contrast to previous studies demonstrating that hand somatotopy is altered in these groups of interest (Flor and Diers, 2009), as mentioned in our introduction. Since this recent evidence demonstrates that information processing of inter-finger representation is unchanged, it is therefore possible that the previously documented map changes, which were based on measures of net activity changes, do not entail reorganisation of representations.


Concluding remarks

Our review shows that there is no simple relationship between somatosensory map reorganisation, PLP and preserved hand representation. This perspective converges with recent studies in related clinical conditions, for example complex regional pain syndrome (Mancini et al., 2019) and peripheral neuropathy (Maeda et al., 2014), showing that the previously assumed relationship between S1 remapping and pain requires further consideration. Although injury-related plasticity mechanisms may be the original driver of map changes, over time a number of additional factors such as use of a prosthesis, intact hand use, alterations in body representation as a consequence of amputation and processing in other regions, particularly with regards to pain processing, may interact with injury-related remapping. Furthermore, the close and bidirectional connections of somatosensory and motor cortex are also likely to impact S1 organisation. These interactions need to be examined and related to functional changes. Thirdly, the traditional focus on S1 remapping due to changed selectivity to particular body parts is probably incomplete, considering net activity changes might not adequetly reveal the underlying functional processing. Moreover, related research in monkeys (Kambi et al., 2014) and humans (Hahamy et al., 2019) indicate that sensorimotor cortical remapping might reflect changes in sub-cortical terminals (e.g. brainstem, basal ganglia) or cerebellum. Future research should aim to study PLP within this broader context, while taking into consideration the role of multiple brain networks and other contextual factors that can alter or stabilise the S1 body map at muliple time scales.


CRediT authorship contribution statement

Tamar R. Makin: Conceptualization, Writing - original draft. Herta Flor: Conceptualization, Writing - original draft.


Anterior cingulate cortex: A brain system necessary for learning to reward others?

Patricia L Lockwood, Kathryn C O’Nell, Matthew A J Apps — PLoS Biology, 2020. PMC7314188, CC BY 4.0.

Helping a friend move house, donating to charity, volunteering assistance during a crisis. Humans and other species alike regularly undertake prosocial behaviors—actions that benefit others without necessarily helping ourselves. But how does the brain learn what acts are prosocial? Basile and colleagues show that removal of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) prevents monkeys from learning what actions are prosocial but does not stop them carrying out previously learned prosocial behaviors. This highlights that the ability to learn what actions are prosocial and choosing to perform helpful acts may be distinct cognitive processes, with only the former depending on ACC.

Prosocial behaviors—actions that help others, often without regard to whether they directly benefit us—are vital for social cohesion. From a stranger holding an elevator door to the millions of charity volunteers worldwide, humans readily engage in a range of helping behaviors. Other species can be prosocial too, such as when a monkey grooms another member of its troop. Understanding the psychological processes and brain systems that underlie how one individual decides whether to help another out has become a major endeavor in cognitive and behavioral neuroscience. The aim is to identify brain areas that perform cognitive processes that result in a decision to help others and not just do actions that directly benefit ourselves. In this field, one of the key questions that remains unanswered is: how do we learn what actions are prosocial?

One recent, striking conceptual advance is the introduction of the notion of prosocial or “vicarious” learning. The idea is that in order to do acts that benefit other people, we first have to learn what actions in the world will lead to something rewarding and positive happening to them. When we perform an action, and it results in a reward for another person, we can put ourselves in their shoes and imagine vicariously what it would be like to get a similar reward ourselves. For example, imagine you see a notebook fall out of someone’s bag in front of you, you pick it up, give it back to them, and they smile and thank you. Vicarious processing of the benefit to the other person (the relief of having not lost their notebook), may be part of the foundations of how we learn to do prosocial acts and how we adapt our prosocial behavior in different settings. Theoretically, this is important, because it means that some people may fail to be prosocial not because they have nefarious intentions but because they fail to learn what acts will benefit or harm others.

The computations that underlie such learning may well parallel those that guide how we learn for ourselves. Reinforcement learning theory (RLT) is a powerful mathematical framework for how we do this type of learning and has been widely applied in many areas of psychology and neuroscience. The key idea in RLT is that learning is driven by “prediction errors” (PEs). When you perform an action, you make a prediction about how good the outcome will be. If the outcome is surprising and better or worse than you expected, how wrong your expectation is dictates the size of your PE. PEs drive learning by updating our future predictions of how good an action is. If the outcome is better than we expected (a positive PE), it increases our expectations that picking that action will result in a good outcome, and we become more willing to choose it. When the outcome is worse than expected (negative PE), we update our expectations and are less willing to choose that action.

RLT has been deployed to understand the vicarious processing of others’ rewards. Understanding how the brain does this is seen as crucial, as it may underpin prosocial learning. Brain imaging studies in humans have measured changes in the blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signal—a proxy of neural activity—when people are performing a variety of different tasks that require making predictions or processing rewarding outcomes during social interactions. Activity in the brain is correlated with the magnitude of rewards and the size of PEs when those outcomes are delivered to other people. Similarly, it has been shown that individual neurons in the brain correlate with PEs when people are watching and learning from the outcomes of others’ decisions.

These social PE and reward signals had been identified in several brain regions, but considerable evidence pointed to their presence in parts of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), a brain area lying on the medial surface of the frontal cortex. It had therefore been suggested that this region might be important for prosocial behavior and learning. However, although the recordings from individual brain cells or activity in brain areas are very useful, they only provide correlational evidence between brain responses and prosocial behavior. They cannot tell us if these brain areas are necessary for being prosocial. That is, without this brain area, would people stop choosing or learning to be prosocial?

Basile and colleagues provided an important step in testing whether ACC was necessary to learn what will benefit others. They had 6 macaque monkeys take part in an experiment that allowed them to learn and execute prosocial choices and then performed a lesion—removing brain tissue—in the ACC, to see whether it impacted behavior. The monkeys performed a task in which rewards (juice) could be delivered to themselves (self), they could observe another monkey (other) receiving a reward, or neither monkey would get a reward (neither). The monkeys first had to learn which of a set of abstract pictures were associated with rewards for self, other, and neither. Once this had been learned, they performed a decision-making task, in which they were able to accept or reject an offer to deliver a reward across 3 conditions (self, other or neither). Much like humans, the monkeys showed an apparent selfishness, accepting rewards more often for self compared with other or neither. However, when comparing acceptance of rewards for other and neither, monkeys rewarded the other more frequently. Thus, with an intact ACC, monkeys could learn what stimuli were predictive of giving others rewards, and they chose it—they learned what actions were prosocial, and they had a preference to be prosocial.

Next, they lesioned portions of the sulcus and gyrus of the ACC in half of the monkeys. This ACC region contains distinct “zones” which have different cellular properties, that are referred to as areas 24 and 32. The monkeys then performed the decision-making task again, with the same pictures as before, but also a new set of pictures, which were similarly associated with rewards being delivered to self, other, or neither. With the previously used pictures, the monkeys continued to show some evidence of a prosocial preference, picking to reward others more than neither. Importantly, the monkeys were also able to learn which pictures would get themselves rewards. So, their prosocial preferences did not depend on an intact ACC, and neither did self-related learning. However, there was a striking change in behavior: The monkeys did not learn that a new picture was associated with giving a reward to the other monkey. They could not learn to be prosocial after an ACC lesion.

These results suggest that learning what acts are prosocial and someone’s preference for being prosocial are distinct. The fact that one process is spared after a lesion while the other is disrupted indicates that they rely on separable cognitive processes, and only prosocial learning depends on the ACC. This is important, as few studies in human or nonhuman primates had examined a causal link to any brain area in giving a reward to others. Establishing the necessity of a brain area is not straightforward. In humans, for valid ethical reasons, one cannot perform circumscribed lesions for experimental purposes. Moreover, widely used brain stimulation techniques that can provide causal evidence in humans are not currently able to target structures that lie deep below the surface of the brain, such as the ACC.

Intriguingly, recent research in rodents offers evidence that is consistent with the necessity of ACC for prosocial behavior. In rodent area 24, which has been argued to be similar to primate ACC area 24, neurons have been shown to respond when another rodent is seen in distress, and inactivating these neurons leads to a reduced ability of rodents to learn from the observation of another’s distress. Thus, across species, the ACC appears to be necessary for learning from the outcomes of events that impact on others. Although it can be challenging to translate findings because of potential differences in the anatomical and functional properties of brain areas across species (such as differences in how strongly connected a brain area is to others) and differences in methodology, it is notable that the ACC is similarly implicated in processing social information across species. It would be interesting for future rodent studies to examine the role of the ACC in giving rewards to others in the manner monkeys and humans seem willing to do.

Although the findings of Basile and colleagues are exciting, a limitation of the work was the size of the lesion. The lesion covered both the sulcus and gyrus of the ACC, areas 24 and 32. However, previous work had suggested that the locus of social processing might be narrower; some work highlights a bigger contribution of area 24 than area 32, and other studies highlight a bigger contribution of ACC gyrus than the sulcus. Both of these might be true, with social processing specialized to the gyral portion of area 24. Lesions to the gyrus lead to monkeys being less distracted by pictures of other monkeys, whereas lesions to the sulcus have no such effect. Moreover, brain imaging studies in humans and electrical recording studies in monkeys have shown that ACC gyrus signals information about others that it does not signal about ourselves. This includes predictions about others’ rewards and PEs when others’ outcomes are surprising. In contrast, the ACC sulcus processes similar information about self and other. Future work can address this limitation by making more specific lesions to examine the relative contributions of different subregions to prosocial learning.

Another potential avenue for research is to examine whether the ACC is involved in learning how to be prosocial through vicariously experiencing others’ outcomes or whether its function is about learning social information at a simpler level. One recent brain imaging study in humans found that activity in the gyrus of the ACC signaled a PE when learning that a stranger’s name was associated with an abstract picture but not when learning that one’s own name was associated with a different abstract picture. It could be that the ACC guides this much more rudimentary form of learning. In particular, it raises the possibility that study by Basile and colleagues the monkeys could not learn that the new pictures were associated with the other monkey after lesions, and it was this process of learning new associations about others that was disrupted, rather than vicarious processing of the reward per se. Future work disentangling learning simple associations between others and stimuli from those involved in explicitly learning what behaviors reward others will allow us to better understand prosocial behavior and the function of the ACC.

The findings of Basile and colleagues could potentially offer new insights into understanding impairments to social cognition. Many studies have linked disruptions of ACC functioning to atypical social behaviors across psychiatric conditions, particularly autism spectrum disorders (ASD). For example, some correlational evidence had shown that atypical PE signaling when vicariously processing others’ rewards is related to the ACC in those with ASD. Basile and colleagues provide an important link to show that, indeed, without signaling in the ACC, monkeys cannot learn to obtain rewards for others, strengthening the claim that aberrant signaling in this region in ASD may be causally linked to social reward–processing deficits. Moreover, it also highlights that people with an ASD may have the intention to be prosocial, but failures to do so could be due to an inability to appropriately learn what actions will benefit others—a novel hypothesis that can be examined in future studies.

Understanding the psychology and neuroscience of prosocial behaviors is a multidisciplinary effort, requiring diverse approaches, of which causal evidence in primates is vital but sparse. Basile and colleagues offer an important window into this, dissociating learning from one’s intentions to be prosocial and linking it to ACC integrity. Future work can build on this robust causal evidence to understand the mechanisms across species and links to disrupted social behavior.


Funding Statement

This work was supported by a Biosciences and Biotechnology Research Council David Phillips Fellowship to MAJA (BB/R010668/1), a Medical Research Council Fellowship to PLL (MR/P014097/1), and a Marshall Scholarship to KO. The funders had no role in decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.


Entraining neurons via noninvasive electric stimulation improves cognition

Mircea van der Plas, Simon Hanslmayr — PLoS Biology, 2020. PMC7654821, CC BY 4.0.

Transcranial Alternating Current Stimulation (tACS) is a method that injects rhythmic currents into the human brain via electrodes attached to the scalp of a participant. This technique allows researchers to control naturally occurring brain rhythms and study their causal relevance for cognition. Recent findings, however, cast doubts on the effectiveness of tACS to stimulate the brain and its mode of action. Two new studies by Vieira and colleagues and Marchesotti and colleagues reported in the current issue report promising new results in showing that tACS can entrain single neuron activity and improve reading abilities in dyslexic individuals.

Cognitive neuroscientists nowadays have an arsenal of methods at their disposal to study the human brain. Methods such as scalp or intracranial electroencephalography (EEG/iEEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG), and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) record brain activity as it labors tirelessly in order to make sense of the world, enabling researchers to establish correlations between patterns of brain activity and behavior. While these studies have without doubt generated a wealth of knowledge, this approach limits neuroscientists to establishing correlational links, i.e., brain state X co-occurs with behavior Y. Notably, this is different from and considerably weaker than establishing a causal link, i.e., brain state X causes behavior Y. Establishing such causal relationships between brain patterns and behavior requires a method that directly changes the brain’s activity and affects behavior accordingly.

One set of brain patterns that have often been assumed to have functional relevance for a wide variety of processes are neural oscillations. Brain oscillations are usually categorized according to their frequency into one of many different bands, each associated with a multitude of processes within the brain. In order to draw any causal links between neural oscillations and behavioral processes, one has to somehow directly affect these neural oscillations. If one can both improve and deteriorate performance for a given task by manipulating these neural oscillations, one can make strong claims about its relevance for behavior.

Transcranial Alternating Current Stimulation (tACS) is an electrical stimulation method that is often used with the aim of manipulating these brain oscillations directly. This relatively simple procedure involves attaching at least two electrodes on the scalp, through which an alternating current (AC) is administered. Depending on the placement of the electrodes, the currents’ electrical field can affect the underlying neurons and bias their firing with subthreshold polarity changes in the surrounding cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in an oscillatory fashion. For example, if the surroundings of a neuron become more positively charged compared to its insides, the neuron will require a larger change in polarity to reach the threshold for an action potential, while a less positive charge will lower the threshold for an action potential. Since the direction of current flow is switched at a fixed rate, tACS biases the firing of the targeted neural population such that action potentials co-occur at certain time windows. In the human brain, co-occurrence of firing is evident in oscillatory activity, which is naturally present at many different rhythms. TACS targets these natural brain oscillations in order to shift their phase to the phase of the applied stimulation, which is referred to as “entrainment”. It is important to highlight that the stimulation resulting from tACS is merely assumed to affect the timing/synchronicity of neural firing but not directly affect the ongoing firing rate (see for an illustration). The window of how much one can affect a natural brain oscillation depends on both the field strength and frequency of the applied current. The lower the strength of the applied electric field, the smaller the window of frequencies one may entrain. This concept can be visualized with a diagram called the Arnold Tongue.

Due to its potential in directly altering ongoing oscillations in the brain, tACS quickly became an attractive method in a variety of contexts. However, much of the early research predated a deeper understanding of the method, resulting in tACS frequently being used suboptimally, leading to many null effects and failures to replicate positive results. This has frustrated the field and led many to question whether tACS can actually directly entrain neural activity. One of the major criticisms resulted from an influential study applying tACS on human cadavers, which found that the electric currents commonly induced by Transcranial Electrical Stimulation (TES) were too weak to actually affect neural firing. Further research on in vivo primate models and humans suggests that stimulation in the range of 1 mA peak-to-baseline (i.e., 2 mA peak-to-peak) can induce electrical fields (>0.2 mV/mm) large enough to affect spike timing, in accordance with existing models of electrical conductivity in the brain. This does cast doubt on many early studies using much lower stimulation intensities. It should, however, be noted that other factors, like electrode montage or distance to stimulation site, and not just intensity also play an important role. The above-cited studies are consistent with findings showing that tACS, applied in the range of 1 mA peak-to-baseline (i.e., 2 mA peak-to-peak), can affect spike timing of single neurons and neural adaptation in primates. However, one problem with such intensities is that they also induce sensory effects (which is why earlier studies used lower intensities in the first place). This raises the additional concern that the mode of action of tACS is not through the current affecting neuronal populations in the brain directly but rather through its side effects, such as the somatosensory stimulation or stimulation of the retina, or indirect stimulation through cranial nerves. A recent study by Asamoah and colleagues found that transcutaneous stimulation of peripheral nerves in the skin could entrain neurons in a rat model. This finding was further supported by an additional experiment in the study in which anesthetic cream removed any tremor effects related to tACS in human participants, further linking somatosensory sensation and behavioral effects.

The study published in this issue by Vieira and colleagues can be seen as a direct response to the previously discussed research on the mechanisms of tACS. The study further explores the mechanisms of tACS, by measuring neural firing in a primate model while systematically varying the parameter space, and its dependency on sensory stimulation. Vieira and colleagues report the effects of tACS on single neuron activity independent of somatosensory perception, supporting the idea that tACS can directly affect neural populations in certain conditions, not merely through indirect sensory means. One should note, however, that they were not able to completely disentangle direct effects of tACS from the possibility of affecting the populations indirectly through cranial nerves. However, not much research has focused on the relevance of cranial nerves on tACS, and this issue requires more attention by future research in general. Nevertheless, this study adds some compelling evidence, making the case for the capability of tACS to directly entrain neuronal populations in certain conditions.

Neural oscillations have been linked to a wide variety of phenomena, not only in the healthy brain but also in pathological cases. Thus, research into the mechanisms of tACS helps researchers to fine-tune their parameters so that tACS may be used in a very targeted fashion to alter brain function, not just for research purposes but for clinical purposes as well. For example, neural oscillations have previously been implicated in language processing. Thus, it would make sense that individuals with language processing issues, such as individuals suffering from dyslexia, might benefit from some kind of tACS stimulation. The study published in this issue by Marchesotti and colleagues provides an example for the potential of tACS to improve brain functioning in impaired individuals, as well as understanding ongoing processes in the brain. Marchesotti and colleagues were able to improve reading performance in individuals suffering from dyslexia by applying targeted tACS at 30 Hz over the left auditory cortex, thus causally implicating the importance of oscillatory activity at 30 Hz for phonological processing. This important finding opens a potential avenue to aid individuals struggling with dyslexia and is a good example of how targeted tACS can be used for clinical treatments in addition to the research purposes.

Even though the mechanisms of tACS are still not completely understood, many studies are being performed in order for tACS to be used to the most of its potential. The study by Vieira and colleagues on a primate model has further explored the mechanism of tACS and its mode of action. Results from these types of studies into the mechanisms of tACS critically help tACS researchers in choosing the right parameters for their studies. In addition, such studies allow tACS to be used more effectively, by fine-tuning tACS to specific hypotheses, as demonstrated by Marchesotti and colleagues in work published in this issue. Research efforts such as these will ultimately answer causal questions of brain oscillations and provide a means for novel treatments for a variety of disorders.


Multiview learning for understanding functional multiomics

Nam D. Nguyen, Daifeng Wang — PLoS Computational Biology, 2020. PMC7117667, CC BY 4.0.

The molecular mechanisms and functions in complex biological systems currently remain elusive. Recent high-throughput techniques, such as next-generation sequencing, have generated a wide variety of multiomics datasets that enable the identification of biological functions and mechanisms via multiple facets. However, integrating these large-scale multiomics data and discovering functional insights are, nevertheless, challenging tasks. To address these challenges, machine learning has been broadly applied to analyze multiomics. This review introduces multiview learning—an emerging machine learning field—and envisions its potentially powerful applications to multiomics. In particular, multiview learning is more effective than previous integrative methods for learning data’s heterogeneity and revealing cross-talk patterns. Although it has been applied to various contexts, such as computer vision and speech recognition, multiview learning has not yet been widely applied to biological data—specifically, multiomics data. Therefore, this paper firstly reviews recent multiview learning methods and unifies them in a framework called multiview empirical risk minimization (MV-ERM). We further discuss the potential applications of each method to multiomics, including genomics, transcriptomics, and epigenomics, in an aim to discover the functional and mechanistic interpretations across omics. Secondly, we explore possible applications to different biological systems, including human diseases (e.g., brain disorders and cancers), plants, and single-cell analysis, and discuss both the benefits and caveats of using multiview learning to discover the molecular mechanisms and functions of these systems.


Introduction

Hierarchical complexity is the nature of all biological phenomena and processes. Although made of physical entities (e.g., atoms), the phenomena and interaction of biological entities such as DNA and proteins—among others—possess emergent properties that cannot be reduced to or explained by physical laws, which have kept biological sciences more descriptive than predictive for a long time. There exists no deterministic law in biology apart from the central dogma, which has actually been questioned and adjusted many times. The flow of genetic information in the central dogma is inherently complex and involves many levels of molecules and interactions (e.g., transcription, translation, alternative splicing, various kinds of regulation mechanisms). To understand a biological phenomenon, we thus need a holistic approach that integrates all the facets and interactions of a biological system as well as collects and analyzes these hierarchical complex data as thoroughly as possible. For this reason, the biological sciences have solely made considerable progress since the era of omics and big data.

High-throughput technologies and next-generation sequencing (NGS) data enable modeling biological systems for understanding underlying complex molecular mechanisms. As correspondents to levels of information flow in central dogma, biological big data are also multileveled and often referred to as multiomics data (i.e., genomics, transcriptomics, epigenomics, proteomics, metabolomics). By combining these “omics,” the complex big biological data can be tackled to disclose relationships between biological entities and identify biomarkers characterizing biological systems. However, a significant challenge involves having access to a set of computational methods powerful enough to shed light on these big data. Accompanied by the strides made in high-throughput biology, machine learning is prospering in biomedical applications, although making sense of multiomics data with traditional machine learning methods nevertheless remains elusive.

The obstacles to doing so are the heterogeneous and implicitly noisy nature of biological data. In fact, omics data are found in many forms, such as sequences (e.g., RNA-Seq, Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin using sequencing [ATAC-Seq]), graphs (e.g., metabolic pathways, regulatory networks), geometric information (e.g., binding site, protein folding), and spatial components (e.g., cell compartment). Biological variables can be continuously or discretely measurable or categorical and may originate from various sources that render them multimodal (rather than Gaussian). These data are often noisy or inconsistent because of the technical problems associated with biological assays, such as background effects and hybridization noise, among others. Furthermore, high-dimensional data (e.g., gene expression profiles with tens of thousands of genes across a limited number of experimental conditions) often suffer from the “curse of dimensionality,” which may lead to overfitting.

These challenges are not effectively addressed by traditional machine learning methods; relying on one single data type may lead to either an incomplete understanding of complex processes or overfitting. To address these problems, multiview machine learning offers a solution by integrating different modes or views of data such that learning from this integration leads to greater accuracy and effectiveness. This method is also effective because each mode (or view) is an aspect of the whole complex phenomenon or process that is often compatible and complementary to other modes (or views). Each view can regularize the hypothesis associated with or infer missing data and reduce noise from other data views. Multiview learning has a long history and is used to fuse various data types, such as video, voice, and text. As mutiomics big data is thriving, a comprehensive survey for different methods of multiview learning and their applications to multiomics or biomedical data analysis is necessary, especially for discovering functional omics. For example, a recent paper reviewed the multiview clustering methods with applications to cancer omics. To extend the generality of multiview learning in terms of both modeling and applications, in this review, we formulate multiview learning in a unified mathematical framework called multiview empirical risk minimization (MV-ERM), an extension of empirical risk minimization (ERM) originally introduced by Vapnik. In particular, we firstly introduce the concept of multiview learning, build the 2 formal alignment-based and factorization-based ERM frameworks, and categorize state-of-the-art multiview methods into these 2 categories. Finally, we review some recent biomedical applications of these methods for understanding functional omics and discuss some related problems and conclusions.


Single-view versus multiview learning

The advancement of high-throughput technologies, which has resulted in tremendous amounts of biological data, has transformed biology from a descriptive science into a predictive science in which machine learning plays an important role. Although biological data are different from visual or speech data, all machine learning algorithms share a common mathematical background that can be described as the ERM principle. In the following sections, we provide the formal descriptions of supervised and unsupervised learning alongside their corresponding ERM estimators.


Single-view learning

Biological data are represented by feature vectors, as is the case in other domains, wherein the i-th datapoint in a data set is a vector xi of measured values (e.g., gene or protein expression levels) across different samples (e.g., timepoints, experimental replicates). Each datapoint might be labeled or associated with a particular phenotype yi∈Y (i.e., tumor or normal). In a supervised setting, when given an unlabeled datapoint (i.e., a gene expression), we can predict the phenotype (disease or controlled) associated with that datapoint; this prediction is often encoded by function f:X→Y. In an unsupervised setting, we can discover a latent structure from unlabeled data, such as a clustering structure of gene expression profiles in which genes with similar expression levels are grouped together driven by particular molecular functions. In general, the formal definitions of supervised and unsupervised learning are presented next.


Supervised learning

In supervised setting, we have n labeled examples where (the label set) and (the domain), sampled from an unknown underlying joint distribution over. The goal is to find a function in a hypothesis space that predicts the output associated to any new pattern by f(x), as measured with respect to a known loss function. Note that function f stands for any transformation, ranging from linear projection to deep neural network and kernel function. For a candidate function, its empirical risk is and the regularizer controlling its smoothness is Ω(f) where is a penalty function (is the set of nonnegative real numbers). The penalized ERM estimator is where λ is regularization parameter. For example, support vector machine (SVM) is the combination of hinge loss and -regularizer, whereas ordinary least squares makes use of squared loss, etc. The basic idea of supervised learning is demonstrated in.


Unsupervised learning

In unsupervised setting, we have n unlabeled examples where sampled from an unknown underlying distribution over. The goal is to find a latent structure (low-dimensional or clustering representation, latent factors, etc.) from encoded by function in hypothesis space and decoded by function in hypothesis space, as measured with respect to a reconstruction error. For a pair of candidate functions, its empirical risk is The ERM estimator is Using a reconstruction error, this framework is general enough to encompass a variety of algorithms, such as principal component analysis (PCA), k-means, nonnegative Matrix factorization (NMF), autoencoder, etc. In fact, the equivalence of NMF and spectral and k-means clustering was investigated. Both k-means and PCA methods can be considered as special cases of autoencoders. Several studies have been explored the additional constraints for an autoencoder to perform NMF. Also, NMF has a good interpretability because, for example, it factorizes a gene expression profiles into 2 matrices, one of which describes the structure between genes while the other describes the structure between samples. It also has good performances, especially in single-cell studies. Because of the equivalence of NMF and other unsupervised methods, we represent here the formal settings of NMF as a typical case of unsupervised learning without loss of generality:

Given a data set represented by a nonnegative matrix X, NMF decomposes X into the production of nonnegative matrices G and F, i.e., X≈GFT. The ERM estimator of NMF can be formulated as follows:

Note that the objective function (5) takes the matrix form of unsupervised ERM estimator (4) where all xi from S are column vectors of matrix X, f(X) = F, and G is the matrix representation of the linear operator g(⋅).


Pitfalls of single-view learning

Through the formal definitions of machine learning identified previously, its applications in biological domains can be regarded as abstracting out a representation of a single data type, where can be, for example, a gene expression profile. This representation captures the interactions of elements (i.e., genes) within and the phenotypic manifestation (e.g., cancer) resulting from those interactions. However, to understand complex traits in which the genotype—phenotype interactions manifest over multiple levels of information flows, relying on merely one single omics data type is limited and prohibits our knowledge from uncovering the comprehensive mechanism that underlies complex biological processes. Even with the availability of more than one data type (e.g., for gene expression, for methylation level), because they originate from different distributions, applying machine learning algorithms on these data independently may solely assemble some pieces of the puzzle of a complex phenomenon; many additional pieces associated with the interactions across different data types remain unknown. Therefore, a learning method that exploits not only information captured in each omic but also that infers from the associations between different omics is needed to understand complex traits. Multiview machine learning is such a method.


Multiview learning

Many real-life datasets comprise diverse views or modalities; for example, a website can contain both images and texts that refer to the same content. In multimedia applications, for instance, both the speech and lip motions of a character are often simultaneously accessible. These views or modalities are often compatible, which helps the learning model be more robust as well as complementary and thereby reveal further information that cannot be fully uncovered when depending on only one view.

In biology, the need for multiview data is quite trivial; on one hand, we have homogeneous biological data assayed from the same molecular level (e.g., gene or protein expression), yet these homogeneous data may be measured across different conditions, phenotypes, or species. In this context, comparative analysis is important to, for example, find a conserved gene set that functions in the same pathway between 2 different species. On the other hand, multiomics is heterogeneous data in which we have different omics (e.g., genomics, proteomics, epigenomics) assayed from the same tissue or cell. These various omics are encoded by different data views, such as for transcriptomic abundance or for protein concentration. The goal of multiview learning is to exploit multiple representations of the input data and improve the learning performance. Herein, we set up 2 formal frameworks of multiview learning: one based on the ERM principle of supervised learning and the other based on the ERM principle of unsupervised learning. We also analyze the following 2 characteristics of multiview data that underlie those frameworks: consensus and complementary.


Consensus and complementary principles

The consensus principle seeks to maximize the agreement among multiple distinctive representations of the data. In short, given an example being seen in 2 views with its label y∈Y, the goal is to maximize the probability:

The complementary principle demonstrates that in a multiview learning problem, each representation or view may contain information that does not exist in other views. Therefore, combining different views makes the predictor more accurate, or in other words, improves the learning performance. The 2 principles are demonstrated in.


MV-ERM

In multiview setting, we have n labeled examples and m unlabeled examples, where and each example x = (x(1),x(2),…,x(v)) is seen in v views with for i = {1,2,…,v}. S and U are both sampled from an unknown underlying joint distribution over. The goal is to find v functions in v hypothesis spaces where, predicting the output associated to any new pattern by f(i)(x), as measured with respect to a known loss function. For a candidate function, its empirical risk is And the regularizer controlling its smoothness is Ω(f(i)), where is a penalty function. Also, to impose a penalty on the complexity of each pair (f(i),f(j)) in a cross-product of 2 hypotheses in order to utilize unlabeled data in different views, we define the co-regularizer The penalized MV-ERM estimator is In, the last term, co-regularizer Ωco(⋅), preserves the consensus principle for multiview learning. Note that if λco = 0, this problem reduces to solving 2 independent problems, meaning only the complementary principle is used. In the following, we present 2 frameworks, i.e., alignment-based and factorization-based, for multiview learning that covers most of the recent methods. The basic idea of multiview learning is demonstrated in.

Alignment-based framework. In the Eq of MV-ERM estimator, if there is no labeled data, i.e., n = 0 (or S = ∅), the problem is then which can be seen as an alignment problem finding a set of embeddings (f(1),…,f(v)) that transform the original multiview data into a new common space by identifying an alignment strategy denoted by the co-regularizer Ωco(⋅). This co-regularizer serves as a pairwise symmetric alignment function across all different views to coordinate the information among them. This multiview framework is based on supervised setting of single-view machine learning in Eq where the loss function is optional, so the learning algorithm will try to uncover the v functions not by comparing with a ground truth (i.e., yi) but by comparing to each other (in a pairwise fashion), depicted by the co-regularization term Ωco(f(i),f(j)). The co-regularization term can be correlation-based, in which the 2 embeddings f(i)(x(i)),f(j)(x(j)) are maximally correlated, or distance-based, in which the Euclidean distance between the 2 embeddings is minimized. This kind of multiview learning can be regarded as self-supervision in which the v learners try to learn from each other’s data.

Factorization-based framework. The second framework for multiview learning is based on single-view unsupervised learning, trying to seek a common latent representation for multiple different views. In terms of NMF, given a multiview nonnegative data set consisting of v different views as, for each view, multiview NMF factorizes X(i)≈G(i)F(i)T, where F(i) = f(i)(X(i)), and learns a common latent representation across all the views via the following MV-ERM estimator: where λ is the regularization parameter, trying to balance the importance of different views and the reconstruction error. The latent representations F(i) in different views are forced to be close to the consensus one. In any deep learning architecture, the joint latent representation can be achieved by a joint layer preceded by separated layers corresponding to separated multiple view inputs.

Both 2 aforementioned frameworks can be regarded as representation learning approaches. Whereas in the alignment-based framework, data representations from each pairs of views are forced to be coordinated, the representation of all views in the factorization-based framework are forced to be the same. The consensus principle is demonstrated by the co-regularizer Ωco(f(i),f(j)) in the alignment method and by common latent representation (or sometimes called dictionary) in the factorization method; the complementary principle is demonstrated by the regularizer Ω(f(i)) in alignment methods and by expansion coefficients G(i) in factorization methods.


Multiomics interpretation of multiview learning

In terms of functional omics, each view of multiview data X(i) can be a gene expression profile, DNA methylation level, or protein abundance. Multiview learning algorithms applied to these data aim to infer the interactions within each omic, represented by f(i)(X(i)) or G(i), as well as the interactions across all omics, represented by Ωco(f(i)(X(i)),f(j)(X(j))) or. In other words, multiview machine learning attempts to recover a common abstract space wherein the several types of omics data are comparable such that the cross-talk patterns may easily be revealed. For example, in single-view machine learning, gene expression profile clustering is one method of revealing functional modules in which a group of genes collaborate to deliver a biological function. However, the insights of many complex biological processes cannot be understood in terms of these functional modules at the transciptomic level. On the contrary, multiview learning can find a way to represent both gene expression X(i) and protein expression X(j) together such that the interactions of genes as well as the interactions between genes and gene products (e.g., proteins) can be captured for a holistic understanding of complex biological phenomena. For example, if gene expression, chromatin accessibility, and protein expression are represented in a common space, they can be simultaneously clustered not only such that a group of genes or a group of proteins that function together can be identified but also—and more importantly—such that the functional linkage between genes, regulatory elements, and proteins can be revealed (e.g., protein α binds to region β to regulate the expression of gene γ). illustrates this example using a factorization method. With a closely related machine learning technique called transfer learning, we can even infer information of an omic level from another omic level. As for homogeneous data across different species, multiview learning can be applied to infer and transfer knowledge from one species to another species.


Multiview learning methods

We categorized all recent state-of-the-art methods of multiview learning into 2 groups according to the frameworks explained in the previous sections: the alignment-based framework, which seeks a pairwise alignment among views, and a factorization-based framework, which seeks a common representation across all views. Each framework contains elements of either consensus principle or complementary principle or both. All the methods described in this review are summarized in.


Alignment-based methods

The consensus principle is realized in alignment-based methods by the co-regularization terms Ωco(⋅)that coordinate any 2 embeddings and, whereas the complementary principle is realized by the separately regularized feature learning of the different views (i.e., the terms Ω(⋅)).

Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) is one of the first and most popular methods to achieve a consensus between 2 views. Formally, for the 2 datasets X(1) and X(2), CCA computes 2 linear projections, F(1) and F(2), such that the cross correlation across 2 views is maximized: Compared with the general form of the alignment-based method in Eq, CCA only support the consensus principle, denoted by Ωco(⋅) = −tr(F(1)TX(1)X(2)TF(2)). Note that in Eq, the transformation f(i)(⋅) takes the form of a linear projection, represented by matrix F(i).

Many extensions of CCA support nonlinear embeddings, such as kernel CCA (KCCA), by using the kernel trick to produce a nonlinear version of CCA by implicitly looking for functions f(1) and f(2) through correspondent kernel functions such that f(1)(X(1)) and f(2)(X(2)) are maximally correlated. KCCA is also an effective preprocessing step for classification algorithms like the SVM; e.g., SVM-2K. TCCA is a tensor-based extension of CCA capable of handling multiple data views by analyzing the covariance tensor of those views. Deep CCA (DCCA) is a deep learning–based extension of CCA that can be regarded as a parametric alternative to the instance-based method of KCCA to learn correlated nonlinear deep embeddings. Unlike KCCA, DCCA does not require an inner product and does not restrict its hypothesis to a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS); DCCA also has scalability advantages according to data size. A more recent approach is deep canonically correlated autoencoder (DCCAE), which combines the advantages of both DCCA and deep autoencoder. DCCAE’s architecture is formed by 2 different autoencoders correspondent to 2 views, and although it preserves the autoencoders's reconstruction errors, it also optimizes the canonical correlation between their bottleneck representations. Because of this simultaneous optimization strategy, a trade-off occurs between information learned within each view and information learned across different views. Traditionally, CCA-based approaches implemented only the consensus principle (except for DCCAEs, which have the Ω(⋅)for learning the compact representation of each view). Yet a recent method, multiview uncorrelated locality preserving projection (MULPP), also implemented the complementary principle by preserving the local structures of all the views.

Similar to CCA-based methods that determine the directions of maximum correlation between each view, partial least squares (PLS) finds the directions of maximum covariance. In fact, a correlation can be considered a normalized covariance, and CCA-based methods therefore have close connections with PLS-based methods in several facets. Formally, given a pair of datasets, the PLS problem can be expressed as: We may observe that, similar to CCA, in PLS, the consensus principle is exclusively implemented:. Multiview discriminant analysis (MvDA) can be perceived as the extension of PLS wherein both the between-view and within-view information are considered:, where, FTSF is the within-class scatter matrix, and FTDF is the between-class scatter matrix. Employing a deep architecture, Kan and colleagues also proposed a multiview deep network (MvDN), which aims to achieve a consensus representation of discriminant features across all views. In particular, MvDN consists of 2 subarchitectures—one involving view-specific components f(i)(⋅) for the reduction of view-specific variations and the other involving a common component gc(⋅)for the shared representation across all views. Finally, the loss function of MvDA (i.e., a Fisher-like loss) is applied on the top layer of the network to learn the network’s parameters through backpropagation and gradient descent: where F = [gc ∘ f(1)(X1),…,gc ∘ f(v)(Xv)].

Whereas most of CCA-based methods solely utilize the consensus principle, manifold alignment can be perceived as an advanced alternative in which both consensus and complementary principles are applied. Manifold alignment is based on the manifold hypothesis, which states that the distribution of real-world high-dimensional data is concentrated near a lower dimensional manifold embedded in the ambient space of the original data. A family of machine learning algorithms (i.e., manifold learning) attempts to capture these data’s manifold structures through nonlinear projections. The idea behind manifold alignment is the aim to capture a low-dimensional common manifold shared by 2 high-dimensional datasets. This aim can be achieved by (1) utilizing 2 nonlinear embeddings (f(1)(⋅) and f(2)(⋅)), which transform the 2 original datasets to minimize the distance between them as well as by (2) preserving the geometric structure of each data set. Specifically, given 2 input datasets, we want to determine the 2 transforms f(1)(⋅) and f(1)(⋅) as solutions to this minimization problem: where f(1) and f(2) are functions defined on the respective datasets X(1) and X(2), and and are the graph Laplacian of X(1) and X(2), respectively; W is the matrix that encodes the correspondences between X(1) and X(2) such that Wi,j = 1 iff corresponds to (e.g., protein is coded by gene). The first term preserves the correspondence (or minimizes the differences) between the 2 views, whereas the second and third terms preserve the local geometric structure of the 2 original datasets by imposing a graph regularization on f(1) and f(2). In manifold alignment, Ωco(⋅) = λco‖f(1)(X(1))−f(2)(X(2))‖ and. Wang and Mahadevan generalized manifold alignment to deal with more than 2 views. To deal with sequence and time series data, Vu and colleagues combined manifold alignment and dynamic time warping. The idea behind graph regularization for multiview learning—as in manifold alignment—is thriving in biomedical applications, for biological networks are pervasive in every level of the analysis.

As the function f(i) in the alignment-based equation represent any transformation, including the implicit transformation in an RKHS —because a kernel function —a broad range of multiple kernel learning (MKL) methods can be considered to be alignment-based methods. The basic idea of MKL aims to combine (in a linear or nonlinear way) various kernels that present different notions of similarity from multiple datasets into one additive kernel. In particular, given v datasets X(i) with v corresponding kernel matrices K(i) (for i = {1,2,…,v}) denoting the similarity over pairs of data points in X(i), we introduce a new kernel K′ = ∑iβiK(i), where β is a vector of coefficients for each kernel. Because of a kernel’s additivity—a property of RKHS—this new function K′ is still a kernel. However, the MKL methods solely support the complementary principle (i.e., Ω(⋅) = K(i)) because we learn merely the appropriate combination of kernels rather than a specific kernel that works most efficiently.


Factorization-based methods

In factorization-based methods, the consensus principle is illustrated by the common latent representations (called the dictionary matrices), whereas the complementary principle is illustrated by the terms G(i) (called the expansion coefficients matrices).

Many extensions exist for the multiview NMF; for example, multiview clustering via deep matrix factorization employs a seminonnegative matrix factorization to learn the hierarchical semantics of multiview data in a layer-wise fashion. The ERM estimator is: The first term is the decomposition on all views through m layers in which the representations on the last layer are forced to be the same. The learning procedure depends on 2 parameters—α(i), which controls the weight for the ith view, and γ, which controls the distribution of weights such that the important views have high weights. The second term, including L(i), the graph Laplacian of the k-nearest neighbor graph constructed from data view i, maintains the geometric structure of each view. The nonnegativity constraint on the hidden representation makes the model easy to interpret.

As spectral clustering has been proven to be equivalent to NMF, multiview spectral clustering is also related to multiview NMF. The idea behind multiview spectral clustering is the aim to achieve a common eigenvector matrix from different views. In particular, the method regularizes all distinct eigenvector matrices towards a consensus matrix by solving the following optimization problem: Another way to establish the common eigenvector matrix is presented by Cai and colleagues, whose optimization problem is formulated as where makes become the final clustering indicator matrix. The main difference between the 2 methods is that the first uses, and the second adopts as 2 different terms that measure the lack of consensus between views that must be minimized.

As shown by Ding and colleagues, k-means clustering can also be formulated as an NMF problem by using an indicator matrix. To deal with large-scale multiview data, Cai and colleagues proposed a multiview k-means clustering method that adopts a common indicator matrix across different views. The optimization problem is formulated as follows: The learning procedure depends on 2 parameters—α(i), which controls the weight for the v-th view, and γ, which controls the distribution of weights—such that the important views acquire significant weight during multiview clustering.

As a multiview deep learning extension for autoencoder model, Ngiam and colleagues introduce a bimodal deep autoencoder to extract the shared representation of the bottleneck layer, which is the concatenation of 2 views' code. This fusion forces the compact representations of 2 views to be comparable. Many different network architectures implement the similar idea of a shared top (or bottleneck) layer of various networks associated with different views. Multimodal deep Boltzmann machine is a similar method derived from a probabilistic graphical model approach. In these deep learning methods, the shared layer serves as the consensus principle, whereas layers that belong to different networks serve as the diversity principle. Currently, most of these multiview deep learning methods are merely applied for multimedia data (i.e., sounds and visions), not for biomedical data yet.

Another multiview extension for deep probability model is multiview conditional random fields (multiview CRF), which is used to label sequential data. To implement the consensus principle, the authors used a joint representation for features extracted from different neural networks and then minimize the distance between the 2 views. To implement the complementary principle, they integrated features of multiple views into the framework of CRF. Variational dependent multioutput Gaussian process is also a multiview method for sequential data modeling, which utilizes the Gaussian process.


Applications


Cancers

Cancer is a complex disease whose phenotypic manifestation might be related to many different levels of molecular signatures, such as gene expression and DNA methylation. In other words, cancer types and subtypes can be defined based on, for example, both genetic mutations and epigenetic landscapes. Therefore, any causal analysis based on solely one aspect or single omics will be a causal reductionism that might lead to insufficient results. Multiomics approaches in oncology research is thriving, and many applications of such approaches have been recently pursued.

Rappoport and Shamir performed an extensive review and benchmark that compare 9 multiview methods on 10 cancer types using cancer datasets from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) spanning 3 omics—that is, gene expression, microRNA (miRNA) expression, and DNA methylation. Among the 9 algorithms chosen, LRAcluster, k-means, and spectral clustering are clustering methods that performs on the concatenation of various omics into a single matrix, which is a method often referred to in the literature as early integration. The other 7 methods are similarity network fusion (SNF), regularized multiple kernel learning-locality preserving projections (rMKL-LPP), multiway canonical correlation analysis (MCCA), multiview NMF (MultiNMF), iClusterBayes, and PINS. These methods are chosen to reflect their categorization which, as stated therein, is overlapped; nevertheless, these practically available tools are widely used. The k-means, spectral clustering, and multiNMF methods are mentioned in the previous section. iClusterBayes is also a factorization method belonging to the subspace clustering family that shares an objective function similar to that of NMF and k-means. MCCA is a generalization of CCA wherein pairwise correlations between embeddings are maximally summed up. The rMKL-LPP method is a case of MKL specifically developed for multiomics data. SNF is a graph-based approach that aims to fuse different graphs that represent various omics and may also be regarded as an MKL method on graph structure. The PINS method, belonging to the approach sometimes called late integration, is the averaging of all clustering results from different omics. In their paper, Rappoport and Shamir demonstrate that rMKL-LPP performs most efficiently in terms of clinical enrichment, whereas MCCA and MultiNMF perform most efficiently with respect to survival. It is worth noting that rMKL-LPP is a specialized multiomic method, whereas MCCA and MultiNMF are general multiview learning methods.

Rappoport and Shamir also developed a new method for multiomics clustering, neighborhood-based multi-omics clustering (NEMO), which can be applied to partial datasets in which patients' omic data are missing without performing data imputation. The authors also compared NEMO with the benchmark on a previous study and demonstrated an improvement of their method on partial data. The idea behind NEMO is similar to those behind SNF and rMKL-LPP; all 3 methods are MKL approaches. Firstly, the similarity matrix of each omic is built based on a radial basis function kernel. Secondly, theses matrices are integrated into one average relative similarity matrix. Finally, spectral clustering is applied on this unified matrix wherein a modified eigenmap method is employed. The ability of NEMO to handle a partial data set is based on a local neighborhood approach. Experiements revealed that NEMO is faster and simpler than existing multiomics clustering algorithms.

Multiview NMF is also used for the selection of common codifferential genes. In this paper, the authors implemented a graph-regularized version of multiview NMF (GMvNMF) to encode the data manifold of genomic data. Manifold regularization for multiview learning was first introduced in the form of manifold alignment. This kind of geometric information embedding can be applied to any multiview machine learning method, including GMvNMF. This method's validity was tested in 4 cancer multiomics data from TCGA, and each of these cancer types comprises 3 omics (i.e., gene expression, copy number variation, and DNA methylation). GMvNMF was demonstrated to perform more efficiently than other NMF methods, including plain multiview NMF.

Also using graph regularization, Zhang and Ma proposed a regularized multiview subspace clustering (rMV-spc) method to discover common co-expressed modules. These modules serve as biomarkers across various cancer stages that might lead to the revealing of mechanisms that underlie the development of cancers. The graph regularization employed therein is the protein—protein interaction (PPI) network; their optimization procedure is based on interior point algorithm. They performed their method on breast cancer data from TCGA and reached a more favorable result compared with that of an artificial network benchmark. Yet while claiming the method's extensibility to heterogeneous multiomics data, in this study, the authors exclusively included gene expression data. Although the PPI network was also used, it is regarded as prior information in the form of regularization rather than a different source of data view.

Yu and colleagues proposed a method for simultaneous clustering of multiview cancer data using a multiview spectral clustering method. However, their computational method substantially differs from other spectral clustering approaches in that, rather than calculating eigenvectors, the optimization procedure therein involves of a line-search algorithm on Stiefel manifold. In this gradient descent method, the gradient calculated from a Euclidean space in each iteration is projected onto an embedded matrix manifold. The authors applied this method to both simulation and real data, which also originate from TCGA. In both cases, the method performed favorably. In the real data set composed of gene expression, miRNA expression, and DNA methylation across 12 cancer subtypes, their method identified more clusters that are enriched by gene ontology and KEGG pathways, which could be used to explain the different mechanisms for each subtype of cancer development.


Brain diseases

The nature of mental disorders and neurodegenerative diseases, of which Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common one, remains a puzzle. Although many psychiatry diagnoses are currently based on neuroimaging and, hence, multiview learning from different types of neuroimages (e.g., MRI, fMRI, positron emission tomography [PET], computerized tomography [CT]), a study of AD suggests that memory impairment and dementia are the results of nonlinear interactions involving multiple brain cell types (e.g., neurons, microglia), pathogenic forms of τ proteins and amyloid-β as the brain ages. Whereas these interactions are preserved in a healthy brain, they are dysfunctional in an unhealthy brain, thereby leading to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and giving rise to AD. Also, each cell type is affected by unhealthy aging at multiple levels, such as transcriptomic, epigenomic, proteomic, metabolomic, and lipidomic. Therefore, a holistic approach that combines these omic data on blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), brain samples, and also neuroimages as phenotypic traits is essential for revealing the complex mechanism underlying the disease. The combination of omics studies and medical imaging (sometimes called radiogenomics) advances our understanding of AD and neurodegenerative disorders in general at multiple levels through the identification of biomarkers for diagnosis and through association studies that reveal the interaction mechanism among genetic and phenotypic data.

Xu and colleagues developed a Bayesian multiview learning method for association studies and diagnosis of AD through 2 data views: genetic variations (i.e., single-nucleotide polymorphism [SNP]) (discrete ordinal data) and MRI features (continuous data). By using sparse linear projections to factorize common latent features, the method aims to (1) simultaneously discover the interactions between genetic variations and MRI features and (2) select biomarkers associated with the disease. The authors also incorporated the linkage disequilibrium as a prior knowledge for the SNP data.

As also a radiogenomics approach, Zhou and colleagues utilized both MRI and PET images as well as SNP to identify AD’s prodromal status—MCI—and to classify MCI subjects into 2 groups of either progressive MCI (pMCI) or stable MCI (sMCI); these groups are categorized based on who will develop AD and who will remain stable. For diagnostic predicting and for dealing with the heterogeneity and high-dimension, low-sample-size problem of the multiview data, the authors developed a deep multiview network that slowly fuses 3 different datasets into a common representation after a stage-wise training using the “maximum number of available samples”; specifically, the architecture makes use of a “three-stage deep feature learning and fusion framework.” In the first stage, latent representations of each view (MRI, PET, SNP) are learned separately, whereas in the second stage, the joint pairwise representations are learned by using the features in the first stage. In the third stage, diagnostic labels are learned by integrating all features from the second stage. The analysis is made on the AD neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) data set and achieves a favorable performance. The multiview deep learning approach taken therein can be regarded as a slow fusion architecture. Another approach of discriminating MCI subgroups is presented by Young and colleagues, wherein the authors made use of Gaussian process as an MKL method to integrate volumetric MRI, fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET), CSF, and apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype for a binary classification. This combination of neuroimaging, genomic, and metabolomic data delivered an accuracy of 74%, higher than any results achieved using a single modality. The combination of structural MRI, FDG-PET, and CSF are also used in an experimental study in which 3 different multiview learning methods—namely CCA, MKL, and matrix factorization—are compared on the ADNI data.

For late-onset AD (LOAD), Mukherjee and colleagues proposed a general multiview framework for feature learning of 27 previously known driver genes of LOAD, which may then be used to identify other potential driver genes. The authors also proposed a ranking method for these genes by aggregating the predictions associated with each feature set with genome-wide association study (GWAS) statistics. While claiming the framework's generality for any data modalities, the authors demonstrated the analysis via 3 modes of data: differentially expressed genes between AD cases and controls, global gene co-expression network features, and 42 tissue-specific co-expression modules. These transcriptomic data are collected from postmortem brain tissue across 3 different studies that are assumed to possess independently predictive information. To tackle sparsely labeled data (of only 27 known genes), they developed a multiview classification based on a co-training scheme. For feature learning, they indicated that topological features (e.g., node degree) are more predictive than are differential expression features; for ranking, they identified previously known and also potentially new LOAD driver genes that are significantly enriched for both SNPs and pathways associated with AD.

Another degenerative genetic disease is spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA), which is responsible for severe movement disorders. This complex disease, which possesses more than 40 genetically different types, must also be studied from an integrative approach that makes use of omics data, neuroimaging data, and clinical data, among others. Garali and colleagues analyzed 4 subtypes of SCA, which are SCA1, SCA2, SCA3—the 3 most common subtypes—and SCA7, by employing component-based methods known as regularized generalized CCA (RGCCA) and sparse generalized CCA (SGCCA). These methods generalize CCA to analyze data sets structured in blocks, each of which represents a unique view of data. This kind of analysis aims to reveal information between and within blocks. Because SCA is characterized by the volume of a brain region called the pons, the authors performed RGCCA and SGCCA as block-based multimodal biomarkers approaches to discover the relationships between the pons volume, metabolomics, lipidomics, and metabolic imaging resulting from magnetic resonance spectroscopy.


Single-cell omics

Cellular populations are heterogeneous in nature. Although cells in a particular tissue are of the same type (e.g., neuron, muscle), they are nevertheless varied in terms of their states (e.g., mitotic, migratory) and behaviors according to the transcriptomic, proteomic, and other measurement levels in a spatiotemporal pattern. Research based on bulk sample of cells from a specific tissue undermines these variations across cells so that the emerged single-cell technologies flourish and thereby enable the exploration of cellular heterogeneity in complex diseases and stem cell differentiation. Single-cell multiomics provide diverse views for each individual cell (e.g., genomic, epigenomic, transcriptomic) that suggest how these different molecular levels interact to result in a phenotypic heterogeneity of cellular types, states, and fates (e.g., the effects of DNA methylation in the cell population on gene expression). Integrating these multiomics remains a challenge, especially when sparseness and high dimensionality are the 2 pervasive characteristics of single-cell multiomics data. Sparseness is caused by dropout events wherein the gene expression is very high in some cells but very low or almost zero in other cells due to the stochastic nature of gene expression at the resolution of single-cell. The mixing of these false zeros with true zeros of nonexpressed genes makes the analysis difficult. Thus, to impute missing values from an omic, we need information from other omics. Also, the high dimensionality caused by the large number of genes in each cell would make any approach for discrimination between cells be very hard because, in this high-dimensional space, the distance between cells is indistinguishable.

Few imputation methods in single-cell analysis make use of multiview learning from multiomics data. Lin and colleagues developed an ensemble regression imputation method that combines the self-imputation from a single omics (e.g., miRNA) as well as cross-imputation from other correlated omics (e.g., mRNA, DNA methylation). When comparing 5 other single-view imputation methods, the method presented therein was demonstrated to be advanced and efficient in terms of imputation accuracy and the recovery of mRNA-miRNA interactions. Multiomics factor analysis (MOFA) is another multiomics integrative method that can efficiently identify outlier samples and accurately impute missing values. The method learns a set of hidden factors responsible for biological and technical variability from different omics and clearly identifies the consensus information shared across multiple omics as well as the diversity of specific information that belongs to individual omics. The inferred factors enable the identification of sample subgroups, data imputation, and sample outliers. When applied to a data set of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia on 200 patient samples, including somatic mutations, RNA expression, DNA methylation, and ex vivo drug responses, MOFA identified many sources of disease heterogeneity, such as immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable region status, trisomy of chromosome 12, and response to oxidative stress. When applied to single-cell multiomics data, MOFA identified coordinated transcriptional and epigenetic changes along cell differentiation. The ensemble method used by Lin and colleagues can be regarded as an alignment-based method because it makes use of correlations between omics, whereas MOFA is a factorization-based method that attempts to reveal common latent factors.

The high dimensionality of single-cell multiomics requires any integration method to consider dimension reduction one of its goals. This requirement is naturally implemented in factorization-based methods because they attempt to reveal a common latent structure that often resides in a low-dimensional space. The desired result may also be accomplished if the embeddings f(i) in alignment-based methods transform the original data to a linear or nonlinear manifold. Welch and colleagues developed MATCHER to perform manifold alignment between transcriptomic and epigenomic levels from different cells. The method firstly uses a Gaussian process latent variable model to obtain pseudotime values for every cell by independently clustering them in every omics and secondly aligns the quantiles of the pseudotime distribution and those of a uniform distribution to make them directly comparable. As far as we understand, very few computational methods in bioinformatics—especially in multiomic integration—utilize the method of manifold alignment even though manifold structure is a suitable representation for gene regulatory networks because it preserves the locality of regulons. Similar to MATCHER, ManiNetCluster is another method for multiview learning that attempts to identify conserved or specific gene modules across species via manifold alignment. Although the data used in their studies are merely transcriptomic profiled from bulk samples, the method is general sufficient to apply to single-cell multiomics data to identify cell types, cell states, and even the functional linkage between various omics. It is worth noting that not all NMF methods used in single-cell multiomic integration are factorization-based approaches. Duren and colleagues developed a method called coupleNMF to cluster cells using both gene expressions (scRNA-seq) and chromatin accessibility (scATAC-seq). This method does not recover a common dictionary matrix that captures the consensus across different views, as is the case in other multiview NMF methods; rather, it identifies the association between genes and regulatory elements and is thus a co-regularized method.


Plants

Multiomics and machine learning may be applied in plant science, especially to understand the mechanisms of photosynthesis and hydrogen metabolism that are valuable for biofuel research. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is a microalgae often used as a premier reference organism to study biohydrogen production because of its high hydrogenase activity. For example, a study applied both transcriptomic and proteomic levels to reveal a majority of the algal genomes being differentially expressed over the course of the light condition and the timing of specific genes being determined by their biological functions. Another study implemented of genomics, transcriptomic, proteomics, and metabolomics to identify critical genes in hydrogen metabolism. The combination of transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolite, and lipid profiling was also used to investigate the the regulation of photosynthetic process during nitrogen deprivation in C. reinhardtii. However, these studies exclusively applied basic statistical techniques in their analysis and as such, lacked a systematic method for integrating and inferring from different types of omics.

As far as we understand, ManiNetCluster is the only multiview learning method that has been used in plant science. In general settings, the method takes 2 different data sets as inputs, transforms them into a common latent subspace where they can be aligned with each other, then simultaneously clusters the aligned network for the discovery of conserved modules and functional linkages between 2 data types. In their study, a gene expression profile of C. reinhardtii between light and dark conditions was employed, and the 2 conditions were treated as 2 views of a multiview data set. ManiNetCluster was subsequently applied on these 2 inputs, which led to the discovery of conserved modules in which a group of genes retain their functions during both the daytime and nighttime. Some critical genes that serve as functional linkages to bridge and regulate daytime and nighttime functions were specifically identified.


Summary and discussions

Multiview learning has a long history, and many literature reviews have been produced on this topic, including the following: Li and colleagues focus on multiview representation learning methods; Zhao and colleagues, Sun, Sun and colleagues focus on some theoretical aspects—that is, generalization bounds—of some old paradigms of multiview learning (e.g., co-training); one of the first reviews discussing extensively on the consensus and complementary principles of multiview learning is made by Xu and colleagues; Chao and colleagues focus on and categorize multiview clustering methods into generative and discriminative methods; and Baltrušaitis and colleagues conducted a comprehensive survey that categorizes multiview learning methods into 5 technical challenges—representation, translation, alignment, fusion, and co-learning. Most methods surveyed by Baltrušaitis and colleagues are general or specialized for multimedia applications. The applications of multiview learning in biomedical data are just recently investigated, and there are also surveys investigating the methods to integrate heterogeneous biological and multiomics data. However, they did not discuss the underlying machine learning principles (e.g., ERM) for multiview learning and how to use these principles for modeling multiomics data and revealing functional omics.

Different from these reviews, we focused on the basic principle underlying all machine learning algorithms (i.e., ERM) and built the alignment-based and factorization-based frameworks for multiview learning based on that principle. We can categorize nearly all the multiview learning methods into those 2 framework by demonstrating which components of their objective functions are responsible for the consensus or the complementary principles of multiview learning. These 2 forms of MV-ERM may also be employed in a future theoretical analysis to derive the generalization bounds of a learning algorithm. We have demonstrated that, with the general settings, our multiview learning framework may be either supervised or unsupervised. In fact, the alignment-based methods are based on supervised settings of single-view machine learning, whereas factorization-based methods are based on the reconstruction error of single-view unsupervised learning. The alignment-based methods are always performed in pairwise fashion and therefore not scalable, as is the factorization-based method; however, in parallel to data integration, alignment-based methods may be applied for an association or comparative analysis.

Current machine learning methods based on ERM have some potential pitfalls, e.g., for understanding causal relationships between variables. When minimizing empirical error, the learning algorithm tries to absorb all the association relationships (e.g., correlation) found in the data. To tackle this association-versus-causation dilemma, Arjovsky and colleagues proposed a theoretical framework, invariant risk minimization (IRM), to learn causations by inferring invariances across conditions (e.g., different omics in biological context). This opens up the possibility to generalize IRM to multiview settings (i.e., multiview IRM) for learning the directed links among variables across omics, implying potential causal relationships.

There are also a few caveats in multiview learning applications, especially in terms of time and space complexities. First, given that its input is typically multiomic data, multiview learning is computationally costly and demands high data memory usage. For example, alignment-based methods proceed in a pairwise fashion, which probably results in a 2-fold increase of data memory. Moreover, factorization-based methods can result in a higher degree of polynomial space complexity in that they simultaneously process all available datasets. Second, a number of hyperparameters may be used to define a multiview learning model. Tuning various hyperparameters is still challenging. In particular, searching an optimal set of hyperparameters is likely computationally intensive. For example, DCCA, a multiview deep learning method, has to simultaneously optimize 2 deep neural networks, creating additional computational burden in training.

Many topics were not covered in this paper. To identify and categorize various kinds of multiview learning methods, we exclusively focused on the algorithms' objective functions but did not discuss the details of their optimization procedures. In fact, many learning methods share similar objective functions but nevertheless differ from optimization methods. Most of the NMF-based methods are based on an alternating optimization technique, whereas spectral methods (e.g., spectral clustering) are based on solving a generalized eigenproblem. Spectral clustering can also be solved by an optimization procedure on a matrix manifold, such as Stiefel manifold. Most deep learning approaches are solved by backpropagation and stochastic gradient descent methods, whereas many other solvers are based on a convex relaxation. There are additional topics that are closely related to multiview learning, such as domain adaptation and transfer learning, that we were unable to dig into in this paper despite their biological application; in our outlook, we find the inferring of the information from an omic to another omic more promising. Also, biological interpretability is still a challenge for machine learning applications. To address this, previous work embedded biological knowledge to the machine learning model for underlying mechanisms; e.g., interpretable deep neural network modeling. Thus, how to make multiview learning interpretable will be an interesting topic in near future. For biological applications, we herein focused on the cutting edge of cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, and single-cell multiomics. The many other applications we were unable to cover include epigenomic variation, gene regulation, and computational pharmacology (e.g., drug repositioning, patient subtyping), among others. These applications can be identified in other surveys, such as. As for benchmark datasets, in addition to cancers, we also summarized additional multiomic benchmark datasets for additional contexts.

We also acknowledge that many multiview learning models (especially deep learning models), although popular in domains such as computer vision and speech recognition, are not currently applied in the biological domain. To move forward, we may take example of other domains. For example, a multiview clustering based on deep matrix factorization learns features via a hierarchical model with multiple layers. Each layer learns a feature representing specific data attributes; e.g., a portrait photo has attributes of pose, facial expression, and facial identity. Clustering photos based on this multiview learning model enables the simultaneous identification of the features and the relationships among photo attributes. Similarly, the idea of identifying hierarchical features in this model can be potentially applied to single-cell data for understanding cell-type-specific gene expression and identity. For example, we can input single-cell gene expression matrices (genes by cells) and learn the features representing (1) cell identity (e.g., cell type) and (2) cell activity (e.g., gene expression) as well as the feature relationships (e.g., cell type interactions).

Another research that has a great influence in healthcare in recent years is the study of the microbiome community inhabiting the host or an environmental niche. For example, metagenomics studies of the gut microbiome have shown the changes of community structures under the changes of diet. However, metagenomics constitute merely another one view for the whole understanding of complex phenotypic traits; to understand the whole microbial traits, we need to integrate metagenomics with other omics and meta-omics (e.g., metatranscriptomics, metaproteomics) in a multiview framework. Among various multiomics integration, combining metabolomics with metagenomics is a promising way to understanding functions and interactions between microbial community and the host.

In short, we have provided the formal framework for categorizing current multiview learning methods; it can also serve as a guideline for developing many new methods. We demonstrated that the biological applications of these methods are thriving and promising, especially in the fields of brain diseases (e.g., neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental diseases) and single-cell analysis because of the growing use of multiomics data. Biological problems always involve of many diverse facets, and multiview learning is an efficient strategy for tackling those problems. We expect that, through this review, additional applications and issues in multiview learning research shall emerge and benefit the community.


Exploring the cerebral substrate of voice perception in primate brains

Clémentine Bodin, Pascal Belin — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2019. PMC6895549, CC BY 4.0.

One can consider human language to be the Swiss army knife of the vast domain of animal communication. There is now growing evidence suggesting that this technology may have emerged from already operational material instead of being a sudden innovation. Sharing ideas and thoughts with conspecifics via language constitutes an amazing ability, but what value would it hold if our conspecifics were not first detected and recognized? Conspecific voice (CV) perception is fundamental to communication and widely shared across the animal kingdom. Two questions that arise then are: is this apparently shared ability reflected in common cerebral substrate? And, how has this substrate evolved? The paper addresses these questions by examining studies on the cerebral basis of CV perception in humans' closest relatives, non-human primates. Neuroimaging studies, in particular, suggest the existence of a ‘voice patch system’, a network of interconnected cortical areas that can provide a common template for the cerebral processing of CV in primates.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘What can animal communication teach us about human language?’

Keywords: language evolution, primates, voice patch system, voice perception, comparative neuroimaging


Introduction

The question of language evolution is certainly one of the most challenging questions of our times. Since Charles Darwin's pioneering ideas almost two centuries ago, extensive research now supports a scenario where language has been gradually shaped from animal precursors instead of a sudden and recent emergence in the human lineage. Rather than a single encapsulated entity, language is considered as a set of cognitive components that may or may not be present at varying degrees in other animal species. By building cognitive phylogenies of these components, we can thus capture crucial information about the emergence of language and the factors that influenced it, which could have been neglected if considered as a whole. Recent breakthroughs in the field of vocal communication highlighted several of these components in non-human primates (NHP), including vocal learning, a rudimentary form of grammar, together with sequence learning abilities and also the presence of a semantic content and intentionally in their vocalizations.

What emerges as a connecting thread across these different components of vocal communication is the perception of voice, i.e. the processing of information carried by the caller's voice. This fundamental ability is a key element of communication for a wide range of species and is therefore particularly appropriate to bridge the gap between animal communication and human language. In particular, an efficient processing of conspecific vocal signals is crucial in a number of situations such as competition for territory, parental care, reproduction or predator avoidance. From these essential behaviours arises the need to infer the vocalizer's size, age, sex, group membership, individual identity or inner state, to adjust behaviour accordingly. This non-verbal content of voice can be distinguished from speech in human language and is also present in other animal vocal signals. Although vocalizations exhibit a certain specificity due to species-specific ecological constraints, the perceptual mechanisms involved in the processing of non-verbal information are probably more conserved. Since neither behaviour nor its brain substrate can be directly investigated from fossils, comparing humans to the closest extant species, NHP, can be used to infer the recent evolution of voice perception before the emergence of language. Here, particular attention is given to what is shared across primates rather than what separates them.

In the present paper, voice perception will refer primarily to the processing of information in conspecific vocalizations (CV) despite evidence that primates are also able to extract information from heterospecific vocalizations. CV perception is assumed to include several processing stages that are organized in a similar way to those employed to extract information from faces, from distinguishing CV among non-CV sounds (initial ‘structural encoding’ stage) to processing different types of information contained in CVs (e.g. species, identity, gender, emotional state, etc.) in interacting but segregated functional pathways. Here, a particular interest will be given to the speaker/caller identity recognition as involving high-level processing stages in both systems. Since it is only in humans that voice perception abilities also include speech perception, this particular type of CV information will not be discussed.

We start by summarizing behavioural evidence of voice perception in primate species ranging from New World monkeys to apes (marmoset, macaque, chimpanzee and human). These species were selected based on the available neuroimaging literature on the cerebral basis of voice perception, developed in the second part of the paper. From this evidence, we develop our hypothesis of a conserved ‘voice patch’ system in primates dedicated to process CV information. This network of voice-sensitive areas can be compared to the face-processing system of the visual cortex. More generally, we assume that cross-species similarities constitute evidence for homologous mechanisms inherited from a common ancestor and a gradual evolution of voice perception. In the final section, we suggest future directions for comparative research on voice perception.


Behavioural evidence of conspecific voice perception

The primate auditory channel, together with vision, evolved as the main communication mode relative to the olfactory and chemical channels predominant in other animal species. Marmosets, macaques and chimpanzees diverge from the human lineage about 40 and 25 and 6 Ma, respectively (left). These species have complex, albeit fairly different, social behaviours that can be regulated using a specific set of conspecific vocalizations. Humans, in particular, have remarkable abilities to extract verbal and also non-verbal information from CV, such as identity, gender or personality. This process is already operational in early infancy to recognize parents' voice and the emotional content of voice. Extraction of caller information is known to reflect the source-filter theory of voice production where acoustic cues derived both from the larynx (fundamental frequency, f0) and the upper vocal tract (mostly formants or vocal tract resonances) are involved. Surprisingly, it is only quite recently that a behavioural advantage of voice detection has been experimentally demonstrated in humans: both categorization and detection have been seen to improve when human voices (CV) are the targets compared to non-vocal sounds.

In macaques, belonging to the Old World monkeys, vocalizations are mainly produced to regulate and coordinate group activities using a rich call repertoire divided into a dozen of classes according to the social context and the motivational state. One early series of studies in Japanese macaques employing category identification tasks showed that they can discriminate different CV from the ‘coo’ class of their repertoire and in a more efficient way than the compared species. Nevertheless, further research on monkeys not intensively trained for this discrimination suggests a gradual transition through the different CV within the ‘coo’ and ‘screams’ classes rather than discrete boundaries. In addition, the intrinsic variability of each class is not equal and, hence, potentially conveys distinct information. As in humans, there is clear behavioural evidence that macaques can use identity information from CV. They seem to rely on formant frequency information, in view of their ability to perceive formant frequency changes in playback trials and associate these changes to differences in perceived body size. Although macaques show moderate sexual dimorphism in body size, it is not clear whether macaques can recognize gender from CV.

Recently, there has been a renewed interest in New World monkeys such as marmosets that form a group of social and territorial species living in the upper canopy of South American forests. As highly vocal animals, they are in almost constant vocal communication, even in captivity, and their repertoire is now well-characterized acoustically. This includes multiple vocalization types, from both simple to compound calls composed of sequences of simple calls. This sequential production is highly variable in the temporal domain and can be modulated by the emotional state. However, the processing of complex sequences remains limited in these species. One long-distance contact call, the ‘phee call’, is produced by visually separated congeners in a reciprocal exchange known as ‘antiphonal calling’. This call contains potentially significant information on the caller's identity or gender. Recent evidence demonstrated that marmosets can process identity from these calls. The ‘Virtual Monkey’ approach, an automated playback technique, exploited the antiphonal calling behaviour: changes in the identity of synthetic phees were followed by changes in the frequency and latency of antiphonal calling by the subject, demonstrating identity discrimination. Others have shown that changes in caller identity during playback can induce exploratory behaviour in marmosets.

Behavioural evidence of CV perception in great apes is much less documented, especially because they are more rarely studied in the laboratory. Chimpanzee vocalizations have been described in association with their facial displays as graded among acoustically defined call categories from simple, well defined, categories to more blended ones according to the internal motivations. Considered separately, a large proportion of compound calls have been recorded, some of them exhibiting a different function than their simple counterpart. A limited number of studies suggest that identity can be processed from chimpanzee CV. One of them found markers of individuality in the acoustics of one long-range call.

Two others employed vocal-to-facial matching tasks and reported correct identification of the caller from both long-range and short-range calls. In contrast with this sparse literature on CV perception, higher-level properties of communication like intentionality and meaning have been described for chimpanzee vocalizations.

Thus, the evidence presented in this section indicates that CV of other NHP convey relevant information to their social interactions, as does non-verbal information in the human voice. The perceptual mechanisms involved in CV processing could then be conserved to some extent due to selective constraints inherent to this social life. Thanks to the recent advances in non-invasive neuroimaging techniques, the cerebral mechanisms of CV processing in primates can now be more precisely examined and compared with those of humans.


Cerebral evidence of conspecific voice processing in the temporal lobe


Clarifying where and what we are looking at

In primates, the anatomical organization of the auditory cortex reflects a functional hierarchy where information flows through primary regions (the ‘core’), secondary regions (‘belt’ to ‘parabelt’) and auditory related fields, extending principally from the lateral sulcus (LS) to the superior temporal sulcus and to the extra-temporal regions. The primary auditory cortex is located in Heschl's gyrus in humans but is deeply hidden in the LS, behind the parietal opercula, in monkeys. Different cytoarchitectonic parcellations of the auditory cortex have given rise to various nomenclatures. This potential source of confusion makes the interspecies comparison difficult to assess. Here, we chose to report the data from the literature based on simple morphological references. The medial-lateral axis is represented in order by the LS, the superior temporal plane (STP), the superior temporal gyrus (STG) and the STS. The positions on the rostral to caudal axis are noted as anterior (a), middle (m) and posterior (p). Another potential source of confusion in the cross-species comparison concerns the nature of the contrast used to highlight a CV sensitivity. Two principal methods exist: the first (CV versus non-CV) compares CV with categories of complex sounds such as heterospecific (HV) or environmental (Env) sounds; while the second (CV versus control sounds) compares CV with acoustically matched control sounds for which a specific set of acoustic parameters are kept unchanged (e.g. temporal envelop in phase-scrambled sounds). A third type of contrast specifically examines the sensitivity to identity information. summarizes the approximate anatomical location of contrasts reported in key selected studies for each species, classified into three main categories: CV > non-CV (red), CV > acoustic controls (green) and sensitivity to speaker/caller identity (orange). Each selected study is further developed in the following section.


Neuroimaging evidence of conspecific voice perception

The human cerebral substrate for voice perception is centred on secondary auditory cortical regions located bilaterally along the superior temporal gyrus (STG) and sulcus (STS). These ‘temporal voice areas' (TVAs) show greater fMRI signal in response to vocal sounds, whether they contain speech or not, compared to other categories of non-vocal sounds such as environmental sounds, amplitude-modulated noise, or to hetero-specific vocalizations (HV). Although their exact anatomical location in the temporal lobe varies considerably across individuals, a cluster analysis of voice-sensitivity peaks in several hundred subjects highlighted an organization in three ‘voice patches’ along STG/STS bilaterally (TVAa, TVAm and TVAp). To test their selectivity, Agus et al. used ‘auditory chimeras’ that matched vocal sounds for a large subsets of acoustical features and showed that the right TVAs (middle STG/STS) were preferentially activated only for the natural human voice. Very little is known about the cortical anatomy underlying the TVAs, on average centred bilaterally around the deep portion of the STS but exhibiting an important variability at the individual level. Functional connectivity investigations have highlighted both intra- and inter-hemispheric connections between the different TVAs during passive voice listening or a voice recognition task. The three patches of the right STS were also shown to be structurally connected to each other. Thus, while it seems clear that vocal information flows through the voice areas, little is known about their individual roles to date. Nevertheless, a growing body of literature indicates that they are recruited differently to process identity.

As for behavioural evidence, our knowledge of the cerebral substrate for voice perception in NHPs mainly comes from the studies on rhesus macaques and marmosets, which are standard animal models in neuroscience. Nevertheless, pioneering studies were initially conducted in the auditory cortex of the squirrel monkey revealing CV sensitivity at the neuronal scale. Electrophysiological recordings in awake macaques evidenced neurons in belt and parabelt areas that show a strong sensitivity to CVs with latencies and selectivity increasing in the caudo-rostral direction towards the temporal pole. Conversely, a strong sensitivity to CVs was found in the core areas of freely moving marmosets using electrophysiology. Despite the crucial information provided by electrophysiology, direct comparison between species remains difficult because electrophysiological recordings in humans are mostly extracranial and, therefore, at low-spatial resolution. Recent advances in functional imaging hold much promise as they allow scanning of awake animals using protocols comparable to those of humans.

Petkov et al. was the first fMRI study revealing macaque voice patches with responses analogous to the human TVAs, i.e. areas with significantly stronger response to macaque CV than other categories of environmental (CV versus non-CV) or control sounds (CV versus control sounds). Using an auditory cortex parcellation, a bilateral but mostly rightward activity of the anterior STP was found together with two clusters in the right middle STP (close to primary auditory cortex) and posterior STG. A right anterior patch was observed in the same location in two individuals and was still observed in anaesthetized monkeys, removing the possible effect of attention to sounds. It was then targeted in a subsequent single-cell recording electrophysiology study that revealed ‘voice cells’ in that anterior voice patch. Surprisingly, no further consideration was given to the other voice patches.

Another study by Ortiz Rios et al. also reported CV selectivity: compared to environmental sounds (CV versus non-CV) CV activated more bilateral anterior STP and right middle STP in addition to more anterior regions of the temporal pole. However, they recruited only the anterior patches when compared with their scrambled version (CV versus control sounds), altered spectrally and temporally.

Joly et al. performed a pioneering comparative study in which human (n = 20) and macaque (n = 3) subjects were scanned in the same scanner while exposed to the same stimuli, including vocalizations of both species. Areas along the middle STP, close to A1, showed greater response to CV compared to their scrambled controls, but not compared to human vocalizations.

It has been suggested that the position of the anterior voice area described in Petkov et al. is different from what was expected from human data. Yet this comparison only focused on the most anterior patch observed in two macaques, leaving the possibility that the other, not yet examined, voice patches could be more similar to those of humans. In fact, taking into account all relevant studies and combining the different contrasts and nomenclatures used, several voice patches clearly emerge along the STG, in both hemispheres of the macaque brain. In a recent fMRI study, we scanned three awake macaques and three humans using a similar paradigm of passive auditory listening. We found that CV elicited more activity in the bilateral anterior STP and the right posterior STG than environmental and heterospecific sounds, replicating earlier findings. For the first time, however, we found that the CV versus non-CV contrast also recruited the STS in its left anterior and right posterior portions (black crosses in), as in humans.

These novel results support the existence of several voice patches in monkeys; they also point towards a recruitment of STS domains. Indeed, this region has often been neglected as a classified multisensory region only. However, neuronal recordings already reported unimodal auditory responses in macaque STS. Using face and voice stimuli, the anterior STS was shown to contain a more balanced proportion of auditory and visual unimodal neurons than the anterior STP; however, multisensory interaction was found to be equally prominent in both regions.

The past 5 years have seen increasingly rapid advances in the field of marmoset brain imaging, particularly as its small size is compatible with highfield (7T) rodent MRI allowing for higher signal and spatial resolution. Remarkably, a recent fMRI study in anaesthetized marmosets (n = 6) revealed a gradient of sensitivity to CV along a caudal-ventral axis, with areas of high selectivity (here compared to scrambled controls) in the most anterior parts of the temporal lobe bilaterally. Such CV sensitivity accords with the anterior patches previously described in other species and with the neuronal gradient of selectivity of the macaque STP. However, this is inconsistent with the other patches and previous reports of CV sensitivity in the marmoset primary cortex, located more dorsally. Although speculative, it is still possible that anaesthesia may lower the signal strength and allow only the regions that are least sensitive to the level of vigilance to be seen. One PET (positron emission tomography) study started to fill the gap between humans and monkeys by studying CV sensitivity in anaesthetized chimpanzees. By grouping both proximal (short-range) and distal (long-range) categories of calls in contrast to their time-reversed controls (CV versus controls), the activity was lateralized on the right posterior temporal lobe, with peaks extending from the superior to the inferior temporal gyrus. However, this posterior activity was mainly driven by proximal calls and an important variability seemed to exist across conditions and individuals. Three methodological factors can have induced such variability and could explain the divergence with other species. First, PET acquisition was necessarily delayed after the auditory listening task during which the radioactive tracer is injected and this delay may have varied between individuals. Second, the auditory listening task was performed on freely moving animals without control of interaural differences. Finally, time-reversed controls may have involved different processes than other matched controls described in. For instance, in macaques, temporal inversion was shown to induce distinct behavioural responses depending on the acoustical symmetry of the call. Hence, although a promising investigation, there is abundant room for further progress in determining the localization of voice areas in chimpanzees and it would be premature to interpret the observed lateralized activity.

Neuroimaging studies in the different primate species mentioned above are summarized in, which illustrates our current knowledge of the putative location of voice patches in the temporal lobe of humans, chimpanzees, macaques and marmosets.


Identity processing

Speaker identity processing in humans involves both temporal and prefrontal regions with strong right-hemispheric lateralization. The most anterior voice-sensitive region of the right temporal lobe (right TVAa) in particular shows adaptation to speaker identity, i.e. smaller response to syllables spoken by a single speaker than to syllables spoken by multiple speakers. A similar adaptation procedure evidenced a sensitivity to gender in this region. Subsequently, Andics et al. showed that bilateral TVAs are recruited by contrasting close versus distant identities morphed along an acoustic continuum. Nevertheless, all clusters in the right hemisphere, but only the deep left STS, were positively correlated with recognition performance. This is in line with the idea that unfamiliar voices are coded in the TVAs in a multidimensional acoustical ‘voice-space’. In particular, voices acoustically close to their (own-gender) average prototype elicit smaller TVA activity than more distinctive, acoustically dissimilar voices as a ‘norm-based’ coding. It is worth noting that familiar and unfamiliar voice may be processed through dissociate pathways and thus make the prototype model more complex than expected (as reviewed in). Andics et al. also described interesting adaptation effects (response reduction to stimuli perceived as similar) along the STS axis: a short-term acoustic adaptation in the bilateral middle/posterior STS but a longer-term identity effect in the anterior temporal poles and the deep posterior STS. This may suggest that CV is primarily processed acoustically in middle and posterior TVAs then addressed to the anterior patches to extract identity-relevant information. A preponderant involvement of the right anterior region in that processing is suggested by adaptation mechanisms and information-decoding procedures. Contrastingly, the role of the right posterior region is nuanced by two contradictory lesion studies: from a cohort of patients, one classified it as an obligatory structure for voice-identity recognition, whereas another case study reported no effect on voice perception or identity recognition after a complete right pSTS resection. As TVAs are functionally connected to each other but also to frontal regions during voice perception, it would be interesting to explore if compensatory mechanisms exist after such a lesion.

In macaques, the right anterior voice area described earlier exhibits the same speaker adaptation response to that observed in the human right anterior temporal lobe: greater response to CV from different individuals than CV from a single individual. Some of the voice cells in that region also show some degree of caller selectivity, differentiating between individuals more than call type. Advances in the processing of identity in these monkeys have been pushed forward by the discovery of multisensory regions integrating vocal and facial information and converging toward the temporal pole (reviewed in; see section Parallel with the face-processing system).

Despite behavioural evidence that identity is relevant to marmosets, cerebral evidence of such processing is not obvious. In a recent PET study, extra-temporal regions were found to be associated with the perception of phee calls from a single subject compared to multiple subjects' stimuli. However, an adaptation effect could have been expected in their CV-sensitive anterior temporal poles by contrasting these two conditions. To our knowledge, there is no experimental evidence to the neural coding of caller identity in chimpanzees.


Conspecific voice perception in extra-temporal regions

Neuroimaging studies also revealed extra-temporal regions, sensitive—although less consistently—to CV. Three bilateral patches were identified in the human frontal cortex as the ‘frontal voice areas’, more sensitive to voice than non-CV stimuli. Especially, voice recognition performance was related to the functional connectivity into this fronto-temporal network in the right hemisphere. The previously cited literature in macaques also reported CV sensitivity in parietal and ventro-lateral prefrontal cortex together with higher-level visual areas. In particular, electrophysiological recordings provide clear evidence that prefrontal cortex contains CV-sensitive neuronal populations; however, it is not yet clear whether they constitute higher-level areas in voice processing than those of the temporal lobe. A study combining fMRI with neuronal microsimulation suggests that the level of processing of temporal areas cannot predict their effective connectivity with frontal areas. Nevertheless, it is highly possible that anterior temporal and prefrontal cortices collaborate during CV processing as part of the same ventral pathway for complex sounds processing.


A voice patch system hypothesis

The literature overviewed here support the notion of a conserved system for the perception of CV in primates. Several discrete areas along the primate STG exhibit a specific sensitivity to voice compared to other categories of natural sounds or matched controls. These areas extend from belt to auditory related fields up to polar regions of the temporal lobe. Future work is needed to provide a generic model linking the diverse results gathered so far in a coherent picture. First, it becomes essential to better determine the role of STS in the processing of CV in monkeys. Too long considered as only multimodal, this view is challenged by the presence of unimodal auditory neurons and now by new data. Second, additional neuroimaging investigations should be carried out in chimpanzees and marmoset to counterbalance the increasing amount of evidence in humans and macaques.

We further discuss three points in relation to the hypothesis of a potentially conserved voice patch system: (i) the voice patch system is organized into a network of interconnected voice patches comparable to those of the face-processing system of visual cortex; (ii) supporting an ecologically relevant ability in primates, it could be part of a broader social network in their brain; (iii) speech emerged from primitive roots including the voice patch system.


Analogies and interactions with the face-processing system

Full characterization of the voice patch system could allow further testing of the hypothesis of similar coding strategies for processing face and voice, converging across sensory modalities to extract, for example, identity information. Studies in humans, macaques and, more recently, marmosets together demonstrate the existence of a system of discrete, interconnected face-sensitive areas containing ‘face cells’ and supporting a series of increasingly abstract (identity-invariant) face representations. The overall arrangement of face patches and their approximate distribution in the occipito-temporal cortex appears quite similar across species, although there is an overall shift of areas ventrally from the STS in humans compared to macaques. This shift also seems to apply to a lesser extent to voice areas, with areas more deeply located in the STP in monkeys, but mostly around the STS in humans. Although we still do not know if there is a vocal equivalent of the view-point invariance gradient observed in the face network, adaptation and multivariate paradigms suggest that invariant, word-independent, vocal identity information is mainly processed in anterior temporal regions in both humans and monkeys. Further work would determine whether NHP represent different callers in a measurable ‘voice identity space’ similar to humans and if they rely on norm-based coding strategies. From the face processing literature, behavioural evidence indicates that chimpanzees but not macaques rely on a norm-based coding of facial identity, whereas neuronal recordings suggest that this coding is also present in macaques. As for the face patches, structural and functional connections were also found between the different voice patches, meaning that both systems could constitute an interconnected network.

Yet, in contrast to the notion of a conserved face-patch system across primate brains, behavioural studies report striking differences between great apes and monkeys in the way they encode faces. An investigation of the cerebral basis of face processing in chimpanzees identified bilateral face-sensitive regions mostly localized around orbitofrontal and posterior STS areas, the latter being close to the voice-sensitive regions in this species. Although new investigations are required to confirm this result, it indicates some inconsistencies across primates as observed for voice in our case. Perhaps the key lies in the way voice and face processing systems interact with each other. Several analogies between the two systems have been established from behaviour to cerebral bases between humans and monkeys. The most direct evidence of their interaction is probably their connectivity. Blank et al. reported direct structural connections between voice and ventral face areas in humans, and von Kriegstein et al. a functional coupling of these regions during familiar speaker recognition. Both findings indicate a multimodal integration for identity recognition. But where could this integration take place? A model largely inspired by monkey data suggests a multimodal interaction that would converge towards the macaque temporal pole region to extract identity information, which is also supported by electrophysiological recordings and neuroimaging studies. Extracting identity from voice in humans was previously shown to occur in the right anterior STS and over a large part of the TVAs by adaptation and morphing paradigms respectively. However, extracting identity from both face and voice could engage the right posterior STS in a modality general representation by an audio-visual integration phenomenon, although others claim that this multimodal association is preferentially processed in inferior parietal areas. Hence two identity processing streams emerge from the human literature. On the one hand, voice is processed along the STG/S antero-posterior axis using specific circuits depending on its familiarity to be fully recognized and stored in the anterior temporal lobe. On the other hand, a multimodal pathway involving the posterior STS and inferior parietal areas integrates information carried by the face and voice. The latter lacked evidence in monkeys and could be inextricably linked to the social nature of the transmitted information such as emotions and social stimuli perception in humans.

Hence, although face and voice processing systems would be conserved in primates, their functional interactions may differ between species. Strikingly, the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) has undergone an increasing cortical expansion from New World monkeys to great apes, along with a major restructuring of its anatomical and functional organization. This expansion may have influenced a ventral shift of both the voice- and the face-patch systems from monkeys to humans and favoured the emergence of a new functional pathway combining multimodal social information in and beyond the pSTS in humans.


Integrated into a broader social network?

From a larger perspective, we assume that the vocal exchanges of information essential to the primates' social life may have shaped their voice processing system in a similar way. As an example, similar encoding strategies in their vocalizations could allow a generalization across call categories but also across the vocal repertoires of other species. To what extent has social life been able to determine these similarities in voice processing among primates? The social networks involved in the perception of interacting faces and in orofacial movement have been recently described in macaques, highlighting similarities with the speech-production system in humans. At least two of these networks also interact with voice in humans and monkeys: the face-processing system (see previous section) and the lateral prefrontal cortex. In daily life, faces, voices and orofacial movements are in constant interaction during communication, which can suggest that the CV-processing system is also part of a broader social network in the primate brain. Importantly, whereas the cerebral substrates (see previous sections) and coding strategies appear relatively conserved through evolution, voice and face processing systems are still permeable to the early social environment. For example, a study on face-deprived infant macaques demonstrated that exposure to faces was necessary for the emergence of the face patches and a behavioural interest in those stimuli. In marmosets, parental feedback can affect vocal development and the acoustic structure of the infant's calls. In humans, voice areas become functional between four and seven months of age, while a behavioural tuning to speech over heterospecific vocalizations seems to arise at three months of age. The influence of the auditory environment on the development of CV-processing networks in primates remains to be investigated experimentally.


How did speech processing integrate into the voice patch system?

Evidencing similarities between human and NHP can help bridge the gap between animal communication and human language. However, this purpose is made challenging by the tight relationship between speech and voice in humans. The identity- and speech-processing pathways of voice perception constantly interact, in no small part because the same acoustical cues (formant frequencies) allow perceiving both what is being said and who is speaking. In the brain, speech stimuli elicit higher activity in the temporal voice areas than vocal sounds without speech. Yet neuroimaging evidence suggests a general dissociation between speech-related processes (mostly left hemisphere) and speaker identification (mostly right hemisphere). Thus, the genius of human language could lie both in the interhemispheric dissociation of its components and in the ability to connect spatially segregated regions during communication. Inter-species comparison of the fibre bundles connecting temporal and frontal lobes, such as the arcuate fasciculus, provide useful information: from monkeys to humans, projections are increasingly widespread along the STG and in prefrontal areas. This type of evidence supports the hypothesis that the left dorsal pathway, devoted to the processing of complex sounds in monkeys and to the articulation and production of language in humans has become more complex during the evolution of primates. The temporo-parietal regions of the right hemisphere, however, may have evolved in a way that favours multimodal associations and the processing of high-level social information (see two previous sections). In this scenario, a conserved voice patch system could constitute one of the primitive foundations on which language would have emerged asymmetrically.


Future directions for comparative research in voice processing

Future work is needed to understand which features drive neuronal responses in the acoustically complex and variable CV and, thus, determine if NHP represent different callers in a measurable ‘voice identity space’ similar to that of humans. The ‘Virtual Monkey’ approach exploiting the natural vocal behaviours of marmosets is a promising technique for this purpose and could be used on new species. A clearer appreciation of the different functional roles of each voice patch will provide crucial information on both an interaction with those of the face-processing system and with language-related areas. In the same line, neuroimaging studies using comparable paradigms across species should also be increasingly conducted to reliably estimate their similarities/differences. Finally, collaborative research in ethology and neuroscience will be essential in the future to improve our knowledge of the environmental and social factors that have influenced the emergence of language and of their respective contributions.


Data accessibility

This article has no additional data.


Authors' contributions

C.B. and P.B. wrote and revised the paper.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

This article has no additional data.


A taxonomy for vocal learning

Peter L Tyack — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2019. PMC6895552, CC BY 4.0.

Humans and songbirds learn to sing or speak by listening to acoustic models, forming auditory templates, and then learning to produce vocalizations that match the templates. These taxa have evolved specialized telencephalic pathways to accomplish this complex form of vocal learning, which has been reported for very few other taxa. By contrast, the acoustic structure of most animal vocalizations is produced by species-specific vocal motor programmes in the brainstem that do not require auditory feedback. However, many mammals and birds can learn to fine-tune the acoustic features of inherited vocal motor patterns based upon listening to conspecifics or noise. These limited forms of vocal learning range from rapid alteration based on real-time auditory feedback to long-term changes of vocal repertoire and they may involve different mechanisms than complex vocal learning. Limited vocal learning can involve the brainstem, mid-brain and/or telencephalic networks. Understanding complex vocal learning, which underpins human speech, requires careful analysis of which species are capable of which forms of vocal learning. Selecting multiple animal models for comparing the neural pathways that generate these different forms of learning will provide a richer view of the evolution of complex vocal learning and the neural mechanisms that make it possible.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘What can animal communication teach us about human language?’

Keywords: auditory–vocal feedback, compensation for noise, vocal imitation, vocal learning, vocal mimicry, complex vocal learning


Introduction

When an animal vocalizes, it must generate the right pressure in its lungs, adjust the tension and vibration rate of its vocal cords and configure the upper respiratory tract to produce the sound. All of these actions must be coordinated with plans for respiration and swallowing. Research with vertebrates from fishes to mammals has shown that much of the complex coordination of the motor nuclei involved in these components occurs in the brainstem (teleost fishes:; non-human primates:). Bass et al. have argued that the vocal pattern generators of fishes and all tetrapod vertebrates evolved from an ancestrally shared developmental compartment of the brainstem. Stimulation of the appropriate areas of the brainstem can generate complete vocalizations, suggesting that central pattern generators in the brainstem encode all the information required to integrate all of these respiratory, phonatory and articulatory movements to produce a sound.

Some vertebrate species have evolved neural mechanisms that allow them to go beyond fixed motor programmes for vocalization and to produce sounds that match a wide variety of sounds that they hear. These mechanisms for vocal learning are critical for human speech and music. Some other animals also have this capacity for vocal learning, which enables comparative studies on the evolution, development and neural basis of human speech. Extensive research in humans and many songbird species has shown they learn to speak or sing by listening to acoustic models, forming auditory templates and then learning to produce vocalizations that match the template. This ability for vocal learning is defined by Janik & Slater (p. 59) as learning ‘where the vocalizations themselves are modified in form as a result of experience with those of other individuals’. Janik & Slater distinguish vocal production learning, which involves changing the acoustic parameters of a vocalization, from contextual learning, which involves associating or producing an existing signal in a new context. Here, I am only concerned with vocal production learning, so will use ‘vocal learning’ as synonymous with ‘vocal production learning’.

In this paper, I point out that there are several limited forms of vocal learning that qualify by the Janik & Slater definition as vocal production learning, but which may involve fine-tuning an inherited motor pattern rather than matching a learned template. Janik & Slater (p. 8) mention ‘the possibility of learned gradual parameter changes within call types' as a form of vocal learning that has received little attention. These limited forms of vocal learning may involve neural networks that differ from those required for complex vocal learning, which I define by the need to hear a sound to form a learned auditory template before the animal can develop a vocalization that matches the template.

Janik & Slater argue that vocal learning appears to have a very limited distribution among birds and mammals. They argue that the strongest evidence for vocal learning stems from experiments that test whether an animal can learn to copy sounds of another species or to copy artificial sounds. This certainly qualifies as complex vocal learning by my definition. Vocal learning is more commonly involved in the development of a species-specific repertoire, but some species do not restrict the learning of auditory templates to species-specific sounds. Hindmarsh suggests that about 20% of passerine birds mimic the sounds of other species. Humans have long trained birds such as parrots and songbirds to imitate speech, and hummingbirds can learn to copy the aberrant song of a cross-species hybrid or replace their song as they hear new song types, but this kind of vocal learning has not been demonstrated for any of the 20 or so other orders of birds. The three avian orders with evidence for vocal learning are only distantly related, suggesting that vocal learning evolved independently three times in birds. Evidence for complex vocal learning in mammals also has a spotty taxonomic distribution, with just a few cases of non-human mammals showing the ability to copy novel sounds. For example, a harbour seal (Phoca vitulina), who was raised in a Maine home, spoke English with a New England accent. An Indian elephant (Elephas maximus indicus), who was raised in a zoo, learned to produce the Korean words used by his trainer as commands. It is more difficult for humans to raise obligate aquatic mammals such as dolphins in close proximity, but bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) can be trained to imitate computer-generated patterns of frequency modulation. Seals and elephants appear to represent two independent evolutionary origins of vocal learning with a laryngeal sound production mechanism, and toothed whales, which have evolved a novel sound production organ, represent a third origin of these vocal learning capabilities among non-human mammals.

Given the importance of vocal learning for humans, there is a surprising lack of evidence for vocal learning among non-human primates. Intensive efforts to train apes to speak met with failure. Experiments that attempted to disrupt development of vocalizations in squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciureus) showed that infants which were deaf or had mute parents still could produce normal vocalizations, suggesting that the vocalizations developed from central pattern generators that do not require auditory input from conspecifics. And evidence from cross-breeding strains of primates that have different vocalizations suggests that some variations in acoustic structure are inherited. Vocalizations with acoustic structures that are inherited and whose development does not require auditory input have been called innate vocalizations.

Over a century of neurological research has demonstrated that the ability of humans to speak depends upon cortical networks for which there is little evidence in non-human primates. Stimulation or lesions of specific areas of cerebral cortex can produce or disrupt speech in humans, but stimulation or lesions of homologous areas in non-human primates do not affect their vocalizations.

Given the lack of vocal learning in non-human primates, songbirds have been the dominant animal model for studying the neural mechanisms of vocal learning over the past few decades. The forebrain of birds is organized into nuclei, a structure which differs from the multi-layered cortex in mammals, but in spite of this significant difference, there are striking parallels in the organization of neural networks for vocal learning in songbirds and humans. Jarvis argues that songbirds and humans each have two pathways in the forebrain for vocal learning, an anterior pathway that is required for learning the acoustic structure and sequencing of sounds and a posterior pathway responsible for production of learned sounds. Similar to the contrast between humans and non-human primates, the nuclei specialized for song learning in oscine songbirds are not present in suboscine birds which develop normal songs in the absence of exposure to songs of their species.

In addition to learned vocalizations such as music and language, humans also have innate vocalizations such as crying and laughter, and songbirds with learned songs also produce calls, most of which are thought to be innate. For many decades, neurologists have located brain lesions that affect the human voice by assuming that it is activated by two separate mechanisms; the classic description suggests that one generates innate vocalizations for emotional expression similar to those of other mammals and that another generates speech under volitional control using cortical networks that evolved de novo in our human ancestors. Studies of learned and innate vocalizations have led to the conclusion that there are two separate pathways controlling vocalization in mammals and songbirds, one controlled by innate pattern generators in the reticular formation of the brain stem and another parallel pathway that evolved later and is controlled by telencephalic processes that generate patterns for learned vocalizations.

In mammals, the vocal pattern generators in the brain stem are activated by centres in the periaqueductal gray (PAG) in the mid-brain, which are responsible for initiating a vocalization and controlling its intensity, but which do not appear to control its patterning. The PAG itself can generate unplanned responses such as a pain cry to a painful stimulus, but voluntary initiation of an innate vocalization requires the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), which projects to the PAG. All of the muscles involved in sound production that are activated by the brainstem vocal pattern generators are also represented in the motor cortex. Jürgens argues that primates have a parallel pathway with direct connections from laryngeal motor cortex to the reticular formation areas that project to the motor nuclei involved in vocalization, bypassing the PAG. Based on observations of Kuypers that humans have strong projections from the motor cortex directly to the motor nuclei involved in vocalization, but that cats and non-human primates do not, Fitch et al. specify a Kuypers/Jürgens hypothesis that direct connections from the motor cortex to the primary motor neurons controlling the vocal apparatus are required for complex vocal learning.

The innate and learned pathways for vocalization may be separate, but they cannot operate independent of one another. Doupe & Kuhl (p. 599) argue that ‘both songbirds and humans have high-level forebrain areas that control the pre-existing hierarchical pathways for vocal motor control’. Simpson & Vicario (p. 1541) ‘suggest that the learned features of oscine songbird vocalizations are controlled by a telencephalic pathway that acts in concert with other pathways responsible for simpler, unlearned vocalizations’. They studied the long call of zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata). Females develop this call without learning, but males use the same telencephalic pathways involved in song learning to learn features of the call. When the learning pathways are blocked in males, males revert to a call similar to the innate female call, suggesting that the learning pathways suppress the innate pattern without modifying the innate motor programme. Simonyan & Horwitz argue that voice control in humans requires coordinating the interactions between the pathways for learned and innate vocalizations, and they argue for mechanisms in the ACC and also in the brain stem.


Limited vocal learning has a broader taxonomic spread than complex vocal learning

Researchers interested in animal models for complex vocal learning that is supported by cortical networks as described above must be able to differentiate complex vocal learning from limited vocal learning, which may have different functions and be generated by different neural networks. Petkov & Jarvis argue for a spectrum of complexity in vocal learning, and they assume that the more complex the learning, the fewer species will have the ability. They are agnostic as to whether the actual distributions of vocal learning ability are smooth and continuous or whether there are step functions with different classes of animals having different categories of vocal learning. Here, I focus on distinguishing different categories of vocal learning that may involve different neural pathways. I define limited vocal learning as the ability to fine-tune acoustic features of species-specific vocalizations that can develop in the absence of auditory input because innate motor programmes can generate the species-specific pattern. This stands in contrast with complex vocal learning which is defined by the need to hear a sound to form a learned auditory template before the animal can develop a vocalization that matches the template. The vocal learning literature tends to emphasize that complex vocal learning has a sparse and patchy taxonomic distribution, but here I argue that limited vocal learning can have a much broader taxonomic distribution.

As bioacousticians have developed better abilities to quantify subtle differences in acoustic features, evidence has accumulated that hearing the sounds of other individuals can modify the acoustic structure of vocalizations often thought of as innate. An important experimental design for this phenomenon involves measuring acoustic features of vocalizations of animals before and after they are housed together. For example, Nowicki showed that the calls of a group of black-capped chickadees (Parus atricapillus) converged on the central tendency of features within the group within a week of when it was housed together. Bird calls have traditionally been thought of as innate, but the Nowicki evidence for convergence demonstrates vocal learning by the definition of Janik & Slater. Hughes et al. showed that chickadees raised in isolation develop some notes in their call with acoustic features within the normal range of wild birds. This suggests a central pattern generator that can develop the note in the absence of hearing other conspecifics producing it. However, other call notes are more similar to wild-type in chickadees that experience the calls of others, demonstrating a role for limited learning in parts of the same call (see (pp. 25–33) for further discussion of innate and learned factors in vocal development).

Vocal convergence has been reported for many species whose vocalizations are thought to be produced by central pattern generators in the brainstem. In many non-human primate species, the calls of individuals become more similar when they live together (pygmy marmosets Cebuella pygmaea, cotton-top tamarins Saguinus oedipus, and chimpanzees Pan troglodytes). Even the contact calls of young goats (Capra hircus) converge when they are housed together. Vocal convergence has even been demonstrated in playback studies of white-lipped frogs, Leptodactylus albilabris, where 12 of 17 frogs exposed to conspecific sounds converged on the dominant frequency of the calls. This broad taxonomic distribution of convergence for vocalizations thought to be innate suggests the need to distinguish this more limited form of vocal learning from the complex form produced by songbirds and humans using specialized neural pathways in the telencephalon.

A key reason to distinguish limited from complex vocal learning is the hypothesis that limited vocal learning may not require cortical networks used to form and match auditory templates and may be achieved using other neural pathways. Comparative analysis of which neural pathways have been recruited for which tasks can help us to understand how different parts of the central nervous system (CNS) solve different vocal communication problems. A more careful analysis that distinguishes different vocal learning capabilities in the animal kingdom will also allow us to make more educated selections of species for studying the evolution of neural mechanisms that enabled human language and music.


Auditory–vocal feedback and limited vocal learning need not involve cortical networks

There is abundant evidence for a variety of ways in addition to vocal learning that auditory input affects vocal behaviour. I use the term auditory–vocal feedback (AVF) to include both vocal learning and also changes in vocal behaviour owing to auditory input that does not involve experiencing other individuals. The study of complex vocal learning has focused on specialized neural circuits in the telencephalon, but there are many other sites where auditory feedback has been shown to influence vocalization. Bass & McKibben argue that fishes, birds and mammals all have centres at forebrain, mid-brain and hindbrain levels that integrate the auditory and vocal systems, providing multiple sites where AVF can take place. Labelling studies in sound-producing fish species have uncovered vocal-acoustic complexes in the hindbrain, mid-brain and forebrain that receive input from the auditory system and produce output that generates vocalizations.

Several different functions have been identified for modulation of vocal output by auditory input. Compensation for noise is one of the most ubiquitous forms of AVF because all animals that communicate acoustically face the problem of making their signal detectable in varying levels of ambient noise. A variety of mechanisms can be used to compensate for noise, including making the signal louder, increasing the length or redundancy of the signal, or shifting the signal outside of the frequency band of noise. Birds and mammals have been shown to use all of these mechanisms. The ability to call louder in elevated noise is called the Lombard effect after the author who first described it in humans. The Lombard effect has since been found in all birds and mammals tested, but it is not limited to birds and mammals. Even a frog species has been shown to call more loudly after louder playback of frog calls. There is evidence that some anurans and even an insect (bow-winged grasshoppers, Chorthippus biguttulus) can shift the frequency of their calls upwards when in the presence of low-frequency noise. These results emphasize the taxonomic breadth of mechanisms to compensate for noise. Brumm & Zollinger suggest that the Lombard effect has a very old history in birds and mammals, and they argue that either it independently evolved in both taxa or originated in a common ancestor.

The Lombard effect appears to be influenced by auditory–vocal (AV) interactions at all levels of the brain. Nonaka et al. surgically separated the brainstem from the cerebrum in cats to show that the brainstem alone is sufficient to elicit the Lombard effect. The brainstem of the squirrel monkey contains AV neurons that respond when the monkey hears noise and also when it produces its own vocalization, leading Hage et al. to suggest that the brainstem may mediate the Lombard effect in this species as well. The Lombard effect was initially viewed as a reflex, but noise compensation is now viewed as more complex, involving pathways that involve the mid-brain and cortex in primates. In non-human primates, the PAG not only serves a gating function for vocalization, but also controls the acoustic intensity of a vocalization. Some AV neurons in the PAG respond more strongly when a squirrel monkey hears conspecific vocalizations while it is also vocalizing, suggesting that mid-brain circuits could also generate the Lombard effect. Eliades & Wang demonstrated that when marmoset monkeys (Callithrix jacchus) vocalize in noise, neurons are activated in the auditory cortex whose activity predicts the extent of later Lombard compensation, suggesting cortical involvement in some neural networks that produce the Lombard effect, at least in primates.

Several sophisticated forms of AVF have evolved in echolocating bats. When an echolocating bat encounters a conspecific that is vocalizing at the same frequency, it may shift the frequency of its signals in what is called a ‘jamming avoidance response’. Some bats also shift the frequency of their outgoing echolocation signals so that the Doppler-shifted returning echo occurs at a favoured frequency. There is some evidence that the neural networks for this Doppler compensation involve processing in the mid-brain. Metzner describes AV neurons in the mid-brain of the rufous horseshoe bat (Rhinolophus rouxi) that respond both to vocalizations of the bat and to hearing simulated echoes. He then develops a model to explain how the observed AV neuron behaviour can produce the observed Doppler compensation. Humans have also been shown to shift their vocalization frequencies if their auditory feedback is artificially frequency shifted.


Do vocal feedback mechanisms that operate on timescales of seconds differ from vocal learning during weeks or more of development?

The jamming avoidance response meets the Janik & Slater [p. 59] definition of vocal learning as learning ‘where the vocalizations themselves are modified in form as a result of experience with those of other individuals’. However, it involves a more rapid feedback response than classic vocal learning in which an auditory template is formed during exposure to a sound after which the ability to produce the previously heard sound is gradually learned from repeated attempts to match vocal output to the template. The task of shifting one feature, such as frequency, based on auditory input heard at the same time is likely to select for different neural networks than those that support learning a suite of features over a longer period of vocal development. Once song or speech has stabilized in its adult version, auditory feedback is still used for error correction on timescales of a second or so. This real-time feedback may involve neural networks with different components than those required for vocal development. The need for rapid processing may select for transmission over fewer synapses at lower levels of the CNS closer to the primary auditory inputs and vocal motor outputs. Conversely, pathways that include the cortex may be better structured for slow formation of a memory of a flexible auditory template during repeated experience of a model sound, for matching to a variety of potential acoustic features and for vocal development that is affected by more general learning processes as well.

Humans and songbirds often separate the timing of the formation of the auditory template from the process of comparing vocal production to the template, assessing any mismatch and correcting the error. This process of learning to produce a vocalization through trial and error correction can take a long time. After formation of the auditory template, young humans and songbirds first produce vocalizations that are far from the adult version: subsong in songbirds and babbling in young infants. Fitch suggests that a babbling phase may be a necessary component of complex vocal learning. This hypothesis can be tested by studying vocal development in other species capable of vocal learning. Evidence from bottlenosed dolphins (T. truncatus) supports the hypothesis. Infant bottlenose dolphins in captive settings first produce a variable repertoire of unstereotyped whistles but develop individually distinctive signature whistles by 1.5–2.5 months of age.

However, babbling may not necessarily represent learning to match vocal output to a learned auditory template. Knörnschild et al. report that pups of the greater sac-winged bat, Saccopteryx bilineata, combine elements of all adult vocalizations into unstructured bouts that they describe as ‘babbling’. Knörnschild et al. show that as young greater sac-winged bats develop from 2 to 10 weeks of age, they modify precursor songs to match the song of the adult male in their group, whether that male is their father or not. Knörnschild et al. describe this as complex vocal imitation. I view this as clear evidence for vocal learning, but not for complex vocal learning by my definition. The key missing evidence is whether the elements of adult vocalization produced by pups at two weeks of age are produced by innate vocal motor programmes which are then fine-tuned by limited vocal learning, or whether the two-week-old pups are already forming an auditory template and the ‘babbling’ represents attempts to match an unstructured series of templates. Only the latter case would represent complex vocal learning by my definition. Comparison with humans and songbirds suggests that this latter alternative would involve unusually rapid learning of the template and efforts to produce vocalizations to match it.

The overproduction of a high diversity of vocalizations in the young followed by a narrowing of the vocal repertoire need not always indicate vocal learning. In species where the young produce a large and variable vocal repertoire, social interactions may reinforce selection of some sounds for the adult repertoire. This reinforcement can influence vocal development whether or not it involves template matching. Takahashi et al. suggest that marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) parents may direct the transition in their infants from immature to adult calls by calling in response to particular infant calls. This suggests a role for this kind of reinforcement in selecting the mature vocal repertoire, even for some species that may not have complex vocal learning.


Sequence learning to develop diverse and complex displays

An important consequence of complex vocal learning in human speech and birdsong is that it can generate a huge diversity of utterances, many more than can probably be generated by independent auditory templates or innate vocal motor programmes. Humans and songbirds construct such a large number of utterances by segmenting them into subunits and memorizing the serial order of subunits. A population of neurons in an upper vocal control centre in the zebra finch appears to have a unique pattern of firing at each precise time in the overall song, providing sequencing information to the lower vocal centres to generate the timing for a sequence of the subunits. When songbirds listen to song, they also appear to process groups of notes together, suggesting a hierarchy of perceptual processing. There is some evidence that non-human mammals with complex vocal learning also may use subunits to generate and categorize a diverse vocal repertoire using processes similar to those studied in humans and songbirds. Pace et al. analysed humpback song using short subunits, which produced a more accurate classification than using whole syllables as the basic unit of analysis. Some toothed whale species also develop diverse repertoires of complex calls that appear to be made up of subunits (killer whales:; bottlenose dolphin whistles:).

Human speech is typically analysed in a hierarchy of phoneme, word and sentence, and birdsong is traditionally analysed in terms of a hierarchy of notes, syllables and motifs that make up a song. The distinction between bird calls and song is that calls are ‘short discrete vocalizations uttered irregularly or in isolation’ while songs ‘are longer, more complex stereotyped call sequences that are repeated frequently’ (pp. 536–538). Some of the best examples of vocal learning in animals come from songs, but animals can construct complex songs from a repertoire of innate syllables. For example, Holy & Guo discovered that male mice sing complex songs made up multiple syllable types emitted in repeated sequences. However, Portfors & Perkel review several studies testing for vocal learning in mice and they conclude that mice are not capable of vocal learning. This suggests that mice, like some birds, learn to construct complex songs from learning sequences of innate syllables.

Understanding the potential for sequence learning provides a different perspective on vocal learning. Animals with complex vocal learning must hear vocalizations to learn them, but the templates may occur at the subunit level. Similarity in the syllables that make up the learned songs across populations of a songbird species has led Marler to suggest that songbirds have innate predispositions to learn templates for specific elements of conspecific songs. For example, the multitude of swamp sparrow songs can be described in terms of six note types and the distinctive songs of each population are made up of different sequences of these notes. These results emphasize the importance of determining the basic units of vocalizations that are learned by template matching and to differentiate them from series of these units that can be learned through sequence learning.


Evidence for complex vocal learning in non-human mammals

I have argued here that limited vocal learning, which has a broader taxonomic distribution among mammals than complex vocal learning, may not provide good animal models for studying complex vocal learning because limited vocal learning may involve fine-tuning of brainstem vocal pattern generators and need not involve specialized telencephalic networks. This suggests the importance of critically evaluating evidence for complex vocal learning among potential study species. Following Janik & Slater, the strongest evidence for complex vocal learning is taken here as the ability to copy sounds that are not part of the normal species-specific repertoire. The most striking cases of this ability occur when an animal can learn to imitate human speech well enough for native human speakers to understand the words. Here, there is no chance that the animal is simply matching a vocalization it hears with the closest one in its species-specific repertoire. Cases where individual animals copy complex vocalizations that are not shared as a species-specific repertoire but are individual-specific or population-specific may provide adequate but weaker evidence for complex vocal learning in which the subject must learn a new acoustic template for the vocalization and then learn to develop a vocalization that matches the template.

Even though birds have a different sound production organ from mammals, humans have learned how to train several avian taxa including some parrots and mynah birds to imitate human speech (parrots:; Mynah birds:). By contrast, there are only a few cases where mammals raised in captivity have developed intelligible speech sounds. Recent modelling of the vocal tracts of monkeys has shown that monkeys would be capable of producing sounds like those of human speech if they had the neural capacity for vocal learning, but there is only weak evidence for such imitation. A male harbour seal that was raised by humans since he was born started to produce about eight different English phrases as he reached sexual maturity. He became highly vocal for several years before refining his production of speech sounds, and he had to adopt an unusual posture to produce them. This imitative ability is not limited to one seal. Stansbury & Janik trained grey seals to match sequences of musical notes or to match formant frequencies of human vowel sounds, using a careful design to make sure that acoustic features of the copies did not appear in the pre-exposure repertoire of the subjects and were not part of the normal grey seal repertoire in the wild. Reichmuth & Casey also review other evidence for vocal learning in seals, sea lions and walruses. Stoeger et al. describe a case of a male Asian elephant (E. maximus) that was able to imitate Korean words with enough precision for native speakers to understand the words. In order to imitate speech, the elephant stuffed his trunk in his mouth to render the acoustic properties of his upper vocal tract more like that of humans. These imitated speech sounds had acoustic features that mapped well onto human speech but were very different from those of normal seal or elephant vocalizations. These cases provide very strong evidence that the animals needed to learn new acoustic templates and use trial and error learning to produce vocalizations that matched them.


Cetaceans

Lilly reports that a bottlenose dolphin was able to match the number and duration of human speech sounds and there are three reports of beluga whales imitating human speech, but none provide cases of imitation of words as convincing as those shown for skilled avian mimics or the harbour seal and Asian elephant discussed above. The first paper on beluga vocalizations recorded in the wild stated that ‘Occasionally the calls would suggest a crowd of children shouting in the distance’ [p. 143], which highlights the importance of making sure that sounds interpreted as ‘copies’ are not present in the normal pre-exposure repertoire of the species. This is necessary to rule out the possibility that the subject was just matching speech with the closest pre-existing call in its repertoire rather than actually copying a speech sound. Janik provides a general review of vocal learning in cetaceans. The best evidence for complex vocal learning in cetaceans involves bottlenosed dolphins copying synthetic frequency modulated tones, which were similar in general acoustic structure to dolphin whistles, but which had contour patterns that were not present in the pre-exposure repertoire. Several other papers claim to find evidence for vocal learning in toothed whales. Favaro et al. report that a Risso's dolphin (Grampus griseus) cross-fostered with bottlenose dolphins produced whistles more like a dolphin in its pool than like wild Grampus, but similarity of whistles from different delphinid species makes this kind of cross-fostering experiment less robust than for species with less overlap in vocal repertoires. Abramson et al. trained a captive killer whale to match sounds either from her own calf or from a human but did not use the same methods to test for matches in the pre- and post-exposure repertoires, which hinders interpretation. Few studies of vocal learning in toothed whales meet the gold standard of quantifying the pre-exposure repertoire of the subject, designing signals that clearly differ from this repertoire and demonstrating accurate matching in the exposure or post-exposure repertoires as well as Richards et al. study. For animals that can be held in a managed setting, experiments that train subjects for imitation of carefully constructed stimuli such as those of Richards et al. and Stansbury & Janik represent an important method for testing for complex vocal learning by imitation.

The strongest evidence for complex vocal learning in baleen whales stems from the process by which individual humpback whales copy changes in the song of their populations. Within a population, the song changes over time, with each individual whale tracking the changes of the population. Noad et al. report that when a few males from the humpback population on the west coast of Australia brought their song to the east coast of Australia, their song was picked up by the entire east coast population within 2 years. These examples of copying and tracking changes within and between populations demonstrate that whales must learn the acoustic structure of each unit of the song as well as the sequence of units that make up the song. Bowhead whales (Balaena mysticetus) produce such a diverse set of songs with so much interannual variability as to also provide evidence for complex vocal learning.


Bats

Evidence for vocal learning in bats is described in detail by Vernes & Wilkinson. They report no evidence for bats copying sounds of other species or novel synthetic sounds. I consider most cases of vocal learning reported in bats to reflect limited vocal learning (see table 1 of Vernes & Wilkinson) as they involve vocal convergence or differences in vocal development of isolated bats versus those exposed to sound playback or conspecifics, which could involve convergence for the exposed animals. As Vernes & Wilkinson describe, bats are more accessible for neurobiological research than many of the other mammals shown to have vocal learning skills. This makes them attractive for testing for differences in the neural underpinnings of AVF and limited versus complex vocal learning. Lattenkamp & Vernes report that bats are subjects of only about 2% of studies published on vocal learning, and no studies have tested imitation of novel sounds in bats. This emphasizes the importance of systematically studying which taxa are capable of which forms of vocal learning before reaching final conclusions about the presence or absence of these skills.


Conclusion and future directions

I have defined a classification system for different forms of AVF and vocal learning that evolved to solve different problems and that are likely to involve distinct mechanisms. As Vernes & Wilkinson argue, studying the evolution and neural underpinnings of vocal learning demands distinguishing between these different forms. I define complex vocal learning by the need to hear a sound to form a learned auditory template before the animal can develop a vocalization that matches the template. I contrast this with limited vocal learning defined as the ability to fine-tune acoustic features of species-specific vocalizations that can develop in the absence of auditory input because innate motor programmes can generate the species-specific pattern. Complex vocal learning has been associated with specialized telencephalic networks in humans and songbirds and has been described for a much narrower set of species than has limited vocal learning. Testing whether these telencephalic networks are required for complex vocal learning but not for limited vocal learning requires careful selection of which species are appropriate for representing each form of learning.

The taxonomic distribution of complex vocal learning suggests several independent origins in birds and mammals. However, the discovery of vocal learning in species such as elephants and seals has depended upon fortuitous cases of individuals being discovered to have learned to copy human speech; it is probably present but undiscovered in other species. The strongest evidence for complex vocal learning stems from the ability to copy sounds that differ from the normal conspecific repertoire. However, animals may use complex vocal learning to form auditory templates of their normal species-specific vocalizations and then to match them. Some species have evolved more selective predispositions to limit learning of auditory templates to species-specific vocalizations, while others may imitate sounds that are not typical of their species. We are more likely to detect complex vocal learning in species with less stringent predispositions, but testing for complex vocal learning must include species that only form templates for their normal species-specific vocalizations. The critical point for distinguishing complex from limited vocal learning is whether subjects require auditory input to develop their normal species-specific vocalizations, or whether a central motor programme allows these to develop in the absence of auditory input. Some of the procedures used in the past for testing this point, such as deafening subjects before they have a chance to hear conspecifics, are unlikely to meet modern standards for welfare of many of the taxa discussed here. Higher welfare standards should stimulate alternative approaches.

There is relatively strong evidence for innate calls in non-human primates, which have only been shown to have limited capacity for vocal learning. However, tests for vocal learning are so limited for birds and mammals that we cannot establish the presence or absence of specific vocal learning capacities in most families. Tests for the presence of specialized telencephalic networks for vocal learning are similarly limited in different families of bird and mammal. A broad comparative study of the origins of vocal learning demands a systematic selection of species with respect to mammalian and avian phylogeny. Strategic selection of species for testing the absence of vocal learning in critical parts of the phylogeny is just as important as identifying taxa with different forms of vocal learning. Only with such efforts can we develop confidence about the phylogenetic positions of independent origins (or losses) of vocal learning, and of the evolutionary relationships between different forms of AVF and vocal learning.

The quest to understand which neural networks are involved in which forms of vocal learning, and how they perform the necessary information processing will also require careful selection of different model species. In this paper, I have explored a series of questions about neural pathways for the different forms of vocal learning. Taking the broadest perspective on AVF: where are centres in the brain where auditory input converges on networks that generate vocal motor output? What are their functions and how conserved are they across the vertebrates? How do pathways for AVF and vocal learning interact with pathways for innate vocalizations? Important questions about limited vocal learning include: what and where are the neural networks that fine-tune vocal motor programmes based on auditory input? How different are the demands of real-time feedback mechanisms versus slow vocal learning during ontogeny, and how might these differences select for different neural pathways? There are long-standing questions about complex vocal learning: does complex vocal learning require telencephalic networks in all species with the trait? If so, what characteristics favour the telencephalon for complex vocal learning? How homologous are the independently evolved telencephalic networks? Do all of these independently evolved telencephalic networks have direct connections to motoneurons that innervate the vocal musculature? How does the template form? How does the CNS estimate an error signal between vocal output and template? How does the CNS modify vocal output to correct the error? How does sequence learning interact with template matching? How specialized are the neural pathways by which social reinforcement affects vocal development? How different are the pathways by which animals learn to develop new signals through ontogeny versus correct errors in production of mature vocalizations in real time?

Testing hypotheses about neural pathways required for the different forms of vocal learning requires careful selection of study species. Methods may be available to test some of these hypotheses in the full range of species for which complex vocal learning is thought to be present or absent. For example, neuroanatomical studies should be able to test for specialized telencephalic nuclei and pathways over a broad range of avian taxa for which freshly preserved specimens are available. Current methods for testing the Kuypers/Jürgens hypothesis that complex vocal learning requires direct connections between laryngeal motor cortex and motoneurons that innervate vocal musculature require invasive axonal tracing procedures with living animals. These procedures may routinely be used for some model species in neurobiology, but they are unlikely to meet modern welfare standards for many other species. However, testing whether complex vocal learning correlates with more robust tracts between motor cortex and the brainstem nuclei that innervate vocal musculature (nucleus ambiguus for the larynx and facial motor nucleus for toothed whales) may be possible using post-mortem tract tracing even with species such as elephants and marine mammals. I have suggested that more attention needs to be paid to the role that auditory input may play with mid-brain and lower brainstem vocal pattern generators. Invasive neurobiological methods may be able to test these ideas with some species that are model systems in neurobiology, including species that are not capable of complex vocal learning. The hypothesis that limited vocal learning may involve mid-brain and lower brainstem vocal pattern generators and that complex vocal learning requires cortical networks may be able to be tested at a coarse scale using non-invasive or minimally invasive neurobiological methods as suggested by Ravignani et al.. The success of non-invasive methods in studying neural mechanisms underlying human language should challenge those interested in vocal learning to develop ways to apply these methods to a broad enough taxonomic range of subjects for a comparative analysis of vocal learning and AVF.

It is important not to close without considering the ethics of working with the broad array of species discussed here. Many of the species that are capable of vocal learning are endangered, threatened or protected, and it is critical that access to subjects have no negative impact on wild populations. Research on such species should be designed to improve their conservation status, potentially by enhancing our appreciation of their capabilities. Animal welfare must be carefully taken into account as part of the process of selecting methods and species as subjects for this research. As with work with human subjects, the development of methods to study the neural processes involved in vocal learning must incorporate stringent standards for the welfare of the subjects. The last few decades of development of neurobiological methods that are appropriate for human subjects should encourage development of similarly appropriate methods for animal studies. The goal for selecting some of these species as models for understanding vocal learning should not just be based upon lower welfare standards compared to humans, but rather for their power in terms of comparative studies of the evolution of neural mechanisms that underpin the different forms of vocal learning described here.


Data accessibility

This article has no additional data.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

This article has no additional data.


Animal cognition and the evolution of human language: why we cannot focus solely on communication

W. Tecumseh Fitch — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2019. PMC6895558, CC BY 4.0.

Studies of animal communication are often assumed to provide the ‘royal road’ to understanding the evolution of human language. After all, language is the pre-eminent system of human communication: doesn't it make sense to search for its precursors in animal communication systems? From this viewpoint, if some characteristic feature of human language is lacking in systems of animal communication, it represents a crucial gap in evolution, and evidence for an evolutionary discontinuity. Here I argue that we should reverse this logic: because a defining feature of human language is its ability to flexibly represent and recombine concepts, precursors for many important components of language should be sought in animal cognition rather than animal communication. Animal communication systems typically only permit expression of a small subset of the concepts that can be represented and manipulated by that species. Thus, if a particular concept is not expressed in a species' communication system this is not evidence that it lacks that concept. I conclude that if we focus exclusively on communicative signals, we sell the comparative analysis of language evolution short. Therefore, animal cognition provides a crucial (and often neglected) source of evidence regarding the biology and evolution of human language.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘What can animal communication teach us about human language?’


Introduction

I have not, to my knowledge, spoken the word ‘octopus’ today or indeed in the past week, but no one would therefore conclude that I lack the concept OCTOPUS (here I follow the philosopher's convention, when necessary, of denoting conceptual representations in capital letters). Indeed, I have spent many hours observing these creatures and read books about them but, like most of my mental concepts, OCTOPUS goes unexpressed in my speech most of the time. This is not only true of concepts captured by single words (like ‘octopus’, ‘chartreuse’, ‘quasar’ or ‘exponent’) but for more complex cognitive constructs that I possess (like how to walk from the Jardin de Luxembourg to the Place Stravinsky in Paris, via Notre Dame) but have never spoken at all. Humans possess many concepts, within individual minds, that go unexpressed via their language output for long periods of time (and some may never be expressed verbally). However, my assumption in what follows is that pretty much any human concept could be expressed in language, with perhaps hours or days of effort, and with varying degrees of accuracy, difficulty and concision. This capability to express any concept goes far beyond what any other species can do.

In what follows, I will take the basic observation that most concepts go unexpressed as axiomatic and argue that the same is true regarding animal communication, only more so (using ‘animal’ as shorthand for ‘non-human animal’ hereafter). For at least in principle, I might, under some circumstances, exclaim ‘Octopus!’ (e.g. when seeing one unexpectedly) or tell you the way to the Place Stravinsky (if you asked me), providing evidence that I indeed possess these concepts. By contrast, it is the nature of all known animal communication systems that they allow their bearers to express only a small subset of the concepts they can remember, represent and manipulate productively. For example, honeybees have excellent colour vision and can remember the colours of the flowers they visit, but the honeybee dance ‘language’ allows a forager to communicate only the spatial location of the flower and has no provision for expressing colour information. I will provide evidence for this below and review similar evidence for other species, including non-human primates. I conclude that animal communication systems appear to be intrinsically limited to a smallish set of fitness-relevant messages that relate to such factors as food, danger, aggression, appeasement or personal prowess. But a substantial literature in animal cognition reveals that they know much more than this, even if they have no way of saying it.

The core argument is that, just as a person's utterances reveal only a subset of what they know, animal communication signals express an intrinsically limited subset of that species' conceptual storehouse. The argument that most thoughts are not expressed is by no means new: it follows Jackendoff's (2002) model of linguistic semantics closely and is also consonant with Chomsky's model. Both Hurford and Bickerton have explored its implications for language evolution at book length, as have I more briefly. My aim here is simply to argue this crucial point sharply and concisely, for although these ideas should not be controversial, they are rejected by some prominent philosophers, and even when accepted, their implications are ignored in many recent discussions of language evolution.

The central implication of my thesis is that the field of animal cognition has a very important role to play in our understanding of human language evolution because the fact that animals have concepts (whether expressible via signalling or not) erases a potentially gaping evolutionary chasm that would exist if they did not. Apparent discontinuities between humans and animal cognition that ‘pose a severe challenge for evolutionary explanation’ (p.3), may in fact be based on discontinuities between language and other species' communication systems. This elision between two different things—cognition and communication—is at best misleading and often pernicious. The study of animal communication is indeed important for comparative analysis of language evolution, most obviously relevant for factors involved in externalization, such as vocal learning, speech perception and gestural communication. But to get the full comparative picture, we need to embrace animal cognition as a central and in some cases the central source of information relevant to the biology and evolution of language (and human cognition more generally).


Words ≠ concepts

Before discussing animals, it is important to first clarify some basic issues about the nature of human concepts, and to at least dip our toes into the philosophical quagmire surrounding the term ‘concept’ (for a concise introduction). My take on concepts in this essay will be essentially that of mainstream cognitive (neuro)science today, where a concept is simply ‘a nonlinguistic psychological representation of a class of entities in the world’ (Murphy, p. 335).

More specifically, my perspective is mentalistic and representationalist. I assume that concepts are mind-internal entities—‘representations’—that often, but not necessarily, correspond to some entities ‘out there’ in the world. It is physicalist: conceptual representations ultimately consist of neural activity in brains (they have no platonic existence, independent of minds). Finally, it is pluralistic, meaning that it allows for different types of concepts, some best captured by definitions, others by prototypes and still others as abilities to discriminate or act. Although much ink has been shed regarding the virtues and flaws of these different interpretations, both in cognitive science and philosophy, precisely where one stands on these philosophical issues will have little relevance to my comparative argument here.

However, one central issue, illustrated in, cannot be ignored, concerning a long-running philosophical debate between ‘mentalists’ (virtually all modern cognitive scientists) and ‘referentialist’ philosophers like Quine or Putnam. Referentialists posit a direct referential linkage between utterances and their real-world referents. The referentialist doctrine was dominant in behaviourist psychology of language, which privileged observable behaviours (such as speaking words and pointing) over invisible mental constructs. But it has fallen by the wayside in modern cognitive science—at least regarding human language. The alternative mentalist perspective (also termed the ‘internalist’ or ‘conceptualist’ perspective) holds that words do not refer directly to things in the world, but rather express our (mind-internal) concepts. To paraphrase Strawson ‘words don't refer, people refer’. The concepts we express linguistically may correspond to real entities in the world, but in many cases (e.g. ‘Sherlock Holmes’, ‘the unicorn in my dream’), they do not.

The modern mentalist perspective in cognitive science sees acts of referring (e.g. by speaking) as being indirect. That is, reference involves two separable phenomena: first a mental representation of an entity is recognized, recalled or otherwise activated, and second some utterance is produced which may, if successful, elicit a similar though not identical mental representation in the listener. For example, observing a cat walk behind a tree, I may form a mental representation of CAT BEHIND TREE. This complex concept is the first step in reference: a correspondence between real-world events (e.g. visual patterns interpreted as cats and trees) and the resulting mental representation. Generating this particular non-verbal concept is accomplished by the visual system, is private, and (I argue below) essentially the same type of cognitive processing that occurs when a dog sees a cat go behind a tree (who perhaps indicates this knowledge by straining at its leash).

The second stage of reference—externalization—is the one with a public, perceivable component: under some circumstance, I may choose to say ‘there's a cat behind that tree’ or perhaps ‘hinter dem Baum ist eine Katze’ (in German). This second step in referring links my mental representation to some signal in English, German, American sign language, etc. Crucially, my mental representation is the same for either sentence (the very idea of translation—that different sentences in different languages can refer to the very same concept—assumes some language-independent conceptual world). Again the link between the concept CAT BEHIND TREE and either of these sentences is initially an internal matter, within the speaker's mind, and dependent on their personal conceptual and linguistic competences. However, if finally I utter one of these sentences, the utterance enters the public sphere and may cause an appropriately equipped listener to form their own mental representation CAT BEHIND TREE (probably different in detail from mine). Linguistic communication—concept sharing—has occurred.

This indirect model may sound overly complicated or obscure. We have a strong intuition that words themselves ‘mean things’ and sentences ‘refer’, regardless of whether anyone reads or understands them. This intuition about direct reference is hard to shake and still taken quite seriously by some philosophers. This may be because the intuition is biologically grounded, stemming from a ‘referential drive’ to interpret words as meaningful, part of the species-typical ‘instinct to learn’ that underpins child language acquisition. For the child inferring word meanings, the simple notion that words mean things provides a useful shortcut to get the semantic system up and running. This intuition persists into adulthood, leading to superstitious beliefs (the magical powers of names or ritual chants). Despite providing a concise shorthand for denoting the more circuitous process detailed above, the referentialist intuition is completely inadequate as a full description of linguistic meaning. Freeing ourselves from the shackles of this prescientific intuition is the first step to insightful scientific analysis.

Embracing this indirect, two-step nature of reference, I can now state my argument more clearly: the first stage of reference—building representations that tie sensory input to conceptual representations—is built upon a chassis of cognitive processes (sensory processing, recognition, categorization, combination and inference) that has fundamental shared components between humans and other animals. These components long predated language. The second stage of ‘externalization’—the capacity to form signals representing these non-verbal concepts—represents a crucial difference in humans and was one of the key innovations in human language evolution. As Jackendoff puts it ‘phonology and syntax… evolved to express meaning, which has a far longer evolutionary pedigree’ (p. 428).

It was once common to take a link between concepts and language as definitional, such that a ‘true’ concept must be linked to a word, but this traditional notion seems unsustainable in the face of infant research, where infants can clearly represent and reason about things they have no words for.


Do animals have concepts?

The considerations above lead most cognitive scientists to assume that the meanings of words and sentences are to be cashed out in non-linguistic mental representations: ‘concepts’ hereafter. However, the cognitive revolution remains incomplete: while few today deny the existence of internal mental representations (concepts) in humans, many remain suspicious when attributing them to animals. Animal cognition researchers are typically required to reject all possible associative explanations, regardless of their complexity, before attributing mental representations to animals and the discipline spends considerable energy and ingenuity refuting so-called killjoy associative explanations. Fortunately, the field has matured to the point where, for many phenomena, there can be little doubt that mental representations exist in animals, and can be recalled, manipulated and themselves represented.

Concepts should be, in some sense, general and flexible, and might initially be equated with mental ‘categories’. It is uncontested that birds and mammals learn and recall categories, but some have claimed that animal categories are little more than reflexes, reactively elicited in sensory cortices by sensory inputs and lacking the flexibility and generality of human concepts. However, current data demonstrate that many species form cross-modal associations, showing that their categories are flexibly multi-modal. Animals can summon categorical representations in the absence of relevant triggering stimuli, for instance seeking hidden food items at particular times, or re-hiding food items a potential thief saw them hide, in the absence of that thief. They can compute abstract relationships like ‘same’ and ‘different’, for example, correctly choosing novel ‘same’ pairs when presented with two matched objects, and vice versa when given unmatched pairs. Many species can compute transitive inferences: knowing that if A > B and B > C, then A must be greater than C as well. These data fulfil the philosophers' desideratum that (animal) concepts should be more than unimodal, reflexive, stimulus-driven dispositions to react appropriately: they have an abstract categorical and relational structure.

A sceptical philosopher might still object that however impressive these cognitive abilities are, they do not ‘really’ constitute concepts. Concepts require not just categorization (first-order representations), but a second-order representation of that knowledge: knowing that (or doubting that, or being surprised that) some perceptual object belongs to the category. Animal concepts are limited, philosophers like Davidson argue, to first-order representations. The most telling evidence against this ‘first-order’ view comes from studies on ‘metacognition’, where animals exhibit an understanding of their own conceptual representations (beliefs about beliefs). If uncertain about their own knowledge, they will choose a ‘don't know’ response, for lesser reward, rather than guessing. Most research in this experimental paradigm been done on rhesus macaques but related work documents metacognition in dolphins, rats and pigeons. Such experiments involve a response to some discrimination task, yielding a food reward, but an additional response is allowed for uncertain cases, often glossed as ‘I don't know’. The animal can choose the ‘don't know’ option when uncertain, receiving a smaller food reward than they would receive for a correct answer, but no punishment. Typically, in situations of high uncertainty (e.g. stimuli ambiguous from a human perspective), animals in these experiments choose the ‘uncertain’ button.

Although some critics have suggested that animals in such experiments simply form a new perceptual category (e.g. ‘unfamiliar’) and pushing the button for this, this possibility can be ruled out in most of the primate experiments (for the refutation of this and other ‘killjoy’ hypotheses, cf.). Recent experiments are most compelling. Monkeys are first trained on one set of experimental stimuli, for example, based on colour discrimination, to learn the ‘don't know’ option. If this response was really tied to perceptual cues (e.g. colour) about the training stimuli, there should be no carry-over of this third option to novel stimulus sets. Instead, monkeys immediately transfer their appropriate use of the third option to novel situations (e.g. area discrimination) or even from past (retrospective) judgements to future (prospective) judgements. This strongly suggests that the animals truly doubt their knowledge (represent their own uncertainty) and can transfer a response based on this meta-knowledge to novel situations. These and other data have convinced even previous sceptics that animals possess representations about representations, and therefore ‘concepts’ in this more demanding Davidsonian sense. Of course, human metacognition is more sophisticated, involving thoughts about thoughts about thoughts… But that fact provides no empirical grounds to deny basic second-order metacognition to other animals. Given these modern data, denials that animals possess basic non-verbal concepts seem misinformed and anti-scientific.

I hasten to add that my claim here is not that animal concepts are of the same complexity or flexibility as those of humans. That would be absurdly anthropomorphic and would ignore the fact that language, as a multi-component system, also includes recursive compositional machinery that allows us to flexibly combine basic concepts into complex, hierarchically structured thoughts. This compositionality is a key component of linguistically structured thought, independent of externalization. Indeed, Chomsky terms it the ‘Basic Property’ of language and argues that it was selected in the human lineage precisely for its value in structuring internal thought, rather than externalizing these thoughts via speech. There is at present little evidence of complex compositionality in animal communication or cognition (beyond things like transitivity, discussed below). But crucially, if we want to understand the evolution of this component, the appropriate starting point is animal conceptual abilities, and cannot be limited to the signals animal produce.

I now turn to the empirical data supporting my main contention that animals possess more concepts than their communication systems allow them to express. For reasons of space and concision, this is a very selective review—the data are so abundant that a full treatment requires an entire book (for this I recommend). I will thus focus on a few examples from clever species, like primates and dolphins, plus honeybees, because these are well documented in easily accessible publications.


Animal signals ≠ animal concepts

To empirically demonstrate that a species can conceptualize more than they can express requires both an understanding of their communication system and independent data concerning their cognition. A nice example to start with is the honeybee Apis mellifera, in which communication and cognition are well-studied. The honeybee communication system allows a forager who has discovered flowers, upon returning to the hive, to inform other foragers of their location. In the darkness of the hive, the bee performs a stereotyped (and apparently innate) ‘waggle dance’ whose direction, relative to gravity, signals the azimuth direction of the flowers (relative to the sun). The duration of the waggle portion correlates with the distance to the flowers, and by combining these cues, the dance provides a remarkably accurate indication of the location of these flowers. This system is also remarkable in ‘referring’ to an entity not currently present or visible to the communicators (thus sharing the property of ‘displacement’ with human language). Finally, the system is flexible, because a honeybee can ‘refer’ to the location of other objects than flowers when necessary, for instance, water or a new nest-site (I put ‘refer’ in quotes to avoid philosophical debate—I simply mean that a honeybee's dance reliably allows naive honeybees to locate the object in question).

Despite this impressive communication system, detailed studies of honeybee cognition reveal even more impressive cognitive abilities. For example honeybees have excellent colour vision and can remember the colour of rewarding versus unrewarding nectar sources over days. Nonetheless, their dance ‘language’ has no way to communicate colour information. Even more impressive, a honeybee can judge whether two stimuli are the same or different in colour or pattern and generalize this behaviour to novel modalities (trained on colour, she immediately transfers the same/different decision to patterns or vice versa). Again, however, the honeybee dance language lacks signals for ‘same’ or ‘different’. Thus, even an insect whose brain occupies 1 mm3 and contains less than a million neurons has cognitive abilities that significantly outstrip its ability to communicate them.

Turning now to a large-brained species, the bottlenose dolphin Tursiops truncatus is another species for which we have solid data about both cognition and communication. Dolphins have sophisticated cognitive abilities rivalling those of non-human primates. They rapidly learn a ‘delayed match-to-sample’ task and generalize across hundreds of novel sounds. Dolphins can remember lists of items (spatial locations, visual objects or sounds), correctly indicating whether a probe stimulus was or was not in the list, and show a classic recency effect, like humans. Dolphins show cross-modal integration, matching visually and acoustically perceived (via echolocation) object shapes, and show mirror self-recognition, inspecting themselves in a mirror when marked in an otherwise invisible location (and not doing so when sham-marked). Dolphins readily learn to interpret human signals, whether gestural (e.g. pointing) or auditory and can understand novel combinations of signals (‘sentences’ made up of multiple gestures or sounds) on the first try, based on a simple order-based grammar (e.g. responding correctly to ‘take the hoop to the ball’ versus ‘take the ball to the hoop’). Dolphins can understand the abstract command ‘create’ indicating ‘do something novel’ by performing some new action or ‘repeat’ to perform the act again (thus requiring the dolphin to keep track of what it itself had done). All of these data indicate that dolphins have a flexible, productive capacity to learn, can self-monitor and can retain and manipulate novel concepts across multiple modalities.

However, turning to bottlenose dolphins' well-studied communication system, we get a very different picture. Early studies indicated a quite complex vocal communication system, and the ability of dolphins to learn human words suggested that they might have a ‘language’ of their own. These suggestions led to careful experiments attempting to understand dolphin communication via observation and playback experiments that, on the contrary, suggested an ordinary mammalian repertoire of vocal signals, with the exception that dolphins are vocal learners and readily learn to mimic both conspecific and human-generated sounds. Vocal learning is put to use in a ‘signature whistle’ system: dolphins emit an individual-specific whistle pattern (for example, when captured) that can be imitated by other dolphins, leading to exchanges and reuniting of separated animals. Young dolphins initially acquire their whistles, by imitation. Although this is an interesting system, with a capacity to signal individuals (reminiscent of ‘names’), it appears to be the most productive aspect of their vocal system.

The evidence against greater expressive ability comes from experiments where two dolphins are allowed to communicate vocally while solving a joint task. Individual dolphins readily learn to push on a right or left paddle depending on a visual signal. With more training, two dolphins who can see each other can learn a social version: a signal perceived by one dolphin must be responded to by the other dolphin first, and only afterwards by the second, to provide a food reward to both. The crucial experimental condition involves blocking visual contact between the two individuals. If dolphins possessed a flexible language-like communication system, it should be a simple matter to signal ‘push the left one’ and succeed. Although initial experiments suggested this, more careful follow-up studies showed that these initial successes did not reflect anything language-like. When the roles were reversed (so that the former responder had to become the signaller), the pair totally failed. Furthermore, when the contingency between signal and response was changed, the dolphins had to be retrained from scratch and were not able to simply switch vocal signals to indicate the other action. The researchers concluded that the initial success was a result of trial-and-error learning where incidental sounds made by one animal, or vocal sounds produced whether or not the other animal was present, were used to solve the task. Bastian, who led this research project concisely concluded ‘No evidence was found to support the supposition that the social signalling of dolphins is capable of the transfer of arbitrary environmental information’ (p. iii). Summarizing, dolphins have very sophisticated cognitive and learning abilities, revealing complex internal concepts, but their capacity to communicate those concepts via their species-typical signals is quite limited.


Concepts and communication in primates

My final examples come from two non-human primate species—vervet monkeys and chimpanzees—but similar examples could be provided for many other well-studied primates.

Vervets Chlorocebus pygerythrus (previously Cercopithecus aethiops) are small common African monkeys, possessing a suite of different alarm calls that are typically emitted in the presence of different predators. The vervet monkey alarm call system is frequently cited as a potential precursor to language. However, the three different alarm calls produced to leopards, eagles and snakes in no way exhaust the concepts that vervets can represent. In addition to ‘standard’ primate concepts like individuality and dominance, vervets maintain complex spatial representations of their environment and can mentally track the locations of hidden group members. They can socially learn how to access food and rapidly absorb new social preferences about what to eat based on colour. None of this cognitive sophistication is in any way detectable in their vocal communication system.

Turning finally to our nearest living relatives, the chimpanzees and bonobos (Pan troglodytes and Pan paniscus), there is abundant evidence that chimpanzees have highly developed cognitive abilities and can represent basic concepts like colour and shape, as well as abstract concepts including sameness, location, and sequence. Chimpanzees also have social representations including individual identity, dominance and relationships (e.g. ‘child of’) and are capable of transitive inference. With extensive training, very abstract concepts like number are within their cognitive reach. They show at least the beginnings of theory of mind, in that they can represent what competitors do or do not see. Their tool-using abilities are sophisticated and incorporate future planning. When trained intensively with human communication systems, they can understand multi-word sentences and indicate an impressive variety of objects and events and exhibit flexible cross-modal transfer of information without further training. In general then, chimpanzees exhibit some of the most sophisticated cognitive abilities known among animals—unsurprising given their close biological relationship to humans.

By contrast, chimpanzee vocal communication is comparable to that seen in many other primates or mammals, with a small repertoire of 30-odd innate vocalizations including food calls that differ for different food quality, screams and threats, and complex display calls like pant-hoots. Chimpanzees are not known to have predator-specific alarm calls like vervets. Their gestural communication system is considerably richer, and perhaps more intentionally informative than their vocal communication. But both their vocal and gestural communication skills pale in comparison to their rich and sophisticated cognitive abilities. Cognitive studies demonstrate beyond a reasonable doubt that chimpanzees possess many concepts that their species-typical communication systems cannot express (nor indeed do the utterances of ‘language trained’ chimpanzees come close to expressing the complexity of concepts like number, transitivity or tool use). Thus, chimpanzees clearly possess and manipulate concepts that they are unable to communicate. Even the most exhaustive analysis of chimpanzee communication would vastly underestimate the complexity of their non-verbal conceptual world.

It is crucial not to conflate these communicative limitations with the false but frequently repeated claim that primates (or animals more generally) have no voluntary control over their vocalizations. A sizeable body of data clearly demonstrates that they do. For example, in the wild, many species (including chickens and monkeys) exhibit ‘audience effects,’ producing vocalizations only when appropriate listeners are around, and chimpanzee screams and alarm vocalizations are clearly modulated by the presence and composition of the audience. Several bird species produce ‘false’ alarm calls when no predator is present, frightening away competitors and then taking remaining food. In an operant setting in the laboratory, numerous studies have demonstrated voluntary production (or inhibition) of vocalizations on command in chimpanzees, other primates and various other mammals (e.g. cats and dogs). Thus, despite a common misconception, animal vocalizations are not reflexive actions, performed inevitably upon the appearance of some external stimulus; but this fact does not imply that their vocalizations provide exhaustive access to their conceptual world.


Conclusion: discontinuities in signalling do not indicate cognitive discontinuities

I end by clarifying the key implication of this essay: when considering the evolution of human cognition, we will be fundamentally misled if we attribute to animals only those concepts they can communicate. Externalization of concepts is just one component of language, and another is to help structure our private internal thought. Thus, we cannot accurately limit our estimation of what humans know to what they say. The same is true of animals, only more so. The flexibility of human language means that we can use it to represent virtually anything we can think (perhaps with considerable effort, in the case of visual, musical or highly abstract concepts). The same flexibility and expressivity is simply not present in animal communication systems. This limitation, rather than any fundamental non-existence of animal concepts, was surpassed by humans during language evolution. Thus, our (linguistic) ability to refer, not our basic ability to conceptually represent, must be explained if we hope to understand the neural and ultimately genetic basis of human language.

This is not to deny that externalized language gives humans a huge conceptual advantage over other species. We acquire many concepts via language that we have no direct access by personal experience, vastly enlarging our potential store of knowledge (some readers may never have personally seen an octopus, but most will nonetheless have some concept OCTOPUS). Blind people, thanks to language, have surprisingly rich conceptions of colour terms, and many abstract or scientific terms such as ‘electron’ or ‘truth’ have no sensory manifestations at all. My argument is not that animals have precisely the same concepts as humans (that would be absurd, because even individual humans do not share precisely the ‘same’ concepts). My argument concerns the neural and cognitive machinery underlying the formation of mental representations, along with many of the cognitive processes that allow concepts to be formed based on sensory experience and combined at a basic level. These capabilities are shared across species and were therefore present before language evolved and provided the precursors of more complex human concepts.

In many circumstances, the study of animal communication can provide crucial insights into what animals know and remains an important part of comparative investigation of language evolution. But accepting the fundamental fact that animals know much more than they can express implies that the evolution of human language built upon a pre-existing conceptual apparatus much richer than that observable in animal communicative capabilities. It is therefore critical that future scholarly explorations of human language evolution take results from animal cognition research as crucial data for understanding the evolutionary path to human language. Even more crucial is a dedicated research programme to explore in detail animals' abilities to combine concepts. To the extent that they can do so in a flexible, hierarchical manner, I think we can see the germs of the recursive symbolic system that underlies human linguistic concepts.


Cilia-driven flows in the brain third ventricle

Gregor Eichele, Eberhard Bodenschatz, Zuzana Ditte, Ann-Kathrin Günther, Shoba Kapoor, Yong Wang, Christian Westendorf — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2019. PMC7017332, CC BY 4.0.

The brain ventricles are interconnected, elaborate cavities that traverse the brain. They are filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) that is, to a large part, produced by the choroid plexus, a secretory epithelium that reaches into the ventricles. CSF is rich in cytokines, growth factors and extracellular vesicles that glide along the walls of ventricles, powered by bundles of motile cilia that coat the ventricular wall. We review the cellular and biochemical properties of the ventral part of the third ventricle that is surrounded by the hypothalamus. In particular, we consider the recently discovered intricate network of cilia-driven flows that characterize this ventricle and discuss the potential physiological significance of this flow for the directional transport of CSF signals to cellular targets located either within the third ventricle or in the adjacent hypothalamic brain parenchyma. Cilia-driven streams of signalling molecules offer an exciting perspective on how fluid-borne signals are dynamically transmitted in the brain.

This article is part of the Theo Murphy meeting issue ‘Unity and diversity of cilia in locomotion and transport’.


Introduction

Greek physicians already knew about the liquor-filled delicate cavities (the ‘ventricles’) inside the human brain and considered them as the seat of mental capacity, including cognition, memory, awareness and imagination. The physician philosophers thought that the ‘Common’ and the ‘Imaginative’ senses reside in the two large lateral ventricles located mirror-symmetrically in the front of the brain. The bipartite middle ventricle would encompass the ‘Estimative’ and ‘Phantastic’ senses. The last ventricle in the back of the brain would be devoted to the ‘Memorative’ sense. Modern neurobiology places mental functions right into the dense tissue of the brain composed of neurons, nerve fibres and glia cells.

Despite their ‘downgrading’, brain ventricles continue to attract attention, perhaps more now than in the past when physiologists viewed them primarily as toxic waste dumps for metabolites that the brain eliminated. Contemporary neurobiologists view the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-filled ventricles as dynamic reservoirs of signalling substances and nutrients that can reach neurons, glia cells and stem cells. This way of looking at ventricles leads to a host of questions. Which signalling molecules are present in the CSF? How do they interact with the various ependymal and subependymal cell types? How are signals taken up by cells? Which physiological processes does uptake trigger? Are CSF components delivered uniformly to all nearby brain tissues or is substance delivery targeted to a specific location? With regard to the last question, Faubel et al. have identified a cilia-propelled network of CSF streams that run along the walls of the ventricle. These streams may transport factors in CSF to particular ependymal or subependymal tissue regions. It was known that motile cilia propel CSF along the ventricular surface but not that flows form a system of interwoven streams.

The aim of this brief review is to provide background knowledge for selected components of the ventricular system, and information that should be helpful for designing experiments that address some of the above raised questions.


Brain ventricles

The central nervous system of vertebrate animals develops from the neural tube. The wall of the tube consists of neuronal progenitor cells and encloses the CSF-filled ventricle. Through a combination of proliferation, migration and differentiation of the progenitor cells, fore-, mid- and hindbrain form at the front end of the neural tube, while the back end of the neural tube gives rise to the spinal cord. Brain ventricles co-develop with the nervous system so that around the time of birth, four distinct brain ventricles have formed. In the postnatal brain, ventricles are enclosed by the ependyma that consists mostly of E1 cells (ependymal cells, ependymocytes). E1 cells derive from embryonic radial glia cells and carry a characteristic apical bundle of motile cilia that coordinately beat and in this way propel CSF along the ventricular wall.

The shape of the ventricular cavity in brains from different species varies enormously to match the diversity of brain anatomy. Most vertebrates have four ventricles except for teleost fishes, which have three. Ventricles are serially docked and interconnect through interventricular foramina. In rodents, the two crescent-shaped lateral ventricles (lV) are each embedded in one of the forebrain hemispheres and connect, via a pair of interventricular passages, to the third ventricle (3V). The narrow 3V is squeezed in between the left and right halves of the diencephalon. In rodents, 3V is separated into a ventral (v3v) and a dorsal (d3V) part. The ventral part resides between the right and the left halves of the hypothalamus. Posteriorly, 3V connects through the aqueduct to the fourth ventricle (4V) that is surrounded by the mid- and hindbrain tissue. 4V connects to both the central canal of the spinal cord and to the subarachnoid space. The latter surrounds the brain and spinal cord. CSF exits the subarachnoid space through arachnoid granulations and in this way flows into the vascular system. An additional exit path for CSF is the perineural flux across the cribriform plate and from there on to the nasal mucosa.


Choroid plexus, a source of signalling factors and extracellular vesicles

The intensely vascularized structure of the plexus choroïdes or choroid plexus (CP) inside the lateral ventricles of the human brain is shown in the detailed anatomical drawings by Vesalius. This particular CP had already been identified in antiquity as a worm-like structure. There is a CP in each of the four ventricles that continuously produces, in humans, about 500 ml of CSF per day. The continuous production of CSF contributes to a steady ventricular CSF flow. Heartbeat, breathing and body motion also contribute to CSF flow. In rodents, the v3v has narrow entry and exit ducts and the wall-to-wall distance measures only 100–200 µm. Therefore, the major driving force for the flow is likely to be the beating of cilia bundles.

In the brain of lampreys, a primitive vertebrate animal, the CP distributes throughout the ventricles. In mammals, CP is present in each of the four ventricles at specific locations. Histologically, the CP consists of a secretory epithelium that encloses a web of fenestrated blood vessels. CP produces and releases CSF and electrolytes into the ventricles. In addition, CP also provides various micronutrients, hormones, neurotransmitters, neurotrophins, peptide hormones, such as melanin-concentrating hormone, and growth factors that occur in CSF and in some cases are secreted in an age-dependent manner. These agents are either directly synthesized by CP epithelial cells or enter the CP as components of the blood that pass through the fenestrated capillaries. Tight junctions connect the CP epithelial cells that form the blood–CSF barrier. Thus, a passage of substances into the ventricles requires selective trans-epithelial transporters. Such transporters are abundantly expressed in CP epithelial cells. CSF constituents also enter into the ventricular space from the interstitial fluid-containing parenchyma. Lastly, there is release of neuropeptides and neurotransmitters from CSF-contacting neurons or neurons whose axonal terminals contact the CSF. Some of the CSF hormones modulate cilia beating frequency and thus influence CSF flow.

The CSF also contains extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVs are membrane vesicles of a diameter between 30 and 150 nm and are of endocytic origin. Most cell types secrete EVs. EVs contain cellular proteins, small molecules and nucleic acids such as miRNA and non-coding RNAs. EVs are likely to play a role in intercellular communication, in pathogenesis and are a reservoir of biomarkers and may also be in a pathway by which cells pass on unwanted materials. EVs play a role in different stem cell niches such as the mesenchymal stem cell niche, cancer stem cell niche and the pre-metastatic niche. A community compendium for EVs is found in databases such as Vesiclepedia and ExoCarta.

Adult neurogenic stem cell niches in which neurogenesis persists after birth are found in the subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle, in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus and along and beneath the v3v wall. It has been hypothesized that EVs that contain signalling factors required for neuronal development are carried along in the embryonic and adult CSF, thereby reaching stem cell niches. EV-borne components are insulin-like growth factor, folate receptor-α and pro-inflammatory miRNA such as miRNA-146a and miRNA-155. These CP-derived EVs are not only transported by CSF but can also cross the ependymal cell layer and reach brain parenchyma cells. One significant advantage of EV-borne signalling factors is that they can be specifically labelled with fluorescent antibodies directed against EV transmembrane proteins and be traced by live fluorescence microscopy in space and time. Despite much research activity, EV research results are at times ambiguous owing to differences in purification methods, EV heterogeneity, heterogeneous sources and influence of growth conditions on the cargo of EVs. Accordingly, it is of great importance to use reproducible and thorough methods for isolation, purification and characterization of EVs.

In summary, the CP is a rich source of signalling compounds, some of which are dissolved single molecules, while others are packaged into EVs or other types of lipid particles. Because EVs can be labelled with fluorescent antibodies against the extracellular domains of EV transmembrane proteins, and because EVs can be visualized by fluorescence microscopy and nanoscopy, they are a CSF component amenable to the study of cilia-mediated transport in the ventricular system.


Cellular constituents of ependyma

Knowing the biology and biochemistry of the ependymal cells is crucial since these cells form the boundary between CSF and brain parenchyma. Through their apical cilia bundles, they are capable of moving CSF, and they represent the first point of contact between CSF constituents and the brain. The ependyma of the v3v is predominantly made of E1 cells (ependymal cells) that are apically covered with microvilli, but also includes E2 and E3 cells. E2 cells carry apically two (potentially motile) 9 + 2 cilia and are likely to be identical with α-tanycytes. E3 cells are uni- or bi-ciliated and are better known as β-tanycytes. Cilia of E3 cells are thought to be sensory cilia. E3 cells are most abundant in an approximately rectangular patch of ependyma in the posterior most part of the v3v (black area in). E2 cells are also found in this patch and additionally are scattered throughout the posterior-most third of the v3v and in a stripe extending along the ventral aspect of the outflow tract. Like E1 cells, E2 and E3 cells have their apical side directly exposed to CSF. Basally, tanycytes extend one or two long processes that reach deep into the brain parenchyma where they contact several hypothalamic nuclei as well as blood vessels.

The current literature discusses four types of tanycytes, but the tanycyte population may be even more diverse. α1-Tanycytes populate the upper half of the tanycyte patch and their processes project into the dorsomedial and ventromedial hypothalamic nuclei. α2-Tanycytes are located ventral to their α1-siblings and send processes to ventromedial and arcuate hypothalamic nuclei. When exposed to growth factors by intraventricular infusion, α1- and α2-tanycytes will proliferate and, depending on the nature of the infused factor, give rise to neurons, α1- and α2-tanycytes, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Thus, factors delivered to the v3v through CSF are capable of triggering cell proliferation. Ventral to the α2-tanycyte region are β1-tanycytes that send processes to the arcuate nucleus and the median eminence. The CSF-contacting face of the median eminence is made of the apical face of type β2-tanycytes that carry sensory cilia. In juvenile mice, β-tanycytes proliferate and yield astrocytes and neurons targeted to the median eminence. β2-Tanycytes also proliferate to sustain a size expansion of the median eminence typically seen in juvenile animals. β2-Tanycytes extend their basal protrusions towards the plexus of fenestrated blood capillaries that are part of the hypophyseal portal microcirculation. This contact of tanycyte protrusions with the capillaries could allow the transfer of blood-borne substances into the tanycyte and then into the CSF and vice versa. Tanycytes of the E3 type also populate the organum vasculosum of the laminae terminalis (OVLT) located at the anterior wall of the v3v. These tanycytes are in direct contact with v3v through the apical area of the tanycytes that sprouts sensory cilia.

Taken together, the wall of the third ventricle is histologically complex and is made of several cell types. The dominant cells are the ependymocytes that sustain a lifelong complex CSF flow. Tanycytes provide a conduit between ventricular CSF and the brain parenchyma. Tanycytes also form bona fide stem cell niches in the adult brain, and these niches respond to CSF-infused growth factors by proliferation and differentiation.


v3v exhibits complex cilia-driven flows

Does CSF flow through the ventricles like water would flow in a system of interconnected rivers and lakes? This is definitely not the case in the v3v. Explants of the ventricular walls show complex flow patterns that consist of eight distinct streams that are interconnected like roads in a map (a). To generate this flow map, 1 µm diameter fluorescent beads are added in bulk to the medium in which the v3v explants are kept. The movement of beads evoked by beating cilia bundles is captured and a particle tracking software is used to compute individual bead tracks. These tracks are plotted on top of the v3v explant, resulting in a map of continuous, interwoven flows that represent fluid movement across the entire v3v surface. Alternatively, fluid flow can readily be visualized by locally applying fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-dextran (b) or fluorescent liposomes (c) to the ependyma of the explant. Rates of transport of beads and liposomes across the ependyma are in the range of several hundred micrometres per second. Since in the mouse, the v3v is about 2 mm long, moving of CSF from the inflow to the outflow occurs within a few seconds. Either of these methods reveals a complex flow pattern in the v3v that consists of straight flows, bent flows and whirls capable of directional transport and of subdividing the ventricular volume. These flows are entirely regulated by properly oriented cilia bundles. Cilia bundle orientation is genetically determined by planar cell polarity proteins.


Fluid dynamics

CSF flow in the ventricular system of mammalian brains is driven by CSF secretion into the ventricles and by motile cilia beating, and plays an important role in the delivery of CSF components and washout of waste. CSF is not stagnant but pulsating in vivo owing to heart beating, respiration and even head movement. Different approaches have been used to investigate the CSF flow experimentally or numerically (see and the references therein). Non-invasive MRI offers a way to evaluate the flow in vivo but cannot provide detailed flow information owing to its limited spatial resolution, especially for the mouse brain. Particle tracking with microscopy is capable of recording cilia-induced flow networks along the wall in opened ventricles but does not give the volumetric flow.

Alternatively, detailed CSF flow in the 3D ventricles can be investigated with computational fluid dynamics. Previous numerical studies focused on the human brain and investigated the CSF flow in idealized geometry or subject-specific geometry of ventricles reconstructed from medical imaging. In most investigations, the effect of cilia on the flow was not studied. Recently, Siyahhan et al. took into account the effect of the cilia beating pattern in the lateral ventricles of the human brain by applying a force density on the flow and studied the near-wall CSF flow dynamics. However, the cilia or beating directions were assumed to be aligned with the CSF net flow, which may not be true when there is a complex cilia pattern in the ventricles as we detect in our experimental investigation in the mouse (a). Interestingly, the Siyahhan et al. simulations show that flow in the appendix of the human 3V had a very small oscillatory component, suggesting a prominent role of cilia there.

Compared with the human brain ventricles, the two parts (dorsal and ventral) of the 3V of the mouse brain are much more separated. The ventral part is also much narrower than its dorsal counterpart. As a result, most oscillatory CSF net flow will take the dorsal route owing to its smaller resistance and, therefore, the flow in the ventral part will be dominated by cilia beating.


Comparing flow directions in explants with the intrinsic translational polarity of the v3v

Media-immersed v3v explants exhibit a complex flow pattern. What is the evidence that this pattern reflects the CSF flow in vivo? There are two lines of evidence that suggest that flow directions in explants and in the live animal are very similar. First, it was observed that in the lateral ventricle, cilia effective stroke and flow directions, as detected by particle tracking (a), are correlated. In the v3v, flows 3 and 4 are directly opposing each other (a). The corresponding movies of cilia beating in the ependyma underneath flows 3 and 4 show that cilia beat in the opposite direction as well (Movie S4 in). One could still argue that in explants cilia bundles have reoriented relative to their position in the brain. This implies that translational polarity would change upon dissection and/or transfer of the v3v tissue into the culture medium. Immunohistochemical staining of ependymal cells and of cilia bundles in native v3v ependyma allows one to determine translational polarity. shows translational polarity for E1 cells driving flow 3. The arrows represent translational polarity cell-by-cell point in their majority towards the posterior end of the v3v. a shows that flow 3 is also pointed towards the posterior end of the v3v. The example discussed here suggests that there is a good match between flow direction in the explant and translational polarity in the corresponding region in the intact brain.


Outlook

Why is there a ventricle in the hypothalamus and what would be the purpose of a complex directional flow pattern in the v3v? The answer could be that CSF delivers factors to specific hypothalamic nuclei, especially those that are located at or near the basal side of ependyma. Ependymal flow 8 passes above the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which regulates the circadian clock. Flow 6 passes by the arcuate nucleus, which controls various metabolic functions. Tanycytes provide a direct exchange between CSF and neuronal or vascular targets. Flow 6 streams to the tanycyte region, while flow 7 leads away from the tanycytes. In the explant, there is no flow above the tanycytes, but in the closed ventricle in the brain, flows 6 and 7 would provide coordinate transport of CSF solutes to and then away from the tanycyte region.

This view of the ventricular system as a site of targeted flow provides a number of challenges. What are the substances that are being delivered? There are many factors in CSF, and they not only need to be identified but assays for a function in the hypothalamus need to be developed. These functions could relate to metabolism, circadian timing or the control of stem cell growth and differentiation. How can CSF constituents transit from CSF to their subependymal targets? For solutes such as growth factors, there may be specific receptors on E1, E2 or E3 cells. The uptake of EVs may involve endocytosis. Where do signals come from? One likely source is the secretory epithelium of the CP, but it is unclear how signals coming from the lateral ventricles or the d3V are funnelled into the v3v. Could the divergent flows at the inflow act as a sorting device? Do the observed flows change rhythmically and do they change during the lifespan of an animal? That there is directional movement of solutes, signalling molecules and EVs in the fluid phases of the central nervous system (extracellular fluid and CSF) has long been known and has led to the concept of ‘volume transmission’. The case can be made that cilia-driven directional flows are a manifestation of volume transmission in that the ciliary conveyor belts provide the means of transportation.

Protein targeting mechanisms in cells may serve as a useful paradigm for thinking about the ventricular transport. A key insight for understanding protein targeting within cells was the realization that proper sorting and delivery relies on information encoded in the protein itself. In analogy, it is possible that EVs, potential carriers of CSF signals in the ventricular system, expose on their surface protein sequences that are used as a postal code for sorting into specific streams and for proper delivery to the apical face of specific E1, E2 and E3 cells. Addressing all these points experimentally is a daunting task. The reward of such an effort could be the discovery of a cilia motility-based signalling system in an important and ancient part of the brain.


‘Hierarchy’ in the organization of brain networks

Claus C Hilgetag, Alexandros Goulas — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2020. PMC7061955, CC BY 4.0.

Concepts shape the interpretation of facts. One of the most popular concepts in systems neuroscience is that of ‘hierarchy’. However, this concept has been interpreted in many different ways, which are not well aligned. This observation suggests that the concept is ill defined. Using the example of the organization of the primate visual cortical system, we explore several contexts in which ‘hierarchy’ is currently used in the description of brain networks. We distinguish at least four different uses, specifically, ‘hierarchy’ as a topological sequence of projections, as a gradient of features, as a progression of scales, or as a sorting of laminar projection patterns. We discuss the interpretation and functional implications of the different notions of ‘hierarchy’ in these contexts and suggest that more specific terms than ‘hierarchy’ should be used for a deeper understanding of the different dimensions of the organization of brain networks.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Unifying the essential concepts of biological networks: biological insights and philosophical foundations’.

Keywords: visual cortical hierarchy, laminar projection patterns, concerted cortical gradients, spatial temporal scales


Introduction


Background

Hierarchy is one of the most popular terms in current network and systems neuroscience. A combined pubmed (pubmed.gov) search of the keywords ‘hierarchy’ and ‘brain’ and ‘network’ yields more than 2500 references, with strongly increasing frequency over the last 15 years. However, the sense in which ‘hierarchy’ is used in these publications can vary from one paper to the next, or even within the same paper. For example, when addressing ‘…the hierarchical arrangement of cortical sensory areas’, a study may refer to concepts of laminar-specific projections, topological projection sequence, as well as a combination of both. Similarly, descriptions of how ‘hierarchy’ is expressed in the human and non-human primate brain may interchangeably employ different perspectives of ‘hierarchy’, such as distance along the posterior-anterior axis of the brain, ordered variations of neural responses in terms of functional complexity, gradients of cortical thickness, or a progression of laminar projection patterns. These are clearly very different matters, and while many neuroscientists have the intuitive feeling that these notions of ‘hierarchy’ are somehow related, it is impossible to establish whether this is true or not and in which way the different interpretations may be linked without carefully exploring each of the different ‘hierarchy’ concepts in turn. Failure to do so is bound to result in confusion.


The example of the visual cortical hierarchy

Let us consider one traditional notion of ‘hierarchy’ in brain networks in more detail. A classic interpretation of ‘hierarchy’ that represents to many systems neuroscientists a fundamental version of the concept is the primate visual cortical hierarchy (VCH). This concept is enshrined in the wiring diagram of Felleman & Van Essen (a shows an updated version of the diagram). This diagram has been presented at a large number of neuroscience meetings, to impress on the audience the complexity of the wiring of the cerebral cortex, combined with a comforting approach for restoring order. If shown without further explanation, the diagram is frequently misunderstood by a part of the audience which assumes that the areas are arranged according to how many synaptic stages they are removed from direct visual input. Moreover, it is frequently expected that response properties change systematically as one moves to higher-level areas within the scheme. In particular, receptive fields should become larger and the topographic (retinotopic) organization less pronounced, so that neurons at higher levels of the scheme respond to more global and complex image features, such as faces and complex motion features.

In fact, the areas are not arranged by topology, that is, synaptic step distance from the retina (as they are in the diagram by Mesulam shown in a), but according to the laminar origin and termination patterns of projections between them. Projections that originate mostly from supragranular (upper) cortical layers and terminate in the granular layer (layer IV) are classified as ‘forward’, while projections that originate mostly in infragranular (deep) cortical layers and terminate outside the granular layer and particularly in the upper cortical layers are classified as ‘backward’ (c). The classification can be further extended and refined; specifically, by including categories for ‘lateral’ projections (which originate from upper and deep cortical layers in a more equal proportion and terminate in the target areas in a column-like fashion across all layers). In order to build the VCH diagram, areas are arranged in such a way that as many as possible ‘forward’ projections point up, while as many as possible ‘backward’ projections point down. In addition, ‘lateral’ connections link areas at the same level. In fact, many (hundreds of thousands) different schemes can be built that all fulfill these constraints optimally, with a minimum number of (six) constraint violations. Therefore, strictly speaking, there exists not a single VCH, but many different ones that vary substantially by the number of levels and the sequence of areas (a shows an average optimal scheme). Thus, the VCH is fundamentally indeterminate, even though suggestions have been made for constraining the scheme with the help of quantitative laminar projection patterns or by effectively averaging the different schemes. The indeterminacy needs to be taken into account if the VCH diagram is to be interpreted directly as a flowchart of visual signal processing.

It is nonetheless interesting that this sorting of laminar-specific projections can be achieved nearly perfectly, with a very small number of violations, on the direction of the more than 300 projections. In addition, most of these violations may be plausibly resolved. This observation indicates an amazing degree of regularity of the laminar cortical projection data. We return to this subject in § of the present paper. In any case, it is clear that the iconic wiring diagram of Felleman & Van Essen does not represent topological distance from the retina as is often assumed, but the complicated outcome of a sorting process of cortical areas based on the directional classification of inter-areal projections which is, in turn, based on their laminar origin and termination patterns. The functional implications of this high-order scheme are not obvious, even if ignoring the principal indeterminacy of the sorting process.

Given that the scheme differs fundamentally from how it is frequently understood, it should be no surprise that the VCH has not fulfilled a number of functional expectations invested into it, such as the alignment with systematic changes in response features described above. Specifically, it was found that the VCH scheme does not align well with functional properties of the visual system such as stimulus processing latencies, which are much more simultaneous than expected, in particular in the dorsal part of the visual system, or the presumed increasing complexity of functional responses of areas on different levels of the VCH. These findings were summed up by Zeki [p. 243] in the conclusion that ‘… perceptual hierarchy cannot be predicted from the anatomical hierarchy’ (i.e. the VCH), echoing the statement of Silvanto [p. 17] that ‘… anatomical hierarchy does not imply functional hierarchy’.

The apparent failure of the VCH scheme to be helpful for a functional interpretation of cortical connectivity was also pointedly summarized by Hegdé & Felleman [p. 416]

‘…a growing body of evidence, including recent direct experimental comparisons of functional properties at two or more levels of the anatomical hierarchy, indicates that visual processing neither is hierarchical nor parallels the anatomical hierarchy. Recent results also indicate that some of the pathways of visual information flow are not hierarchical, so that the anatomical hierarchy cannot be taken as a strict flowchart of visual information either. Thus, while the sustaining strength of the notion of hierarchical processing may be that it is rather simple, its fatal flaw is that it is overly simplistic’.

This conclusion may be largely owing to a misunderstanding of the kind of ‘hierarchy’ reflected in the VCH. We revisit the VCH and the question of how laminar patterns of projection origins and terminations can give rise to meaningful functional interpretations in § of this paper.


The plan of the present paper

In this review, we explore different senses of ‘hierarchy’, as they are currently employed in systems neuroscience, such as in the meaning of a topological sequence of projections, as sequences or gradients of structural or functional cortical features and finally the interpretation of ‘hierarchy’ as an ordering of scales of connectivity, as in the case of multi-level modular networks. This exploration might help to differentiate the different senses of ‘hierarchy’. We also attempt to sketch out specific functional implications of the different meanings of ‘hierarchy’. In this way, we hope to delineate and clarify the different concepts of ‘hierarchy’ and demonstrate their functional implications and value.


Hierarchy as a topological projection sequence

We start by taking at face value the intuitive interpretation of the VCH as a topological sequence of projections. In this perspective, primate visual cortical areas are ordered by the number of steps by which they can be reached from sensory (specifically, visual) input, taking the shortest path via direct structural connections. Simply, this perspective only considers the direct area-to-area connections, but not their laminar patterns. Directionality in this kind of hierarchy arises from defining a start and end point, such as sensory input or motor output. If primate visual cortical areas are ordered by this sequential connectional topology, rather than by their direction as inferred from laminar patterns, two very different arrangements emerge. Conspicuously, the arrangement by the number of connection steps from the retina results in a much more compressed scheme than the VCH. Intuitively, as the scheme takes into account the number of processing steps, it should correlate more closely with functional properties of the visual system, such as onset latencies, than the VCH. Indeed, computational modelling by populations of integrate-and-fire neurons has demonstrated that empirical onset latencies in the primate visual system can be reproduced nearly perfectly on the basis of the connectional topology of the cortical network, without attributing special roles to ‘forward’ and ‘backward’ projections. Remaining discrepancies may point to additional direct projections from the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus to extrastriate cortical areas such as V4, as suggested by computational simulations or implied by the observation of a parallel, near-simultaneous distribution of input signals in the visual system of other species such as the cat. Thus, while the arrangement of the VCH does not help to predict stimulus processing latencies, the topological scheme does. It also appears to align better than the VCH with features such as the complexity of visual representations in different cortical areas, for instance, V2 and V4, which are more similar in their response properties than expected based on the clear separation of these areas in the VCH. More generally, a topological sequence of converging projections provides a simple model for the increasing receptive field size as well as complexity of visual representations at subsequent processing stages.

Generalizing the concept of a topological sequence of connections, we wondered how one could decide more formally if brain networks, such as the primate visual cortical network, are organized more sequentially than other comparison networks of the same size. The notion of a sequential organization of brain networks is potentially rooted in the image of the sensory-motor arc, the intuitive incremental processing sequence of sensory inputs eventually resulting in motor actions. However, several known aspects of brain network organization also appear incompatible with a clearly sequential arrangement. First, nodes in brain networks are very widely connected, ruling out a strict serial and sequential chain of signalling in which each node only possesses two connections (i.e. input and output). Moreover, these connections are not just formed with next (spatial or topological) neighbours. Second, shortest paths across brain networks are known to be quite short also indicating the presence of shortcuts across networks, which increase the diversity of processing and reduce the sequential organization.

To assess formally the degree to which brain networks are arranged sequentially, that is, are arranged serially as contrasted to a connectional organization that is parallel or all-to-all, we defined an objective function describing sequential network organization. Basically, a perfect connectional sequence would be an arrangement of nodes A, B, C and D, where A connects to B, B to C, C to D and so on. Naturally, in dense networks, the nodes may also have further connections across the network, so the challenge is to identify the layout that best reflects the serial organization of projections, where the total distance spanned by the projections between connected nodes is minimal. For the formal analysis, the connections need to be embedded in some layout, for instance, simply along a one-dimensional axis. Then the nodes are rearranged until the cost is minimal, which can be achieved through an optimization approach. The minimal cost of the sequential layout of the actual data should also be compared to the layout cost for a network of the same size and density, but different topology, in order to place the organization of the networks on a relative scale.

An arrangement of this kind for a one-dimensional circular layout is shown in a, as well as for a one-dimensional linear layout in b. The sequential cost of the arrangement of the primate visual cortical network is higher than that of the strictly sequential benchmark networks, but lower than that of other comparison networks, such as randomized or most distributed networks with the same number of nodes and edges. This finding means that visual cortical projections in the primate indeed possess a semi-sequential organization, even if they are not arranged in a strictly sequential way. The sequential arrangement (b) largely resembles the intuitively assumed sequence of the processing of sensory signals in the primate visual system, from primary and adjacent extrastriate areas on the left to dorsal stream and ventral stream areas towards the right. (This interpretation ignores outliers with few documented connections, such as areas VOT and V4t, which are moved to the periphery of the arrangement owing to the sequence optimization process.) The approach demonstrates that presumed aspects of the sequential organization of brain networks can be confirmed and clarified through formal topological analysis. Given the example of the visual system above, the generalization of the topological analysis of projections should also be suitable for explaining signal processing latencies across other networks. More generally, this perspective may be helpful for assessing the communication between and among brain regions, and help to identify major paths for communication as well as vulnerabilities and bottlenecks of the sequential organization of connections. A detailed exploration of this concept should be the subject of a separate study.


Hierarchy as a gradient of features

Another, frequently employed sense of hierarchy is that of a gradient of structural or functional features, that is, an orderly spatial progression of parameters which are changing systematically across the cortical sheet. An example is shown in a, where different macroscopic structural features, such as neuron density, and microscopic features, such as characterizations of layer 3 pyramidal neurons in terms of their size and spine parameters, are shown in the same cortical flat map (adapted from Markov et al.). The figure confirms what has been known for a long time, that features such as cortical thickness or the neuron density of cortical areas are not distributed uniformly or randomly across the cortical sheet, but are found in systematic variations along spatially organized gradients.

In particular, classic neuroanatomical studies by von Economo and Koskinas demonstrated that cortical areas can be categorized into distinct, ordinal cytoarchitectonic types. Moreover, the cytoarchitectonic and myeloarchitectonic inhomogeneity that is observed in the cerebral cortex forms spatially ordered changes, that is, gradients. Generally, such observations suggest that the cerebral cortex is characterized by the so-called gradation principle (Gradationsprinzip). While these spatially ordered changes of cortical features are also frequently called ‘hierarchies’, in the present context the term specifically denotes a succession of spatially ordered changes of a feature, such as cell or spine density or the extension of area-intrinsic projections. Importantly, recent observations, conjointly with classic studies, indicate that the spatially ordered changes of cortical features are concerted; that is, changes in multiple features, for instance, myeloarchitecture, cell density, spine density, and intrinsic connectivity, occur simultaneously along the same axis across the cortex. For instance, in the case of the structural features displayed in a, overall neuron density of primate cortical areas is anti-correlated with microscopic cellular features, such as the soma cross section of layer III pyramidal cells as well as their spine density and spine count.

It has also been suggested that such architectonic gradients shape basic features of area-to-area cortical connectivity. In particular, in her ‘structural model of connections’, Barbas proposed that laminar terminations and origin patterns of prefrontal cortex are directly linked to the relative differences in the laminar differentiation and organization of cortical areas. Indeed, recent work on cat and monkey cortex indicates that cytoarchitecture-based predictive models of laminar origin of connections consistently outperform other predictive models based on features, such as rostro-caudal distance. Thus, cytoarchitectonic gradients of the cortex, as fundamentally characterized by neuron density, constitute the central axis around which shifts of the laminar origin of connections manifest. Thus, hierarchies based on the laminar origin of connections and hierarchies in the sense of spatially ordered features of cortical organization naturally align (cf. §).

In summary, a plethora of findings from classic and more recent studies imply that variations of cortical features on multiple levels of cortical organization, such as the genetic, cytological and connectional level, manifest as concerted changes along spatial axes. Such concerted changes are aligned along a common spatial dimension spanning from less to more differentiated parts of the cortex, on average corresponding to a gradient from ‘limbic’ (agranular and dysgranular) cortices to primary, eulaminate cortices (e.g. primary visual cortex); thus, defining a natural axis of variation of cortical organization.

Evidently, the systematic variations of cortical structure and function have ramifications for function. For instance, spine density gradients entail different levels of excitability of the neuronal populations. Indeed, a computational model embodying such density heterogeneity reveals different receptive time windows that correspond to the natural axis of the primate cerebral cortex in line with empirical evidence. In addition, the natural axis of the concerted changes across the cortex entails a sensory to transmodal functional gradient, as classic organizational schemes and more recent observations indicate. Thus, instead of using ‘hierarchy’ to denote the spatially ordered, concerted variation of cortical features, a more neurobiologically concrete term, rooted in a large body of classic and recent studies in different mammalian species, would be a natural gradient or fundamental axis of the cerebral cortex.


Hierarchy as a progression of scales

A further interpretation of ‘hierarchy’—which may be more prevalent in the context of network science—is that of a progression of features by different scales, not just an orderly sequence or gradient of features as discussed in the preceding sections. In the context of brain networks, where ‘nodes’ abstractly represent neural elements ranging from neurons to whole cortical areas or subcortical nuclei and ‘edges’ represent the structural or functional interactions of these elements, such scaling means that smaller network units are contained or encapsulated within larger ones. Several other features may scale in association with this encapsulation of network elements, such as spatial scales or time scales, or a variety of concrete functional features. A straightforward example for such a hierarchical scaling of brain connectivity is a hierarchical modular network (HMN), which is organized in terms of modules of modules of modules.

Indeed, it is an intuitive and popular idea that the brain, and in particular the cerebral cortex, is organized into modular networks across many scales, from cellular circuits, cortical columns via nuclei or cortical areas to large-scale units such as the entire visual or sensory-motor cortex. At each level, nodes are more densely wired within than between the modules. While empirical data confirm this modular organization at some scales, for instance, for mesoscopic cortical connections, the detailed organization of brain networks across all scales is not yet experimentally accessible. Because of the popularity of the concept of hierarchical modular networks, some of its implications are sketched out below.

Concentration of connections within modules allows locally sustained activity, while at the same time preventing global over-excitation of the networks, owing to the low density of inter-modular connections. More generally, hierarchical modularity may be a natural way to balance network segregation and integration. An influential concept in network neuroscience has been that an optimal balance between these aspects reflects the complexity of network organization, maximizing the richness—measured by the entropy—of potential functional interactions. The hierarchical, multi-scale organization combines connectional sparsity at the global network level with network integration through connectivity that scales naturally from the local to the global level. Computational studies demonstrate that, both, increasing the number of modules or hierarchical levels increases the stability of self-sustained network activity.

At the heart of this observation may be the increased length of cycles by which neuronal nodes in hierarchical modular networks connect back onto themselves. It is apparent that increased network sparsity of large and structured HMNs leads to a general lengthening of cycles. While the average cycle length of dense and small unstructured networks is short, sparser and larger networks display an admixture of long cycles that increases the average cycle length of the network. Simulations with excitable networks demonstrate that activity tends to die out quickly in small and dense networks, as nodes cannot recover their excitability before the next wave of activity arrives. By contrast, networks with a longer average cycle length, which may outlast inhibitory and refractory periods of the nodes and give them time to recover, might be better able to sustain activity patterns. Thus, long cycles in hierarchical modular networks can serve as dynamic reservoirs of neural activity. Computational models also show that structured neural networks such as hierarchical modular networks that combine short with long cycles possess a richer dynamic repertoire combining high and low processing frequencies, associated with short, intra-modular cycles and long, global cycles, respectively.

More generally, network segregation and the emergence of long cycles owing to the increase of brain network size may also be relevant for criticality, a key aspect of functional brain dynamics. Criticality, the positioning of a dynamical system at the boundary between order and irregular chaotic dynamic behaviour (or disorder) has for a long time been considered an advantageous configuration of biological systems. Critical points are linked to high adaptability, because small changes in an external control parameter can trigger large rearrangements in the internal system state. There is experimental evidence for such phenomena in the brain and, intuitively, the normal working brain should be near the critical transition, because it operates between the extremes of complete order, in a silent brain, and the complete disorder of wildly propagating, unstructured activity. Criticality in the brain is particularly intriguing, because it can enhance the information-processing capabilities of neuronal networks and optimize the dynamic range as well as the input sensitivity of brain networks. However, the apparent operation of the brain in a critical regime is also puzzling, because critical points can typically only be attained through careful fine-tuning or by feedback mechanisms that allow the system to self-stabilize at the critical point. The sparsity of the human brain network with its long cycles suggests an alternative way for generating an extended parameter range of critical behaviour via regional mixtures of sub- and supercritical behaviours, a phenomenon known as Griffiths phases. Signatures of Griffiths phases were found in synthetic hierarchical modular networks as well as examples of neural networks, including the macro-connectome of the human brain inferred from diffusion imaging.

In summary, the interpretation of ‘hierarchy’ as a scaling of structural and functional properties of the brain appears as a very powerful and general concept that needs to be more fully explored. Several further aspects of the brain show hierarchical scaling, such as the spatial encapsulation of smaller neural elements (e.g. ion channels, spines) in larger ones (i.e. neurons), the hierarchy of time scales and rhythms of the brain as well as the level of access or control of brain networks (local versus global access, cf.). Finally, such a scaling may also concern the representational level, that is, the chosen ‘aperture’ (scope or focus) of empirical investigations or the complexity of models of neural properties, as in the gradual transition from detailed biophysical models to more abstract representations of neural properties in neural point models or neural masses.


Hierarchy as a sorting of laminar projection patterns

Let us return to the initial example of the VCH (§). It turns out that the progression of amazingly regular projection patterns of visual cortical areas in the primate brain (a) can be related to the interpretation of ‘hierarchy’ as a gradient of structural features, as discussed above (§). In particular, laminar projection patterns may be explained from the close relationship between the relative architectonic type of projection source and target and the laminar projection origins and terminations. As there are systematic, graded variations of laminar architecture across the cortical sheet, the projection patterns also vary systematically along the structural gradients. In this perspective, the cortical architectonic gradients determine the laminar patterns, which in turn specify the VCH. It is, therefore, no surprise that gradients of cortical types and sortings of laminar patterns appear highly similar, but anti-correlated (high-type areas are sources of mostly ‘forward’ projections, which places them at the origin of laminar hierarchies, whereas low-type areas are sources of mostly ‘backward’ projections which puts them at the end point of laminar hierarchies; b). The difference is that cortical types are well-defined biological entities with a direct structural and functional interpretation (in terms of neuron density, spine count, branching of intrinsic connections, neurotransmitter receptor profiles, excitability, and so on), whereas the levels of the VCH are constructs derived indirectly from an (indeterminate) sorting process with no such clear interpretation. The VCH can, therefore, be considered as an epiphenomenon of the gradients of cortical structure. This conclusion does not contradict the fact that the VCH may be correlated with structural or functional features such as excitability of cortical areas; however, a explanation for these features should not be sought in the VCH, but the underlying structural gradients of the cortex. For instance, excitability may be explained more fundamentally by variations of neuronal density versus synaptic density. More generally, as the basic presence or absence of connections is also linked to the architectonic similarity of primate cortical areas, there exists a natural relationship between the architectonic gradients of the cortex described in § and the sequential organization of cortical connections outlined in § above.

To wrap up, while the restating of the traditional picture of the VCH in terms of cyto-architectonic gradients may be a challenging change of perspective, a clearer focus on the underlying factors of this arrangement will be helpful for a deeper, biologically meaningful understanding of projection patterns in the context of cortical architecture.


Conclusion

While the term ‘hierarchy’ is frequently invoked in systems and network neuroscience, it can stand for very different concepts, ranging from the sorting of connections by their laminar projection patterns to the scaling of diverse connectional and functional features. Such a diversity of uses of the term is perfectly acceptable, of course, as long as the intended meaning of ‘hierarchy’ in the context of a particular concept is made clear. Otherwise the use of the term ‘hierarchy’ becomes meaningless or, worse, misleading.

In the present review, we revisited aspects of ‘hierarchy’ that more concretely relate to repeated patterns of laminar projection origins and terminations, the sequential topology of projections, gradients of structural and functional features across the cortex, as well as the scaling and encapsulation of features of the connectional topology. As particularly demonstrated for the example of the non-human primate cortical visual system, these diverse ‘hierarchy’ concepts lead to different interpretations of the empirical data, with diverging functional implications. Whereas the interpretation of ‘hierarchy’ as a sequential progression of projections in the primate cortex may help to explain latencies and increasing complexity of representations, the interpretation as cortical gradients may be helpful for explaining excitability and time scales of processing, whereas the interpretation as a scaling of features may help to explain self-sustained activity and critical phase transitions. Consequently, the use of more concrete terms that are tailored to the specific contexts should help to disambiguate the polysemy and ambiguity of the use of the term ‘hierarchy’ and bring us closer to the core organizational principles of the cerebral cortex.

Here, we focused on four different uses, and thus, meanings of the term ‘hierarchy’. This list should not be considered exhaustive. In fact, we expect that further uses and meanings of the term can be discerned from the neuroscience literature. For instance, some studies and models treat hierarchy in terms of control between different brain structures. Specifically, it was postulated that the prefrontal cortex is organized in a hierarchical manner, with the frontal most part positioned at the top of this hierarchy. In this interpretation, the top of the hierarchy is adequately equipped at the connectional level to exert strong influence on other regions, owing to the larger number of outgoing connections to the remainder of prefrontal areas. Thus, on a connectional basis, another potential use and meaning of the term ‘hierarchy’ can be employed, in terms of hierarchy as control or dominance. Importantly, such a definition can also be formalized in graph theory terms and be subsequently examined in empirical and synthetic neuronal networks. In summary, further meanings of the term ‘hierarchy’ may expand and enrich the existing list and we hope that this endeavour will further enhance the conceptual clarity that is needed for proper dissemination of ideas, results, models and theories among neuroscientists.

While we have emphasized the context-specific interpretations of the different aspects of ‘hierarchy’, there also exist multiple relations between them. This fact was most clearly demonstrated by the close relationship between gradients of cortical types and the progression of laminar projection patterns, as expressed in the architectonic type principle (§). Ultimately, all the different aspects of ‘hierarchy’ are integrated through the embedding of connections in the spatial and topological architecture of the brain, where they underlie multiple interwoven structural and functional features that give rise to the intricate activity patterns and functions of the nervous system.


Data accessibility

This article has no additional data.


Authors' contributions

Both authors wrote and revised the paper.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

This article has no additional data.


Revealing the information contents of memory within the stimulus information representation framework

Philippe G Schyns, Jiayu Zhan, Rachael E Jack, Robin A A Ince — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2020. PMC7209912, CC BY 4.0.

The information contents of memory are the cornerstone of the most influential models in cognition. To illustrate, consider that in predictive coding, a prediction implies that specific information is propagated down from memory through the visual hierarchy. Likewise, recognizing the input implies that sequentially accrued sensory evidence is successfully matched with memorized information (categorical knowledge). Although the existing models of prediction, memory, sensory representation and categorical decision are all implicitly cast within an information processing framework, it remains a challenge to precisely specify what this information is, and therefore where, when and how the architecture of the brain dynamically processes it to produce behaviour. Here, we review a framework that addresses these challenges for the studies of perception and categorization–stimulus information representation (SIR). We illustrate how SIR can reverse engineer the information contents of memory from behavioural and brain measures in the context of specific cognitive tasks that involve memory. We discuss two specific lessons from this approach that generally apply to memory studies: the importance of task, to constrain what the brain does, and of stimulus variations, to identify the specific information contents that are memorized, predicted, recalled and replayed.

This article is part of the Theo Murphy meeting issue ‘Memory reactivation: replaying events past, present and future’.

Keywords: memory, information processing, categorization, modelling


Introduction

The machinery that performs visual cognition has an extraordinary range of capabilities that is supported by the most powerful of sensory systems. Starting with the high-dimensional retinal input that comprises 150 M rods and cones, a large proportion of the cortex (30% to 60%) is then dedicated to accomplishing the feats of visual cognition. Among these is the ability to flexibly reduce the high-dimensional, highly variable input to flexibly categorize it to produce adaptive behaviours. To illustrate, consider the street scene shown on the left-hand side of. The brain can perform numerous categorization tasks on this image: it can identify the country, city and street; the houses and shops; the moving and stationary cars, their makes and models, age and condition; the people shopping or those just passing by, as well as their gait, identity, emotion and social interactions; it can also infer the weather, time of day, season and so on. These are only very few of many categorizations that our brains perform apparently continuously and effortlessly.

To accomplish this feat, current models in the cognitive sciences assume that the categorization processes performed by the brain use memory representations, both to predict the incoming stimulus (e.g. a street, the type of a car or the emotion of a face) and also to categorize it (e.g. as ‘Byres Road’, ‘new Beetle’, ‘face’ or ‘happy’). In these processes, the information contents stored in memory play a critical role in transforming the stimulus information that projects on the high-dimensional retina into categorization behaviour. However, it is notoriously difficult to understand what these memorized contents are, specifically. And without these contents, it is impossible to develop and test the information processing models of brain activity, the stumbling block of the neuroimaging agenda.

To bridge the interpretation gap, we developed the stimulus information representation (SIR) framework. Specifically, we show that SIR can characterize the stimulus information contents stored in memory that are used to flexibly categorize incoming stimuli, and in turn to reveal where, when and how these contents are represented and processed in the brain. SIR comprises three critical elements that enable this interpretative step change: (i) rich stimulus variations with precise control, (ii) an explicit control of behaviour via specific cognitive tasks and (iii) a new analytical methodology that better decomposes brain activity (e.g. into that which represents task-relevant, versus task-irrelevant features). Though our applications of SIR are drawn from vision, the approach, which is based on the framework of psychophysics, is straightforwardly generalizable to any sensory modality.

Analyses of visual categorization processes with SIR provide a useful test bed to discuss the reactivation of neural activity that represents specific information during memory recall. For example, car experts would memorize the characteristic shape of the ‘new Beetle’ in. More casual observers could instead memorize general information about the car, leading to the same car being represented with different features in memory. Consequently, experts and novices could generally recall or replay different features about the same pictures. The key points here are first that observers can only predict or reactivate the information contents that they have memorized about a stimulus category and second that we can generally expect these contents to vary to some degree across observers owing to relative category expertise. Hence, if we aim to understand the mechanisms that use memorized information contents (e.g. for categorization, as we will illustrate, but also for prediction and reactivation, as we will discuss), a useful starting point is to characterize what these contents are, to be able to trace their specific reactivation into brain activity, and thereby bridge the interpretation gap.


The stimulus information representation framework

The SIR framework starts with a critical constraint––a cognitive task––to limit what the brain is doing when we come to analyse its activity. As illustrated earlier in, a single stimulus can in principle recruit as many brain representations and processes as there are possible categorizations. However, typical brain-imaging studies of visual categorization are designed as if the stimulus (or a category of stimuli, e.g. face, car or city) on its own is sufficient to generate and therefore control specific representations and processes of the brain. However, as illustrated, to achieve this necessary level of control, we must constrain the explicit cognitive task that the brain performs on the stimulus. Next, having circumscribed a task, we then need to characterize the specific stimulus information that supports this categorization in memory. Otherwise, we will not know what information the brain has used to make different categorizations such as ‘Byres road’, or ‘New Beetle’, ‘Face’ or ‘Happy’, from the same stimulus.

Such task-relevant information processing is a generic, but often neglected, theoretical point that applies both to the interpretation of any sensory categorization in the brain and to its models. In the case of studies of memory, the tasks performed on a stimulus, or a stimulus category, even implicitly, impact the stimulus features that are memorized, particularly so when the input is high dimensional (as in). In such situations, only partial, task-dependent stimulus representations are learned, and so when this stimulus is recalled, the current categorization task is likely to influence the stimulus features that will be recalled.

The SIR framework has been used to address such task-relevant information processing questions because it can isolate the specific stimulus information that drives variations in the brain activity that in turn generate variations in behavioural responses in a circumscribed task. For example, a typical design in the sciences of cognition involves multiple repeated trials of a specific task. SIR considers the three-way interactions between concurrent trial-by-trial variations of the three main components of such an experiment: stimulus variation, brain activity and behavioural responses. We will now detail each component and the procedure using concrete examples from vision science.


Stimulus variation

As we will illustrate with concrete examples, stimulus variation is crucial to explore, in a data-driven manner, a richer palette of brain and behavioural responses, as illustrated in. Stimulus variation can take different forms: it can consist of images generated by the random selection of pixels, or by sampling from the generative models of complex stimuli. Such stimuli (as described in more detail below with images) are then presented to participants, who are asked to categorize them. So, in this first step, we randomly sample the variables that control stimulus information on each trial (as represented by the blue set in).


Behavioural measures

The second component of SIR consists of measuring behavioural variables in the performance of a categorization task such as response accuracy, reaction time or confidence ratings, on individual experimental trials (as represented by the green set in). Critically, when participants perform a categorization task on randomly generated stimuli, their behavioural responses can be used to disentangle what stimulus variables are relevant to that categorization task from those that are not. In this way, the participants' behavioural responses can reveal in a data-driven manner what information the participant (and therefore their brain) selectively uses to categorize information as ‘Byres road’, or ‘New Beetle’, ‘Face’ or ‘Happy’. Simply stated, we know the what of the information processing task.


Brain measures

Next, to understand where, when and how the brain processes the what (i.e. the task-relevant variables), we also measure its activity while participants perform the categorization task using various brain-imaging techniques, such as electroencephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalogram (MEG), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), electrocorticography (ECoG) or single-cell recordings. The red-shaded set in represents variables in brain activity recorded during a task, as recorded by different sensors, at different sources or time points, or three-dimensional voxels of bold activity, or representing different neuron firing rates.

Together, the three components of SIR test how randomly sampled stimulus information influences brain activity and behaviour during a particular categorization task. In addition, the three-way interactions among these three components, as denoted by 〈stimulus information; brain; behaviour〉, are represented as the four-colour-coded set of intersections shown in (that is, the blue, green and red sets of the Venn-like diagram, and the white, light blue, magenta and yellow areas where they intersect). With these three-way interactions, we can then model the information contents of the brain with unmatched interpretative precision, as we illustrate in the following sections.


Applying stimulus information representation to model and understand task-relevant information

Here, we illustrate how SIR brings these components together to model, using reverse engineering, the processing of stimulus information in the brain while it is performing a categorization task. We first show the two-way interactions before extending to the three-way interactions. In the first three examples, we reverse engineer the information contents of the face memory of individual participants (i.e. the what) from the two-way interactions between stimulus variation and three different face categorization tasks (i.e. face detection, face identity and facial expressions of emotion across cultures). In the final example, we use the three-way interactions (as represented by the white triple set intersection) to reverse engineer where, when and how the brain dynamically processes task-relevant (and task-irrelevant) information in a perceptual decision task. We now review these components of the SIR framework in turn.


Face detection

Suppose we instruct each participant that they will see white noise images (a) and that half of them comprise a face well hidden in the noise (or, in another experiment, the letter ‘S’ hidden in noise). The trick here is that there is never a face (nor a letter) in the noise stimuli; participants are only presented with white noise. To resolve the task, each participant will use memorized information to predict what a face (or letter) should look like and then match this prediction with the incoming input—i.e. pixel noise presented on each trial.

A small positive correlation between the prediction from memory and the noise drives the observer to respond ‘face’ (or ‘S’), even when the input is only white noise. We can reverse engineer the memory prediction that guides such decisions by correlating each individual pixel (which is either black or white on each trial) with the corresponding detection response of the participant (i.e. ‘face’ versus ‘noise’ on each trial, or ‘S’ versus ‘noise’ in the other experiment). The resulting classification image (a) models the information contents of the memory prediction for a face (or ‘S’ letter) in each participant. In SIR, the classification image is the light blue intersection that comprises the randomly sampled pixel variables (in the blue set) that are relevant for task behaviour (in the green set).

A foundational justification for sampling white noise to reverse engineer the information contents of memory is based on the Volterra and Wiener system identification in engineering. It states that we can identify a complex system from a linear sum of subsystems Fi by estimating the kernels fi of each subsystem Fi, where the kernels are the orders of representation of information in memory. For example, the light blue intersection in a is the first-order (i.e. pixel-by-pixel, univariate) kernel f1 captured by computing the relationship 〈white noise pixel; detection behaviour〉. Higher-order kernels can be added to this first-order memory estimate, by computing 〈white noise pixeln; detection behaviour〉, for each order n of nonlinear relation between the sampled pixels—i.e. the f2 kernel of pairwise pixel relations, the f3 kernel of triplewise relations and generally the fn kernel of n-wise pixel relations. This approach has fruitfully modelled the way neurons process specific, low-dimensional sensory attributes in visual, auditory, memory and somatosensory systems, see for a review.

A key advantage of such white noise sampling is the few assumptions that it makes about the structure of information in memory, letting instead a data-driven computation based on behavioural responses to discover this structure as the fi kernels of the Volterra–Wiener expansion. However, this approach is impractical with images of realistic faces, objects and scenes, where each individual pixel becomes a first-order parameter to estimate, together with the many orders of interactions between individual pixels that make up natural image features. Furthermore, natural image features form densely correlated clusters of pixels, whose occurrence will be extremely rare if each image pixel is independently and randomly sampled. Thus, the finite time of a human experiment will make it practically near impossible to estimate the memorized representations of natural image features using white noise pixel stimuli. To address these shortcomings, a fruitful approach is to hypothesize that memorized information is structured and then embed the structuring hypotheses as the explicit dimensions of a generative model of the stimulus. The next examples apply this generative approach in two different tasks.


Face identity

Here, the task is to identify a familiar face from memory. What stimulus information should we randomly generate to reverse engineer the memorized information that guides this task? As discussed, a starting point is to hypothesize, and then model, the information structure of real-world human faces. We note that human faces are statistically smooth, textured surfaces that systematically vary according to their age, sex, ethnicity and, of course, identity. A good model would therefore isolate the information that uniquely identifies a face from that which is shared across faces to represent their age, sex and ethnicity. We formalized these constraints within a linear model that separates the identity component of a face (e.g. ‘Mary’) from the component that represents their shared age, sex and ethnicity as a local average (e.g. the average of all 36-year-old Western white females).

Equipped with this explicit model, we come back to the original question of the identity noise that we should generate to reverse engineer the contents of familiar face memory. Suppose that the target face is ‘Mary’, a 36-year-old Western white female well known to her colleagues. To generate identity noise, we use the two-component model just discussed, and within it set the local average to represent all 36-year-old Western white females. We add to this shared average a randomly generated component of identity as illustrated with the six random identities in b. Critically, these faces share the same local average age, sex and ethnicity as ‘Mary’ and only differ in identity. On each trial, we then ask the participant to select the face (among the six presented) most similar to ‘Mary’ and to rate this similarity on a 1–6 scale from ‘not at all similar’ to ‘very similar’. Following the experiment, we compute for each participant the light blue intersection 〈identity noise; similarity to ‘Mary’〉 for each multivariate component that controls the shape identity noise (and texture identity noise, not shown). The result models the memory contents of a familiar face.

For each participant, we can then compare these memory contents with the ground truth—i.e. the objective identity information of the familiar face. To illustrate, grey faces on the x-axis of b show the ground truth identity that defines ‘Mary’ (and ‘Peter’) as Inward and Outward three-dimensional shape deviations in relation to the shared local average. For example, Mary's nose is objectively thinner than average and so these vertices deviate inward (darker grey tones indicate increasing deviations). Likewise, her more pouty mouth is shown as an outward three-dimensional shape deviation. The y-axis of a uses the same format to show the memory contents for ‘Mary’ in one typical participant, where colours indicate increasing deviations. These contents reveal faithful representations of, for example, a thinner nose and a pouty mouth. The scatter plot visualizes the vertex by vertex fit between the memory representation (y-axis) and the ground truth three-dimensional face (x-axis). The white diagonal line provides a veridical reference, where the identity component in the memory representation is identical to the ground truth face, for every single three-dimensional vertex.

There is an important difference between the white noise used in the face detection example and the component identity noise used here. Whereas the white noise was pixel-by-pixel (i.e. 32 × 43 = 1376 univariate parameters), making few assumptions about the structure of memory representations, the multivariate identity noise (with 355 components of shape and 355 components of textures = 710 parameters) is derived from a generative model of real face information that is laden with explicit hypotheses (i.e. linearity and independence of identity from the age, sex and ethnicity factors). Of course, both types of noise enabled the reverse engineering of task-relevant memory contents, at the level of individual participants and with greater precision and fewer parameters (and therefore trials to estimate them) with the multivariate identity noise. However, a sceptic would correctly point out that these more precise reconstructions are essentially model bound and that we are compromising the open-endedness of a data-driven approach with each structural hypothesis—i.e. we can only reconstruct the memory information in relation to the structural hypotheses explicitly formulated in the generative model. This is indeed an important point that requires careful consideration.


Facial expressions of emotion

In this third example, we turn to the dynamic memory information that guides the categorization of facial expressions of the six classic emotions (i.e. ‘happy’, ‘surprise’, ‘fear’, ‘anger’, ‘disgust’ and ‘sad’) in two cultures (i.e. white and East Asian). Here, we will again sample a multivariate noise to reverse engineer the contents of facial expression memory. However, as real-world facial expressions involve specific facial movements called action units (AUs), we incorporate AUs and their dynamic parameters as structural hypotheses of a generative model of random AU movements, as illustrated in. On each experimental trial, Western Caucasian (WC) and East Asian (EA) participants viewed a 1.25 s facial animation that randomly sampled and combined a subset of multivariate AUs from a core set of 42 AUs. For example, in, three AUs are selected: outer brow raiser (AU2) colour-coded in green, lip corner puller (AU12) in blue and lips part (AU25) in red. Each is activated with a random movement (see colour-coded temporal activation curves for each AU; temporal parameters are labelled in the green curve).

Participants viewed the facial animation, classified it according to one of the six emotions and rated its intensity on a 6-point scale (from ‘very weak’ to ‘very strong’). If the facial animation did not correspond to any of these emotions, participants selected ‘other.’ After many such trials, we reverse engineered the memorized information for each facial expression by building the light blue statistical relationship 〈AUs; expression category〉 between the dynamic AUs presented on each trial (the blue set of stimulus variables in the blue set) and the participant's corresponding responses (e.g. ‘happy’, the green set of response variables). The memory models revealed a culture-specific representation of the temporal dynamics of emotional intensity. Specifically, whereas EA participants represent emotional intensity primarily with early movements of the eyes, WC participants represent emotional intensity primarily with the mouth (see electronic supplementary material, Video S1). This divergence is mirrored in the emoticons of popular culture, where ‘happy’ is represented with ‘^ ^’ in the EA culture and with ‘:)’ in the WC culture.


Applying stimulus information representation to model and understand task information processing in the brain

So far, the examples have focused on reverse engineering task-relevant information, the light blue, two-way interaction of the SIR framework (represented as the light blue intersection between the blue set of pixel samples and the green set of corresponding behavioural responses). Such task-relevant features, represented as univariate features or multivariate shape of expressive components, are pivotal for understanding information processing in the brain because they represent the stimulus features that the brain must process to accomplish the behavioural task in question. In other words, task-relevant features are the needles of information that we should search for in the haystack of brain activity. To find these features, we now intersect the third component of SIR––in this last example, MEG signals, recorded on each trial in response to random stimulus samples that are behaviourally categorized. We can now explore the richer three-way interactions between stimulus variation, brain measures and behaviour (as 〈stimulus variation; brain; behaviour〉).

The following illustrates how this triple intersection produces the coloured intersections of SIR that can be used to disentangle brain activity into the processing of task-relevant stimulus information, the processing of task-irrelevant stimulus information and other brain processes, to enrich the interpretation of brain-imaging data. illustrates the task, where each participant saw an ambiguous image (stimulus) that can be perceived as being either ‘the nuns’, or ‘Voltaire’ (squint to see the latter). In this task, the green set consists of the participants' response variable across trials, which can either be ‘the nuns,’ or ‘Voltaire,’ or ‘don't know.’ As before, to understand the task-relevant information for each of these responses, we systematically and randomly sampled the image to reveal different pixels to a participant on each trial. The blue set shown in thus includes each image pixel as a distinct stimulus variable (with ‘on’ or ‘off’ values), based on random sampling across trials.

Using the blue set of randomly sampled image pixels and the green set of corresponding behavioural responses, we then infer the task-relevant stimulus features for each perception by computing 〈pixel; behavioural decision〉, using (mass-bivariate) pairwise relationships. This computation disentangles all image pixels into those that are relevant for task behaviour (i.e. for participants to categorize an image as being ‘the nuns’ or ‘Voltaire’, as represented by the light blue intersection shown in) from those that are not (which are encompassed in the remainder of the blue set), just as before.

To find where, when and how the brain processes these light blue, task-relevant pixels we intersect the third component of SIR: MEG signals, which were recorded during the task. We then compute the overlapping co-representation of the stimulus features into the behaviour and brain measures (as 〈pixel; MEG; decision〉). The outcome of this computation identifies the light blue task-relevant features that the red set of MEG variables represent, as highlighted by the white triple intersection of the three components of SIR.

Zhan et al. used these three SIR components to trace the dynamic flow of task-relevant features that were processed between 50 and 220 ms post-stimulus, from their early representation in the visual cortex, through the ventral pathway. In the ventral pathway, they found that task-relevant features converge onto a few MEG voxels at the top of the right fusiform gyrus, approximately 200 ms post-stimulus, where they agglomerate into distinct representations that support each behavioural decision (see the colour-coded ‘task-relevant’ features in and their corresponding colour-coded pie chart representations between 170 and 220 ms post-stimulus on the rFG voxels). Thus, using the three-way interaction between the components of SIR, Zhan et al. traced the dynamics of task-relevant feature processing over the first 220 ms post-stimulus, from their early representation in visual cortex to their integration for each behavioural decision in the ventral pathway.


What do we learn from the intersections of SIR?

To re-cap, in the example just reviewed, we have three concurrent datasets in the SIR framework: the blue set of stimulus information samples, the red set of brain measures and the green set of behavioural responses in a task, along with their four intersections (coloured white, light blue, magenta and yellow, as shown on). The white triple set intersection is transformative for neuroscience and neuroimaging because it disentangles the different relationships between stimulus, brain activity and behaviour as follows. The white set divides each coloured intersection into the white component and a remainder. Each of these four intersections contributes its own unique component of interpretation to provide a more detailed understanding of the processing of information contents in the brain. We review each intersection in turn.


The light blue intersection

Within a given task, the light blue remainder set isolates and represents the task-relevant features that the recorded brain measures do not represent. This remainder flags a de facto incomplete explanation of the processing of the stimulus information that supports a particular behaviour. This is because all task-relevant features should be represented somewhere in the brain to influence behaviour. A complete brain measure (such as that captured by a brain-imaging modality) should entirely absorb the light blue remainder (of task-relevant features) into the white set intersection (the light blue remainder is empty in the example shown in, where the white framed task-relevant features are all processed for behavioural decision in the brain).


The magenta and yellow intersections

A magenta remainder reveals task-irrelevant stimulus features, which the brain represents but which do not directly influence behaviour in the task. In, the information processes reduce (i.e. filter out) a travelling wavefront of task-irrelevant feature representations within occipital cortex, around 170 ms post-stimulus (compare the magenta ‘task-irrelevant’ features and brain in to the white ‘task-relevant’ counterparts). Importantly, although these task-irrelevant features do not influence the participants' categorization responses, they were among the features that were most strongly represented in brain activity in early visual cortex. However, they do not reach the fusiform gyrus in the ventral pathway, as the task-relevant features do.

Finally, the yellow remainder isolates brain activity that relates to a behaviour but not to stimulus variation. These brain processes likely reflect other aspects of the task, such as modulation of arousal, response planning, response bias, execution and so forth.


General discussion

Here, we argued that the information contents of memory are the cornerstone of the most influential models of prediction, representation of categories in memory and categorical decision. Although these models are all implicitly cast within an information processing framework, the challenge is now to precisely specify what this information is, and where, when and how the architecture of the brain dynamically processes it to produce behaviour. We reviewed SIR, a framework that can address these challenges in individual participants while they are actively performing an explicit task. During such tasks, stimulus variations are applied on each trial to cause concurrent variations in the participant's brain activity and behaviour. Here, using three face tasks, we illustrated how SIR can reverse engineer, in a data-driven manner, the task-relevant information contents of memory by computing the two-way interactions between behaviour and the univariate, low-structured pixel noise (in face detection), or the multivariate, hypothesis-rich components of a generative model of face shape or movement (in face identity or emotion, respectively). Note that such designs could have been augmented by changing the participant's brain activity with a cue, with direct interaction using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), or other methods, thereby changing the information sampled and behaviour. We argued that task-relevant features are the needles of information that we should search for in the haystack of brain activity and computed the triple interactions of SIR to do so (represented as the coloured intersections). With these, we showed how we can trace the processing of task-relevant and task-irrelevant features in the brain between stimulus onset and behavioural decisions.


Using rich stimulus variations in a task to infer information contents at recall

Our applications of SIR identified the variety of stimulus features that can represent a visual category in the memory of individual participants. We also showed how we can track neural representations of these features into the variations of dynamic MEG activity (and also in other measures such as EEG, fMRI and single-cell recordings). Our analyses use the important interactions between the bottom-up random variations of stimulus components and their top-down usage guided by memorized knowledge. Using these we can separate out the representation of task-relevant from task-irrelevant features in the brain. In SIR, an explicit generative model of the stimulus is necessary to produce the variations of stimulus features that can tap into multiple categorizations of the same stimulus (or category). These considerations also apply to identifying the memory contents supporting different categorizations of a single face (e.g. identity, emotion or social trait), or different levels of expertise of the same object category (cf. ‘new Beetle’ versus ‘car’ or ‘German Shepherd’ versus ‘dog’ or ‘New York’ versus ‘city’). As we will discuss, we can design hierarchical generative models to tap into taxonomies of categories in memory.

Turning to cued recall of information contents from memory, we can use the SIR framework to start addressing two broad questions. First, how can we establish what information a specific brain activity recorded during recall represents (whether EEG, MEG, fMRI or single unit recording) and how does this relate to the information represented during encoding? Second, what are the effects of the explicit behavioural task, both during encoding and at recall, on the information represented, and how do these interact? Though there is at present no methodology to address these questions directly, we refer the reader to to start considering how the information contents derived using the SIR framework could inform information-rich studies of cued recall. In, we used a perceptual categorization task and computed the rich variety of stimulus features that each individual participant processed to enable the response ‘the nuns’ (i.e. the fine-grained left and right nuns' faces) and ‘Voltaire’ (i.e. the coarser face of Voltaire and his eyes). Let's now examine how we could use this analysis to inform the information contents of brain activity during recall.

We could compute the explicit MEG signature of each one of the stimulus features at encoding (as was done in). We could then compare the neural signatures of the specific features of each participant with the activity elicited when the participant would recall each perception in the absence of an explicit stimulus, for example with a cross-decoding analysis (train classifier during encoding, test at recall) as has been successfully applied to fMRI, EEG/MEG measures. The balance of represented features might change between encoding and recall depending on the task considered in each. Such an approach could establish a similarity of brain activity between stimulus encoding and recall and, via the analyses of SIR, indirectly inform the specific features that a participant activates when recalling ‘the nuns’ or ‘Voltaire.’ This thought experiment could generalize to studies of the information contents of other face, object and scene categorizations, between their encoding and recall.

Stepping back from the example, we make an explicit, functional theoretical point about the information contents of memory: the representation of any stimulus category should at least comprise the stimulus features that afforded its multiple categorizations in the history of the individual categorizer (e.g. a variety of features to categorize the relevant identities, expressions, ages, ethnicities and social traits for faces, and the taxonomic categorizations of the objects and scenes at the required levels of expertise). The SIR framework provides the analysis tools to identify what these features of the stimulus are in memory. Consequently, even recalling the same scene stimulus could elicit different neural activity if we tasked the participant with recalling whether the cued stimulus is a city, New York, or a view of the Chrysler building, because these categorizations would require different functional features, each with a specific neural signature.

We have focussed so far on cued recall, where the framework of SIR (including rich stimulus variation of multiple stimulus features and explicit consideration of task) has clear applicability. However, this approach could also give insights into information-bearing reactivations during offline replay. For example, a richer design including multiple stimulus features and different tasks could reveal that the specific feature representations reactivated during offline replay differ depending on the explicit task performed during learning. Here again, the SIR perspective could be combined with existing cross-decoding approaches, enhancing them with the key features of carefully designed rich stimulus variation and explicit control of the cognitive task. In the offline replay setting, there are no explicit behavioural responses, but we might still expect to see an effect of the categorization task during sequence learning on the specific nature of the offline replay.


Extension to events, situations and sequences

We now sketch how generative models could be extended to the object and scene categories making up events and situations. Consider designing the generative models of two city scenes built around one prototype plus a specific component that identifies each scene. At testing, the scene component would be randomized and discrimination performance measured. With reverse correlation, we could reverse engineer from behaviour the features that each participant represents in memory for each scene. We could then use the framework of SIR to compute the encoding models of each component and test whether we can elicit similar brain activations for prediction or recall, when faced with a blank screen. A similar approach could be applied to the design of articulated object categories. However, the main drawback of such approaches is the large experimental time that such an experiment would require, unless the generative model was itself multivariate (e.g. different blocks of buildings to generate the two scene categories, rather than individual buildings) and we could develop encoding models of these multivariate components in the brain. These expansions are part of our on-going research. Our methodology is also in principle extensible to studies of memory that use structured sequences, where the specification of a task is also important. For example, the sequential replay of a memorized sequence of images similar to might differ depending on whether the participant was asked to count the total number of people versus the total number of cars visible in the sequence.


Conclusion

Generalizing from our examples, using a range of modern imaging modalities, we can now measure on individual trials the brain activity of an individual participant while they are actively performing an explicit task. SIR takes full advantage of these richer datasets by computing the interactions between these three components, as 〈stimulus variation; brain; behaviour〉. These computations can then be used to disentangle the stimulus, brain activity and response spaces, including at different granularities, depending on the specific experimental design. From these, we make inferences about what information is being processed in the brain for a particular behaviour, and where and when this processing occurs, which in turn can inform computational models of behaviour. SIR can also be applied to study any parametrizable sensory stimulus spaces (e.g. auditory, as well as other cognitive, social and affective tasks; for reviews) and to study the information processing mechanisms of both brain and in silico architectures. We propose, therefore, that the time is ripe to exploit the full capabilities of modern brain-imaging technologies and to embrace richer designs that exploit the trial-by-trial trivariate 〈stimulus information; brain; behaviour〉. The analysis of such richer designs within the SIR framework may reveal novel interactions that further our understanding of how the brain processes information contents for behaviour.

SIR provides a number of benefits for studies of memory recall and replay. As we have seen, by focusing on explicit tasks performed on a remembered stimulus, or stimulus category, SIR can specify the information contents that must be recalled to facilitate behaviour and then guide the search for replay of that specific information in brain activity. As with categorization and visual perception, an increased focus on explicit task control and task-relevant information content is critically important to understand the information contents of memory.


Data accessibility

This article has no additional data.


Authors' contributions

We all wrote and edited the paper.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

This article has no additional data.


Electrophysiological signatures of memory reactivation in humans

Thomas Schreiner, Tobias Staudigl — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2020. PMC7209925, CC BY 4.0.

The reactivation of neural activity that was present during the encoding of an event is assumed to be essential for human episodic memory retrieval and the consolidation of memories during sleep. Pioneering animal work has already established a crucial role of memory reactivation to prepare and guide behaviour. Research in humans is now delineating the neural processes involved in memory reactivation during both wakefulness and sleep as well as their functional significance. Focusing on the electrophysiological signatures of memory reactivation in humans during both memory retrieval and sleep-related consolidation, this review provides an overview of the state of the art in the field. We outline recent advances, methodological developments and open questions and specifically highlight commonalities and differences in the neuronal signatures of memory reactivation during the states of wakefulness and sleep.

This article is part of the Theo Murphy meeting issue ‘Memory reactivation: replaying events past, present and future’.


Introduction

Episodic memory, the capacity to remember and relive past experiences, represents a cornerstone of human cognition and the sense of our self. Our memories allow us to reflect about the past and to guide our behaviour for future challenges. The neural mechanisms promoting these abilities, thus the encoding, storage and retrieval of memories, have attracted considerable scientific interest during the last decades.

It is assumed that the hippocampus and the neocortex collaborate tightly to form episodic memories. New experiences are encoded by distributed neocortical learning networks and are associated with hippocampal sequences. These sequences organize the networks' input in a way that they can be thought of as sparse and distinct representations of an event's trajectory. They are formed in a very rapid, one-shot type of learning manner enabled by recurrent networks in the CA3 subfield.

During retrieval, the hippocampal sequences associated with a given experience are thought to be triggered upon arrival of a retrieval cue (i.e. a part of the sequence), pointing towards the neocortical assemblies that represented the events during their initial perception. The successful reinstatement of these representations completes the process of memory reactivation and is assumed to be necessary for the conscious access during episodic remembering.


Memory reactivation in awake humans

The hallmark of human episodic memory is the capacity to remember past events with rich contextual details and conscious access, such that the subjective experience of remembering can be described as mentally travelling to the past. The reactivation of a memory trace of a past event is assumed to be necessary to achieve this subjective experience of remembering. Tulving describes the act of retrieval as a correlation of the information provided by a reminder (memory cue) with the initially experienced information stored in the memory trace. Accordingly, an effective memory cue should overlap with encoded events to trigger a correlation between the activity present during perception and the retrieval attempt. Behaviourally, this has been demonstrated using context-dependent memory paradigms: the probability of correctly remembering an item is higher when study and test contexts match, when compared with when they do not match. These effects have been integrated in cognitive theories such as the Encoding Specificity Principle or transfer appropriate processing.


How memory reactivation can be studied in the human brain

As outlined above, memory reactivation can be operationalized as a correlation between activity during the initial perception of an event (for example, a study phase) and the activity patterns recorded during the retrieval of this event (usually a test phase). Although spontaneous retrieval of past events occurs during rest, most human studies investigated memory reactivation during intentional retrieval attempts, providing either complete (recognition) or partial (cued recall) reminders of a specific event or no specific reminders at all (free recall). If reactivation drives memory retrieval, the neural activity associated with a reminder/cue that successfully triggers retrieval of past events (a memory) should resonate with the neural footprint of these events, which was established during encoding (please see exemplifying a procedure to isolate reactivation processes from neural signals). Importantly, multivariate analysis methods have been shown to be capable of detecting such similarities in multidimensional brain recordings. Among the most commonly used metrics are classification accuracies (e.g. training a classifier on study activity to relate brain activation patterns with experimental conditions and test its parameters on the test data) and pairwise measures of similarity (e.g. Pearson's correlation, cosine similarity), which provide the input to a representational similarity analysis (RSA). While pioneering work on memory reactivation has been conducted using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), this review will focus on electrophysiological research, comprising electroencephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG), as well as intracranial EEG (iEEG; including depth electrodes and electrocorticography) and single-unit recordings. Such electrophysiological recordings provide exceptionally rich data, which allow for assessing neural similarities in time or space, for fixed frequencies or dynamic time-frequency patterns, for oscillatory power and phase, and the firing behaviour of single units and populations of units.


Exemplary procedure to isolate memory reactivation using similarity measures.

To identify memory reactivation processes in humans, neural activity is compared between different states or processes (e.g. encoding versus retrieval, retrieval versus targeted memory reactivation). In this example based on Schreiner et al., item-specific reactivation processes during sleep elicited by targeted memory reactivation were investigated. Electroencephalography (EEG) was performed while participants retrieved word pairs and subsequently slept for 3 h. During NREM sleep, some of the prior learned words cues were repeatedly presented to experimentally induce memory reactivation. To detect content-specific memory reactivation, the similarity in oscillatory phase between wakefulness and sleep was compared. The assumption here is that the observed similarity between states indicates the reactivation of memory traces. As apparent in the phase similarity plot (bottom right), memory retrieval-related phase patterns re-emerged during targeted memory reactivation (TMR) in a re-current fashion, indicating the reactivation of memories during sleep. Importantly, for such a rationale to work, spurious correlations that are driven by the perceptual identity of the used stimuli need to be excluded. The example illustrates how this objective might be achieved (please note that this procedure just represents one possibility to preclude spurious effects). The elements on the diagonal of the confusion matrix depict similarities between identical stimulus presentations during retrieval and targeted memory reactivation. By comparing subsets of these elements (e.g. remembered versus forgotten), differences driven by perceptual identity should be eliminated. Hence, if remembered items show a higher similarity between retrieval and targeted memory reactivation than forgotten items, as depicted in the phase similarity plot, the effect cannot be attributed to differences of the presented stimuli.


Content-specific memory reactivation during retrieval


Oscillatory signatures of memory reactivation

Recording techniques on a meso and macro level (MEG, EEG, iEEG) have widely adopted an oscillatory perspective on the investigation of memory reactivation. The idea that brain oscillations provide the means to track memory reactivation is grounded in the notion that oscillations organize cell assemblies to encode information and coordinate neural communication and plasticity. Assuming that the frequency and phase of oscillations represent information and cognitive operations at a high level of specificity, one should be able to identify the reactivation of such content-specific oscillatory patterns during memory retrieval. Because the investigation of similarities in oscillatory activity between encoding and retrieval offers ways to study the neural underpinnings of memory reactivation on multiple levels with several methods, oscillations became a major target in searching for the neural mechanisms underlying memory reactivation.

Non-invasive studies. Over the past 5 years, a growing number of studies exploited the possibilities of non-invasive EEG/MEG recordings to investigate memory reactivation during memory retrieval. Among the first to do so, Jafarpour et al. applied multivariate pattern classifiers to spatial patterns in time-frequency resolved MEG data to discriminate different categories (faces versus scenes) during encoding. The authors then tested the classifiers' performance on the retrieval data. This procedure enabled them to identify an early reactivation of category-specific encoding activity during cued recall. A similar approach was applied by Johnson et al., who trained a multivariate pattern classifier on the time-series of EEG data to distinguish three different encoding tasks involving word learning, and tested its performance on recognition data. Increased classifier performance for correctly recognized versus missed items was taken as an indicator that encoding patterns were indeed reactivated. In general, pattern classifiers offer a versatile tool to study memory reactivation (see later in this review, for recent applications), but are limited when it comes to tracking multiple item-specific memory representations. A different approach was taken by Wimber et al. who entrained different frequencies via flickering words at encoding, with the aim to recover those frequencies during a subsequent memory test. They found that the imposed frequencies re-emerged when participants successfully recognized a previously learned word (but see for conflicting findings).

While these studies identified category-specific memory reactivation, employing RSA on EEG/MEG data enabled the tracking of item-specific memory reactivation. Staudigl et al. investigated the effects of a context match/mismatch on the reactivation of item-specific MEG signals. They found a reactivation of video-scene context in cortical areas indexed by beta band (30 Hz) activity, using temporal and spatial pattern similarity analyses. As predicted by the Encoding Specificity Principle, the neuronal pattern of context reactivation was reversed in the context mismatch condition: higher reactivation for later forgotten then later remembered items. Building on these findings, Staudigl & Hanslmayr tested whether similar reactivation patterns can be identified in a sensory match/mismatch memory paradigm. The authors found that neural pattern reinstatement of MEG activity at 6–8 Hz benefitted memory only in the match condition, but impaired memory in the mismatch condition. However, a reversal of memory reactivation in the match versus mismatch condition was only obtained for aurally but not visually encoded words. Staudigl and Hanslmayr employed a phase-based similarity analysis introduced by Michelmann et al.. In their study, Michelmann and colleagues could show that the phase of low-frequency activity at approximately 8 Hz indexed the item-specific reactivation of memory traces. Importantly, EEG source reconstruction indicated that modality-specific regions (auditory and visual cortex) displayed the most pronounced reactivation. Item-specific reactivation patterns in low-frequency phases were also found in EEG scalp recordings by Schreiner et al. comparing two consecutive instances of memory retrieval. To track the speed and time scale of memory reactivation, Michelmann et al. recorded MEG while participants remembered movie scenes consisting of multiple sub-events. The authors reported evidence for a flexible switching between compressed and non-compressed forward reactivation of sequences during memory reactivation. Consistent with their previous studies, memory reactivation was captured by the phase of oscillatory activity at 8 Hz.

The aforementioned correlational findings received further support from studies probing the importance of memory reactivation for retrieval with transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS) and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). Waldhauser et al. applied rTMS to posterior brain areas where memory reactivation during retrieval was identified via a pattern of lateralized alpha/beta desynchronization. rTMS interfered with the source memory accuracy during retrieval, suggesting that intact reactivation might be causal for successful memory retrieval. Using tACS to entrain rhythmicity during the encoding and retrieval of a memory task, Javadi et al. could show that memory performance was enhanced when tACS frequencies during encoding and retrieval were matched, providing further evidence for the existence of the encoding specificity principle on a neural level.

Taken together, there is now converging evidence from non-invasive EEG/MEG studies for item-specific memory reactivation during retrieval. Specifically, the phase of low-frequency oscillatory activity has shown to be particularly capable of tracking content-specific memory reactivation.

Invasive studies. Intracranial recordings have some clear advantages over non-invasive techniques that record activity outside the brain: a higher spatial resolution allows more reliable inference of the source of the activity, in particular, for deep brain structures as the hippocampus. Intracranial recordings usually have a higher signal-to-noise ratio, which benefits the investigation of low-amplitude signals (e.g. gamma-band activity above 40 Hz). On the downside, intracranial data usually comes with a lack of a whole-brain perspective and is limited to patient populations in clinical settings. Pre-surgical epilepsy patients, for example, may suffer from a serious neurological disorder, such as hippocampal sclerosis, and generally require a strict medication regime. Both factors presumably impact the outcomes of these studies. Nevertheless, iEEG studies represent a valuable approach to study reactivation processes in the human brain, especially if their outcomes may be aligned with rodent models and non-invasive neuroimaging techniques.

Exploiting the high signal to noise in their data, many iEEG studies have focused on activity in the gamma band. Zhang et al. investigated the reactivation of gamma power (42–120 Hz) recorded during the encoding and retrieval of a virtual-navigation paradigm. Using RSA, they found that encoding-retrieval correlations globally increased for remembered spatial paths. In a similar vein, Yaffe et al. reported reactivation of distributed cortical gamma power (62–100 Hz) during cued recall of previously learned paired associates.

Exploiting the high spatial specificity of intracranial recordings, Staresina et al. used RSA to investigate the pattern similarity between the encoding and retrieval of word-colour associations in the human hippocampus. Successful retrieval of the association was accompanied by an increase in representational similarity when compared with when the association was not retrieved (albeit successful item recognition). The authors interpreted this result as reflecting hippocampal pattern completion processes. Estefan et al. recorded from the hippocampus and the lateral temporal cortex and could show that item-specific reinstatement in the lateral temporal cortex was preceded by the reactivation of item-context associations in the hippocampus, which could be described as pattern completion. They also show increased levels of cortico-hippocampal communication alongside the reinstatement periods, which is in line with the idea that the hippocampus triggers cortical reinstatement during memory reactivation. Combining hippocampal depth electrodes and electrocorticography from five patients, Lohnas et al. found that high-frequency activity (45–115 Hz) indexed memory reactivation in the hippocampus and the occipitotemporal cortex. Since they manipulated the similarity of encoded items, they could show evidence for pattern separation (i.e. a process facilitating the distinct representation of highly related events): the hippocampal response differentiated new items that were similar to old items. This finding is of particular interest since the hippocampus has been suggested to perform both pattern completion and pattern separation.

Intracranial recordings also provide the opportunity to investigate electrophysiological signatures that are challenging to track with non-invasive methods, such as high-frequency ripples. Rodent studies indicated that high-frequency ripples play a crucial role for the temporal coordination of memory reactivation. A recent study by Vaz et al. provided first evidence for a role of high-frequency ripples for memory reactivation in awake humans. They identified high-frequency ripples (80–120 Hz) in intracranial recordings and showed that the coupling of ripples in the medial temporal lobe and the middle temporal gyrus was increased during successful memory retrieval. Immediately after the coupled ripples, increased similarity between encoding and retrieval broadband activity in the middle temporal gyrus indicated memory reactivation during successful retrieval. Another recent iEEG study supports the importance of hippocampal ripples and memory reactivation for successful memory retrieval. Using a free recall paradigm, the authors show that the number of hippocampal high-frequency ripples (70–180 Hz) increased during the successful encoding of visually presented items as well as prior to their recollection. Importantly, recollection was accompanied by content-specific memory reactivation in visual areas, which in turn was coupled to ripple emergence. These findings provide an important link of human awake memory reactivation to studies in rodents, while emphasizing the functional role of hippocampal high-frequency ripples in memory processes.

In sum, invasive studies provide convincing evidence for the content-specific reactivation of oscillatory activity during memory retrieval. Importantly, their spatial specificity in conjunction with their high temporal resolution provide the basis for understanding the cascade of processes involved in memory reactivation. Converging iEEG evidence now supports animal and computational models describing the interactions between hippocampus and cortex during memory reactivation.


Single neuron activity reveals timing and circuitry of memory reactivation

Compared to the meso- and macroscopic recordings of brain activity described above, recording single-unit activity in human epilepsy patients provides the opportunity to investigate the neural operations of memory reactivation in neural microcircuits. Multiple studies have now shown that single-unit firing patterns recorded during the presentation of stimuli re-occur during their successful retrieval: Gelhard-Sagiv et al. reported that the selective firing of hippocampal and entorhinal single units during the presentation of audiovisual scenes re-occurred during their successful recall. Jang et al. showed that unique spiking activity patterns representing words in the anterior temporal lobe were reinstated when successfully retrieving those words from memory. Inspired by animal work on navigation, Miller et al. recorded single-unit activity while patients performed a virtual reality navigation task that was paired with a memory test. The authors identified single units in the medial temporal lobe firing at specific virtual locations. Strikingly, when patients remembered items associated with these locations, the place-responsive firing of the single units was reactivated.

In a recent study, Staresina et al. recorded single-unit activity from the human entorhinal cortex and the hippocampus in patients performing an associative memory task. Successfully remembered associations could be decoded from population codes in the entorhinal cortex, but not the hippocampus. Hippocampal firing rates, however, predicted the strength of the entorhinal reactivation. The authors interpreted this cascade of neural activity in the medial temporal lobe as reflecting the basic ingredients of a pattern completion process: the hippocampus coordinates reactivation of the encoded information in the (entorhinal) cortex.


Reactivation of temporal context—neural contiguity

While the studies described above focused on the reactivation of content-specific information during memory retrieval, a different approach to memory reactivation is investigating neural correlates of shifting temporal context. Studies following this approach exploit the fact that contextual representations gradually change over time, that is, that events that are in temporal proximity should share a more similar context than events that are far apart in time. Behaviourally, this has been described as the contiguity effect during free recall, where items that were presented in temporal proximity during encoding are also recalled in temporal proximity. In neural terms, this means that remembering an item would elicit brain activity associated with other items presented in close temporal proximity. Such neural contiguity has been shown by Manning et al. in electrocorticography recordings. The degree to which distributed patterns of oscillatory activity was similar between items decreased with increasing positional distance of their initial presentation during encoding. Similarly, Yaffe et al. found that successful retrieval in a paired-associate memory paradigm involves the reactivation of a gradually changing neural signature during encoding. Manning et al. found that neural signatures of semantic reactivation were related to semantic clustering of items during recall, suggesting that a neural contiguity effect is not restricted to the temporal domain. Further support for the reactivation of contextual features during successful memory retrieval comes from studies recording single units in humans. Based on population vector analyses, Howard et al. and Folkerts et al. showed that the temporal context during encoding was reactivated during successful recognition. These findings support the idea that the reactivation of fluctuating temporal contexts could be used to temporally differentiate past episodes and allocate oneself in time while mentally travelling to the past.


Reactivation in studies not involving episodic memory retrieval

While the present review focuses on memory reactivation during retrieval, electrophysiological signatures of memory reactivation have also been demonstrated during encoding, working memory maintenance, goal-directed navigation and rest. Comparing consecutive instances of encoding, increased similarity for repeated presentations of the same item was found to be predictive of subsequent memory performance. The assumption in these studies is that a repeated presentation of an item implicitly triggers retrieval of the memory of the initial presentation. Implicit memory reactivation can also be identified at event boundaries: during sequential learning, prior events were reactivated when the context changed, presumably to link adjacent representations with the goal to form a coherent, continuous episode in long-term memory.

Neuronal similarity was also found between activity during encoding and maintenance in working memory. Here, rather than retrieving representations from memory, they are assumed to be held active for subsequent output. Rose et al. reported that even unattended items can be briefly reactivated in working memory by single-pulse TMS.

A recent study investigated memory reactivation during goal-directed navigation. Analogous to working memory, representations had to be maintained by the participants while they navigated towards a goal in a virtual reality environment. Recording iEEG in epilepsy patients, the authors could show that the neuronal representations of cue-goal associations were reactivated during specific phases of hippocampal and frontal theta activity. This finding is in line with the view that a function of the hippocampal theta phase is to temporally segregate information.

Liu et al. recently demonstrated memory reactivation during rest. Analysing MEG data, the authors found time-compressed replay of previously learned abstract sequences, in line with a previous MEG study. The replay was accompanied by ripple-like activity localized to the medial temporal lobe and the direction of the replay was reversed after a sequence was associated with reward. These findings from non-invasive human MEG activity very accurately resemble replay patterns found in rodents.


Memory reactivation during sleep

Over the last decades, it has become increasingly clear that mnemonic processes continue beyond ‘online’ encoding and retrieval processes. Specifically, behavioural research has shown that post-learning sleep is inevitable for the stabilization of newly formed memories and critically supports memory formation. The strengthening of learning experiences during post-encoding ‘offline’ periods, called consolidation, has been consistently demonstrated for diverse types of memories including priming, conditioning and procedural motor memories, as well as episodic memories. Theoretical accounts have long postulated memory reactivation as a mechanism mediating the beneficial effects of sleep on memory performance. However, as reactivation processes in sleeping humans are notoriously hard to capture, empirical evidence directly supporting this notion remained scarce until recently. The forthcoming sections will briefly summarize the memory function of sleep and its neural underpinnings. We will specifically address the role of memory reactivation in this context and highlight recent advances and approaches to identify reactivation processes during human sleep.


The memory function of sleep

What is the advantage to exploit sleep for memory consolidation? Stable memory traces originating from specific events and experiences are assumed to be encoded as long-lasting physical change within distributed learning-related neocortical circuits. A major challenge to this proposal is how these physical changes can emerge during wakefulness, while the brain's capabilities are required to process a continuous stream of new experiences. The standard two-stage model of memory offers an elegant solution to this dilemma. It puts forward that new experiences are encoded in parallel in the hippocampus and neocortical learning networks. During subsequent sleep, a period without the necessity to process external events, the hippocampus spontaneously reactivates the prior-encoded memories, thereby coordinating memory reactivation in the neocortex. The repeated reactivation of memory traces is assumed to transform them from initially labile to long-lasting representations, permanently stored in neocortical networks.

In contrast to wakefulness-related retrieval processes, an intricate interplay of sleep-specific oscillations seems to mediate the ‘hippocampal-neocortical dialogue’ during sleep. Put forward by the ‘active systems consolidation theory’, a precise temporal coupling of hippocampal ripples and the two cardinal oscillations of NREM sleep, namely slow oscillations (SOs) and sleep spindles, constitutes the mechanistic vehicle of sleep-related memory consolidation. In this context, the SOs (<1 Hz), which are generated in neocortical circuits, have been ascribed the role of a time-giving pacemaker: their depolarizing up-states are assumed to drive the reactivation of memories in the hippocampus, in parallel with hippocampal ripples and thalamo-cortical sleep spindles (waxing and waning oscillatory events between 11 and 15 Hz). Through this synchronization, SOs provide a crucial basis for the information exchange between the hippocampus and learning-related neocortical areas. Importantly, the coupling of SOs and spindles has also been shown to establish an environment facilitating synaptic plasticity and by that allow long-lasting memory representations to establish in cortical circuits. Thereby sleep-related oscillations might counteract the generally unfavourable circumstances for synaptic plasticity present during NREM sleep, which is due to attenuated neuromodulatory activity.

Bolstering these assumptions, a close relationship of the cardinal sleep oscillations (ripples, spindles and SOs) with consolidation processes has already been established, both in animal models and humans. It has been shown that intense learning increases the ensuing incidence of sleep spindles, SOs and ripples during NREM sleep, while their occurrence in return reliably predicts the degree of consolidation.

Despite these correlational results, more direct evidence embracing the importance of sleep-related oscillations in service of consolidation stems from studies directly manipulating their characteristics. Selectively enhancing SO activity during human sleep via auditory closed-loop stimulation has been demonstrated to simultaneously boost SO-coupled spindle activity and declarative memory performance. Similarly, in rodent models, amplifying the endogenous interplay of hippocampal ripples, SOs and sleep spindles by electrical stimulation resulted in the fortified consolidation of labile memory traces. By contrast, suppressing hippocampal ripples actively disturbed spatial memory formation. Still, according to theoretical accounts, the interplay of hippocampal ripples, thalamo-cortical spindles and cortical SOs might just represent the mechanistic vehicle mediating memory consolidation during sleep. Ultimately, the actual mnemonic representations may need to be reactivated and strengthened, giving rise to long-living memory engrams.


Memory reactivation during sleep in humans

Compared to rodent models, access to the content of memory re-processing during sleep in humans is more limited due to methodological constraints, rendering the assessment of memory traces a challenging endeavour. Early efforts to reveal memory reactivation during sleep in humans hence mainly examined whether brain regions involved in the initial experience would show corresponding activity during ensuing sleep, using fMRI and positron emission tomography. Indeed, brain activation associated with the learning of diverse memory contents (declarative and motor learning, spatial navigation) was shown to re-appear during ensuing sleep, with the putative reactivation-signatures peaking during the presence of sleep spindles. Furthermore, the magnitude of these reactivation events predicted the behavioural consolidation benefits, suggesting their functional significance. Hence, in accordance with rodent models, these studies provided first evidence that reactivation-like processes might take place during human NREM sleep, potentially serving its memory function. Still, the used brain imaging techniques chronically suffer from their rather low temporal resolution, fundamentally impeding the fine-grained characterization of memory reactivation and its conveying mechanisms. In addition, although representing important breakthroughs, these early studies did not directly assess the similarity/overlap between the learning-related brain activation and potential reactivation of distinct memory content, which constitutes a core assumption of memory reactivation.


Identifying memory reactivation using multivariate approaches

As outlined above, research on the formation of memory engrams and the putative role of memory reactivation during sleep was traditionally spearheaded by invasive animal electrophysiology. However, the advent of multivariate analyses methods, in particular, multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) and representational similarity analysis (RSA) constituted a fundamental game-changer in human research. As outlined above, these methods allow for estimating item-specific brain patterns, which represents an essential prerequisite for identifying unique memory traces and their reactivation. The following section will delineate pioneering attempts to capture and track reactivation processes during sleep in humans by applying multivariate analyses methods to both surface EEG and iEEG recordings.

Schoenauer et al. were the first who set out to test whether multivariate analyses methods would provide the means to capture memory processes during human sleep. Participants encoded pictures of houses or faces before going to sleep. To test whether the content of the prior-learned material was reactivated, the authors aimed for decoding the categorical features of the learned material from sleep EEG recordings. Indeed, the authors accomplished to derive solely from the sleep data whether participants had viewed faces or houses during previous learning. This finding speaks strongly for the notion that memories corresponding to these categories were in some way re-processed during sleep, leading to distinguishable distributions of the temporo-spatial EEG patterns. Hence, this work provided initial evidence for the capability of multivariate analyses techniques to detect memory reactivation during human sleep. Still, the applied methods and the experimental rationale hindered the ability to determine the fine-grained interaction, such as the temporal relationship between reactivation processes and sleep-related oscillations.

Cairney et al. specifically addressed this open question by combining TMR, which should significantly narrow down the search-space for reactivation processes, and a correlational decoding procedure (i.e. RSA). In this study, participants associated words with pictures comprising either scenes or objects before taking a nap. During ensuing NREM sleep, parts of the previously learned words were presented again as reminder cues, to experimentally trigger reactivation processes. Words which were previously associated with pictures induced stronger sleep spindle activity when compared with unrelated ‘new’ words, indicating that the sleeping brain responded preferentially to the reminders. More critically, during the rise of sleep spindles, the category of the memories linked to the auditory cues (i.e. objects or scenes) could be reliably decoded. In addition, the precision of the decoding forecasted the behavioural impact of TMR, suggesting the functional significance of the detected reactivation events. Hence, both studies outlined above established that patterns of EEG activity during sleep can be successfully used to detect signatures of memory reprocessing.


Targeted Memory Reactivation.

Studies in both humans and rodent models have demonstrated that sensory stimulation can modify sleep-related memory reactivation. ‘Targeted memory reactivation’ (TMR) studies follow the rationale that reminder cues, which were previously associated with the learning experience, are presented again during subsequent NREM sleep to specifically trigger reactivation processes. This approach has repeatedly proven successful, as both olfactory and auditory cues (sounds, melodies, words) have been shown to strengthen later memory performance for the cued memory representations. Moreover, TMR has also turned out to represent a promising tool to elucidate the neural mechanisms of sleep-associated memory reactivation.

As an important proof of principle, work in rodents demonstrated that TMR cues indeed possess the capability to trigger memory reactivation, both in the hippocampus as well as in the neocortex. Building upon these results, previous studies in humans mainly leveraged TMR to isolate the oscillatory scaffolding orchestrating memory reactivation during sleep. Accordingly, an intimate relationship between TMR and sleep spindles has been established. Promoting memory reactivation via TMR has been demonstrated to cause a robust surge in sleep spindle activity. In addition, a growing number of TMR studies also point towards a critical role of theta with regards to memory reactivation during sleep. As with sleep spindles, cue-induced spectral theta power has been shown to be tightly linked to successful memory cueing of declarative memories, while theta also seems to modulate cue-related functional connectivity between brain regions implicated in the consolidation of motor memories. Taken together, all of these studies established that TMR constitutes an effective tool to bias reactivation and allows accessing control over processes, which are typically hard to capture in humans.

A prevailing assumption touches on the similarity between learning and retrieval-related brain activation during wakefulness and ensuing reactivation patterns during sleep. If memory traces are composed of unique, distributed circuits of neuronal ensembles, (re)activation of a given representation during different states, be it the encoding or retrieval of memories during wakefulness or their reactivation during sleep, should be represented by highly similar, distributed neural activity. Thus, a profound attempt to identify and characterize reactivation processes acting during sleep is ultimately bound to take learning and retrieval-related brain activity into account, which would also allow for a content-specific tracking of memory reactivation. As outlined above, early work in humans primarily tested whether EEG data recorded during sleep would comprise activity patterns that would permit discriminating stimulus categories that were present during encoding. This analytical rational represents without doubt a valid way to approximate memory processing during sleep. Still, the obtained results do not necessarily prove memory reactivation in its actual definition, as a direct test of whether learning/retrieval-related brain activity was reactivated during sleep was outside the scope of these studies.

To address this critical issue, Schreiner and colleagues built upon previous findings indicating that the phase of low-frequency oscillations carries unique information about the content of sensory stimuli. This feature of oscillatory phase has already been exploited to reveal reactivation processes during wakefulness, as it has been shown that encoding and retrieving the same memory content is signified by the emergence of similar phase patterns. Hence, oscillatory phase might also constitute a prime candidate to uncover the reactivation of distinct memory traces during sleep and to assess their resemblance with reactivation processes tied to wakefulness.

In this study, participants performed a vocabulary-learning task in the evening, learning to associate Dutch words with their German translations. Afterwards, memory performance for each association was assessed twice in two consecutive retrieval blocks. During ensuing NREM sleep, some of the prior learned Dutch words were presented again to the participants, following the rationale of previous TMR studies. In a first step, the authors tested whether retrieval of the same memory content during successive retrieval tests would be indexed by similar phase patterns, speaking not only for the content-specificity of low-frequency phase but also for its organizing role in retrieval-associated memory reactivation. Indeed, successfully remembering the same words when compared with non-remembered content was accompanied by elevated phase similarity in the theta range (5 Hz), suggesting that theta phase might coordinate the retrieval-induced reactivation of distinct memories. The most pressing question, however, was whether these content-specific features would also be traceable with regards to TMR-induced reactivation processes during sleep, indicating item-specific memory reactivation during sleep. To capture such TMR evoked memory reactivation, phase similarity for the same memory content was estimated again, but this time comparing the activity related to pre-sleep memory retrieval and TMR related activity during sleep. This analysis indeed yielded strong evidence that TMR-induced distinct reactivation processes, as retrieval-related phase patterns at 5 Hz, re-appeared in response to TMR reminders. Moreover, after the onset of TMR cues, these phase-coded reactivation patterns spontaneously fluctuated at a rate of 1 Hz, hinting towards a supra-ordinate coordination of the reactivation processes by SOs. In sum, those results demonstrated the close relatedness of cue-triggered memory reactivation during wakefulness and sleep, with theta oscillations orchestrating the re-processing of memories during both physiological states.

Moving beyond the declarative memory system, Belal et al. set out to identify the sleep-related reactivation of procedural memories. Participants engaged in a motor memory task (SRTT), which was followed by an imagery period where participants had to imagine the prior learned movements. During subsequent NREM sleep, tones associated with the learning of the task were presented again to elicit reactivation processes. The authors applied a multivariate classifier, which was trained on the imagery period, to the TMR data to detect reactivation of motor memories. In line with the findings on declarative memories, motor memory reactivation could be readily detected using multivariate analysis approaches, speaking for the general validity of these procedures.

While surface EEG recordings have provided precious insight into the memory function of the sleeping brain, a major limitation is its restricted spatial resolution. This constraint not only hinders the ability to assess the specific reactivation-related contributions of potential key areas such as the hippocampus and its subfields or the thalamus; it also prevents clarification of the association between hippocampal ripples and reactivation events in humans, which has been consistently observed in animal models. Thus, taking the impact of hippocampal ripples into consideration might significantly boost the information details that might be decoded from reactivated memory representations and thereby open a new window into investigating the memory function of the sleeping brain.

Recently, Zhang et al. leveraged the opportunity of iEEG to probe the relationship of memory reactivation during wakefulness and sleep and the accompanying hippocampal ripples. Pre-surgical epilepsy patients learned pictures of houses or landscapes before they took a nap or stayed awake. After the 1 h sleep interval, they learned a new set of pictures and subsequently memory performance for all prior-learned pictures was assessed. To isolate stimulus-specific memory patterns, the authors assessed the degree of similarity in gamma activity (30–90 Hz) when the same memory content was learned and retrieved, when compared with inconsistent memory content. Here, higher similarity values were found for same memories, suggesting the presence of gamma-coded reactivation during retrieval.

To identify the spontaneous reactivation of memory representations, similarity between the stimulus-specific encoding patterns and brain activity accompanying quiet rest and sleep was evaluated. Intriguingly, encoding related brain activity was detectable to a comparable extent during both wakeful rest and sleep. Still, during both physiological states, the specified reactivation levels did not predict subsequent memory performance. Next, the authors set out to specifically assess the role of hippocampal ripples for the reactivation of memories. Reactivation processes during NREM sleep preferentially emerged during the presence of ripples, while no such association was observable during quiet rest. In addition, ripple-triggered reactivation particularly comprised later remembered memory content, indicating the necessity of this interplay for memory formation. In sum, this study elegantly revealed the critical role of hippocampal ripples for memory consolidation in humans. While memory reactivation was found to occur spontaneously (i) during both wakefulness and sleep and (ii) during and beyond the presence of hippocampal ripples, only ripple-triggered reactivation during NREM sleep impacted memory formation. These results clearly suggest that ripple-triggered memory reactivation might drive the memory function of sleep and further indicate the excellence of invasive recordings to study sleep-related memory processes.


Discussion and open questions


The when and where of memory reactivation

The evidence about the exact timing of memory reactivation within a retrieval process is equivocal. MEG/EEG and TMS studies characterized very early signatures of memory reactivation in the first 500 ms after cue onset. Accordingly, some iEEG studies also found such early reactivation signatures, while others reported later onsets. Importantly, the described reactivation signals were typically found in cortical sites, depending on the type of encoded content (e.g. sensory-specific reinstatement in sensory cortex). There is also recent evidence for a hippocampal-cortical dialogue during memory reactivation, in line with theoretical models and rodent work suggesting that hippocampal pattern completion is followed by (cortical) reinstatement. Assuming this sequence of processes, very early cortical reinstatement as described in several studies would call for an even earlier hippocampal pattern completion process, for which there is no supporting evidence so far. Alternatively, the early cortical reactivation patterns could reflect the first stage of a cortico-hippocampal-cortical loop that has recently been suggested to underlie multi-sensory memory reactivation during sleep. More insight on the temporal dynamics of memory reactivation processes comes from EEG work showing that reactivation not only occurs at a specific phase of a source-localized hippocampal 8 Hz rhythm, but is shifted 180° with respect to encoding related activity. The results nicely confirm an oscillatory account of memory encoding-retrieval dynamics in the hippocampus.

Another open question is how high-frequency ripples time the reactivation of memory content. Rodent studies have shown reactivation during ripples in the context of spatial navigation, while studies investigating memory retrieval in humans demonstrated reactivation after ripple events, but not vice versa. Investigating this question would entail identifying how (e.g. compressed versus non-compressed) and where (hippocampus or neocortex) specific experiences (e.g. spatial versus non-spatial) are reactivated in the human brain. Investigating ripple-locked single-unit activity during human episodic memory retrieval could be a promising approach.

These studies could also elucidate whether replay during ripples and memory reinstatement after ripples serve different functions for remembering. Replay of spatial information during ripples in rodents is time-compressed, while retrieval-related memory reactivation after ripples in humans is not. A recent human MEG study, however, provided first evidence for the coincidence of ripple-like activity and the time-compressed replay of sequences. In contrast to the studies reporting non-compressed memory reactivation after ripples, this work investigated spontaneous replay of abstract sequences during rest. One could speculate that a non-compressed reactivation of memories after ripples provides the neural substrate necessary to consciously access these memories. How non-compressed memory reactivation during sleep fits into such an account remains an open question.


Is memory reactivation in humans compressed?

Should we expect to find compressed replay in humans, as has been shown in rodents? While the majority of human reactivation studies did not directly address this question, there are reports of compressed memory reactivation in humans. Yaffe et al. showed that the reactivation of distributed patterns of intracranially recorded high gamma activity at retrieval is compressed relative to its occurrence during encoding. Michelmann et al. recorded MEG while participants remembered movie scenes, consisting of multiple sub-events, in order to track the speed and time-scale of memory reactivation. The authors reported evidence for a flexible switching between compressed and non-compressed forward reactivation of sequences during memory reactivation. Compressed replay has also been demonstrated during rest. It remains an open question, however, whether compressed memory reactivation is suitable to create consciously accessible episodic memories. Vividly remembering past events, the ‘mental travel to the past’, is at least not experienced as very compressed. It could still be the case that the actual reactivation of neural activity is compressed, but its interpretation (and with it, its experience) is not, and a rapid jump among snippets of episodes seems also plausible. Alternatively, compressed and non-compressed reactivation could be functionally different, with the non-compressed version being read out only during episodic remembering and the compressed version used for planning and decision making.


When is memory replay in humans reversed?

Hippocampal sequences in rodents can be replayed forward and backward. The particular direction of the replay has been suggested to vary depending on which cognitive process is using the replayed information. In humans, backward replay has been demonstrated during rest and working memory maintenance. Interestingly, Liu et al. recently demonstrated that the forward replay of learned sequences at rest can be reversed by providing a reward, indicating that the direction of replay might indeed be related to task goals. In a recent EEG study, Linde-Domingo et al. investigated the temporal structure during the reactivation of visual memories. The authors could show that the order during retrieval is reversed when compared with encoding: semantic features were reactivated before perceptual features. While this finding is not homologous to reversed memory replay in the rodent hippocampus, which usually does not involve different levels of hierarchies of representations, it shows that the order of a sequence can be reversed during memory readout. Since there are also reports of forward replay during memory retrieval, more research needs to be done to disentangle potentially different functions of forward and backward replay.


Comparing the electrophysiology of memory reactivation during sleep and wakefulness


Oscillatory signatures of memory reactivation across states

Recent studies investigating the reactivation of memory content during memory retrieval converge on the view that the phase of low-frequency oscillatory activity can track item-specific memory reactivation. These studies are based on the assumption that the frequency and phase of oscillations represent information at a high level of specificity. Accordingly, content-specific oscillatory signatures should also be identifiable in the sleeping brain when memory is reactivated. The study by Schreiner et al. provides the first promising results that this actually is the case. The same oscillatory signatures indexed memory reactivation during wakefulness and sleep, constituting first evidence for item-specific memory reactivation during human sleep. Future studies could exploit these commonalities to (i) uncover the fine-grained interplay of the reactivation signals with sleep-specific oscillations and to (ii) dissect potential functional differences with regards to memory reactivation during both physiological states.


The role of the thalamus during sleep and wakefulness

A prominent electrophysiological difference between wakefulness and sleep can be found in thalamocortical activity. During sleep, thalamic activity, which regulates sensory input to pass first-order thalamic nuclei and to arrive in the cortex, is governed by cortically generated SOs (less than 1 Hz). The gating function of the thalamus has been tightly linked to the emergence of SO-coupled sleep spindles, with burst firing of thalamocortical neurons during spindles blocking the processing of external sensations.

Indeed, it has been shown that the presence of sleep spindles specifically hinders the transmission of external stimuli from the thalamus to cortical areas.

Thus, by inducing cellular processes in favour of long-term potentiation and simultaneously deafferenting the cortex from external (sensory) inputs, sleep spindles might promote a neural environment, which enables undisturbed cortical reprocessing (i.e. reactivation) of hippocampal relayed memories. In support of this notion, Halassa et al. showed in mice that first-order thalamocortical neurons were inhibited during sleep spindles, reflecting thalamic gating of sensory input to the cortex. At the same time, higher-order, anterior thalamocortical neurons were not suppressed, potentially enabling offline processing of memories through their connections to the hippocampus and the frontal cortex. Thus, thalamic sleep spindles might be a key signature reflecting the balance between inhibition of sensory input and facilitation of mnemonic processes during sleep. However, before specific thalamic and sleep spindle-related contributions to memory processes in humans might be discussed in full detail, several basic questions await further investigation. It is, for example, not known which and how thalamic nuclei participate in the generation of sleep spindles in humans and whether a comparable division of labour with regards to filtering external events and facilitating mnemonic processes exists.

The role of the human thalamus during memory processes while awake is not well understood. Evidence from human intracranial recordings point towards an involvement of the anterior and mediodorsal thalamus in memory processes, but a direct contribution of the human thalamus to memory reactivation still needs to be identified. Animal models describe an interaction between hippocampal ripple events and thalamic activity, but data from humans is lacking to date. A potential parallel between thalamic functions during wakefulness and sleep could be suppression of distraction. The frequency range of sleep spindles roughly corresponds to alpha/beta-band oscillations during wakefulness. Indeed it has been shown that sleep spindle-related neurons of the thalamic reticular nucleus are likewise associated to attention-related alpha oscillations during wakefulness, pointing towards a state independent thalamic inhibition principle.

Similar to the gating of information on a sensory level via alpha oscillations, prefrontal beta bursts might reflect an active inhibitory process to suppress distracting information at a higher level of the cortical hierarchy. Intriguingly, beta oscillations have been suggested to reflect interactions between mediodorsal thalamus and prefrontal cortex during memory processes. However, whether such thalamocortical beta activity plays an active role during memory reactivation while awake is an open question. Answers to these questions will depend on future studies that take the anatomical and functional intricacies of the thalamic micro-circuitry into account, which are, unfortunately, notoriously hard to dissect in humans.


Are high-frequency ripples a general marker for memory reactivation across brain states?

High-frequency ripples have been suggested to establish neuronal communication between the hippocampus and neocortex supporting the consolidation of memory traces. In humans, hippocampal ripples (approx. 100 Hz) have been reported during sleep, quiet rest and active waking periods. Could such coupled ripple events index the coordination of memory reactivation (in the cortex) by the hippocampus, independent of the physiological state?

While the available evidence from sleep studies seems to agree on a crucial role of high-frequency ripples for memory reactivation and consolidation, recent findings relating hippocampal ripples to awake memory retrieval seem to point in a similar direction.

Vaz et al. provided evidence for ripple events that trigger memory reactivation in awake humans. Importantly, these ripple events were coupled between the medial temporal lobe and middle temporal gyrus and occurred before successful memory retrieval. Recent findings by Norman et al. support the link between ripples and memory reactivation during free recall. Successfully remembered items were indexed by increased counts of hippocampal ripple events prior to their recall, which coincided with memory reactivation in visual areas. However, not all studies support this relationship. Zhang et al. showed that only ripples recorded during non-REM sleep and not during the waking state triggered memory reactivation and predicted memory performance. It is important to note that the authors analysed spontaneous hippocampal ripples during rest, whereas Vaz et al. and Norman et al. analysed coupled ripples during active retrieval. One could, thus, speculate that there is a functional difference between coupled versus local ripples and between ripples during rest and active retrieval. However, ripples during awake memory retrieval seem to be rather rare events, and not every successful retrieval attempt is accompanied by coupled ripples. More coupled ripples could be detected with direct recordings from the hippocampus or a larger spatial coverage (which is not easy to accomplish in human intracranial recordings), but for now the question remains whether high-frequency ripples consistently index memory reactivation during successful retrieval in humans. Recently, Liu et al. identified ripple-like MEG activity localized to the medial temporal lobe which coincided with replay of previously learned abstract sequences. It would be highly interesting to see to what extent high-frequency MEG/EEG activity reflects ripples detected in intracranial data. A non-invasive approximation of hippocampal ripples could be a very promising tool that would certainly inspire many researchers interested in memory processes during sleep and wakefulness.


Is awake memory reactivation sufficient for memory consolidation?

Several researchers have argued that reactivating a memory trace could either facilitate or induce memory consolidation. Following this account, every successful retrieval from episodic memory should facilitate/induce memory consolidation. The testing effect shows that memory retrieval, when compared with re-learning, results in better memory performance. This effect is particularly strong with longer retention intervals (e.g. greater than 24 h), leaving the question whether sleep is exclusively needed for consolidation unanswered. The first evidence for a ‘fast route to memory consolidation’ irrespective of sleep comes from a recent fMRI study reporting a rapid emergence of memory engrams in the parietal cortex, but human electrophysiological evidence is still lacking.


The emergence of emotionally modern humans: implications for language and learning

Sarah Blaffer Hrdy, Judith M. Burkart — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2020. PMC7293152, CC BY 4.0.

According to the Cooperative Breeding Hypothesis, apes with the life-history attributes of those in the line leading to the genus Homo could not have evolved unless male and female allomothers had begun to help mothers care for and provision offspring. As proposed elsewhere, the unusual way hominins reared their young generated novel phenotypes subsequently subjected to Darwinian social selection favouring those young apes best at monitoring the intentions, mental states and preferences of others and most motivated to attract and appeal to caretakers. Not only were youngsters acquiring information in social contexts different from those of other apes, but they would also have been emotionally and neurophysiologically different from them in ways that are relevant to how humans learn. Contingently delivered rewards to dependents who attracted and ingratiated themselves with allomothers shaped their behaviours and vocalizations and transformed the way developing youngsters learned from others and internalized their preferences.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Life history and learning: how childhood, caregiving and old age shape cognition and culture in humans and other animals’.


Setting the Plio-Pleistocene stage

Apes with the life-history attributes of Homo sapiens could not have evolved unless male and female allomothers had helped mothers care for and provision offspring. We refer to this as the ‘Cooperative Breeding Hypothesis’. Across the animal world, breeding systems characterized by group members other than parents (alloparents) helping parents to care for and provision offspring have evolved many times in social insects, in 9% of 10 000 species of birds, and in perhaps 3% of 4500 species of mammals. The prevalence of allomaternal care tends to be higher among social carnivores, and higher still among primates, where females or males other than the mother care for and at least minimally provision offspring in more than 30% of species. Extensive alloparental in addition to parental provisioning, however, is only found among humans and in a distantly related subfamily of New World monkeys, the Callitrichidae, containing marmosets and tamarins.

Various circumstances conducive to the evolution of cooperative breeding pertained among hominins in Plio-Pleistocene Africa. These included: cohesive social groups containing close relatives; production of increasingly costly, slower maturing young; increasing reliance on hunting and extractive foraging such that immatures began to depend on adults to acquire or process food for them and to facilitate their learning appropriate skills; and importantly, ecological instability.

Unpredictable rainfall against a background of increasing aridity almost certainly figured in the emergence of shared provisioning among early hominins. In spite of recurring periods of food shortage accompanied by high child mortality, hominin mothers in the line of bipedal apes leading to H. sapiens were producing slower maturing, increasingly large-brained, energetically more costly offspring, yet also beginning to produce infants after shorter intervals. How? Along with others, we hypothesize that by 2 Ma with Homo erectus, hominin mothers increasingly relied on assistance from other group members to supplement offspring who even after weaning remained years from nutritional independence. Earlier weaning meant mothers could resume cycling, conceive again and reproduce faster. This is a conservative interpretation. Others propose the emergence of allomaternal assistance as early as Australopithecus or Ardipithecus.

Over time, stacking of closely spaced dependent offspring would further intensify reliance on allomaternal provisioning. By the Pleistocene, we suspect that hominins were adopting even more flexible residence patterns than those found in the other great apes, with ‘multi-local’ residence patterns beginning to resemble those typical of twentieth century hunter–gatherers. Greater female autonomy of movement and the emergence of pair-bonds (why they emerged being a topic still debated) would increase chances that probable fathers and matrilineal kin resided nearby.

Greater postpartum tolerance on the part of ordinarily possessive ape mothers coevolved with growing, albeit still facultative, neurophysiological responsiveness on the part of fathers and other allomothers increasingly motivated to care for immatures. The more dependent upon allomaternal assistance primate mothers are, the more sensitive they become to cues of social support, especially postpartum. Compared with the reflexive protectiveness and possessiveness typical of all but the most stressed or inexperienced great ape mothers, who carry comatose or even dead infants for days, postpartum commitment of these hominins would likely have been more conditional. Across traditional societies, mothers are known to abandon at birth infants considered defective as well as adjust parental investment in line with social and ecological circumstances [ch. 12 and 13],.

Infants who could no longer count on being the sole priority of a single-mindedly dedicated mother had to elicit and maintain maternal commitment while also attracting, and increasingly ingratiating themselves with, others. Rewarded when they succeeded, over the course of development infants learned to express otherwise latent sociocognitive potentials. As we use the term, ‘ingratiating behaviours' refer to anything an infant does to increase his or her chances of being chosen as the object of beneficent attention (including provisioning), where offspring best at ingratiating themselves with others would be most likely to survive. Over the course of development, these youngsters learned to monitor and be interested in the intentions, thoughts and feelings of others, and even internalize their preferences. Over generations, youngsters best at doing so would be more likely to survive, resulting in populations of apes emotionally very different from their ancestors.

In this contribution, we reconstruct how growing up in such a social environment may have impacted dependent immatures along with the cascading consequences this would have had on uniquely human forms of learning and language. We start by asking: How would dependent immatures respond to the challenges of eliciting vital, but facultatively proffered, maternal and allomaternal attentions? What would this little ape need to do? Since none of us can go back in time to observe how early hominin infants would have behaved, we draw on evidence for how non-human ape and modern human babies responded in ‘virtual ‘experiments with and without allomaternal care to test assumptions made here about how hominin infants would have behaved with it, as well as on evidence from callitrichid monkey infants reared in a cooperative context.

Although inevitably speculative, this reconstruction is informed by both comparative evidence and a growing understanding of the survival challenges hominin infants confronted. As our point of departure though, we begin with callitrichid monkeys, the only extant primates besides humans with extensive alloparental in addition to parental care and provisioning of infants. Callitrichids face similar challenges to those hominin infants would have although they do so endowed with far smaller brains. Callitrichid mothers customarily give birth to twins, and owing to postpartum oestrus are immediately pregnant again. They are thus lactating and gestating at the same time, and the new set of offspring is born before the previous one is fully independent. This costly reproduction is only possible because other group members act as allomothers and help by carrying infants, protecting them and substantially provisioning them. Like human mothers, callitrichid mothers are highly tolerant towards other group members interested in carrying their babies, and they adjust their maternal investment relative to how much help is available. Helpers provisioning immatures exhibit highly prosocial motivations. Within the social group, all members are characterized by high levels of tolerance and prosociality compared with independently breeding primates. Youngsters born to hominin mothers who, when conditions permitted, similarly produced more closely spaced young (in ‘as-if’ litters), confronted challenges similar to those callitrichid twins face. Thus did infants in distantly related species converge upon similar modes of eliciting succour from allomothers as well as mothers. But how might such solutions be extended and transformed if dependent immatures were endowed with much more powerful ape cognitive systems to begin with?


The hominin infant's to-do list


First order of business: appeal to mother

Although born with open eyes, able to blurrily seek the eyes of someone else, newborn apes are otherwise altricial, utterly dependent on others for warmth, protection, locomotion and food. Fortunately, apes enjoy the built-in mammalian advantage of being born to a mother who during gestation was suffused by hormones lowering her threshold for responding to sounds and smells of a warm, wriggling, fluid-covered baby. If only the newborn can make it to maternal nipples, root, suck and stimulate lactation, ensuing surges in oxytocin and prolactin further enhance her nurturing impulses. With lactation underway, even an inexperienced first-time ape mother becomes increasingly bonded to this newcomer. But over the course of hominin evolution, increasing maternal reliance on allomaternal assistance would have rendered mothers increasingly sensitive to cues of available social support. In the absence of social support, the commitment of even the most experienced human mother falters (see especially).

Over evolutionary time, more contingent commitment preadapted human mothers to become more discriminating than other apes. In addition to their parity, prior experience, physical condition and likely social support, mothers began to respond to specific physical attributes of each infant. Consciously or not, each costly infant was in competition not only with still nutritionally dependent older siblings, but also with subsequent infants a mother might bear under ecologically more opportune conditions if only she retrenched upon investment in this one, or bailed out altogether, and resumed cycling sooner. Over the course of the Pleistocene (perhaps earlier?), hominin babies came under increasing pressure to look good and sound vigorous right at birth, advertising that they were full-term, robust, good bets for survival, worth further investment. This challenge may help explain why, over the course of hominin evolution, fetuses began to stockpile adipose tissue at an unlikely time, just prior to squeezing through what were becoming increasingly narrow birth canals. By now, human neonates are born much fatter than other apes (ca 10–14% body fat contrasted with 3–4% for chimpanzees). No doubt, an extra dollop of energy was initially beneficial for thermoregulation and fuelling fast-growing brains, contributing to the emergence in mothers of sensory biases favouring plump babies. Over time, plumpness may also have come to serve as an infantile equivalent of sex appeal, seducing mothers into embarking on a long, exorbitantly costly, endeavour [ch. 21].

Once increasingly discriminating hominin mothers began to notice associations between birth weight and later outcomes, one of evolution's more consequential self-reinforcing feedback loops would be underway. With runaway social selection (sensu West-Eberhard) for neonatal plumpness underway, extra energy stores became available for brain development, in turn rendering allomaternal provisioning even more essential. Over generations, allomothers as well became attuned to cues of neonatal viability, adjusting levels of commitment accordingly.

This brings us to the hominin infant's second order of business.


Attract others

Because hominin mothers as well benefitted from allomaternal assistance, it behoved females to reside near trusted others, matrilineal kin and/or adult males who were probable fathers. Unlike exceedingly possessive great ape mothers, mothers in traditional human societies not only tolerate, but often encourage postpartum contact with infants. Whether this shift was due to innately more tolerant temperaments, to greater autonomy in selecting whom to live among, or both, is not clear. In any event, maternal tolerance facilitated intimate exposure of trusted group members to infantile smells and sounds, generating maternal-like affiliation-promoting neurophysiological transformations in male and female allomothers alike. Among humans, only a few hours of intimate contact with grandparents is sufficient to produce surges in oxytocin and rearrange priorities. (Among marmosets, similarly, oxytocin increases not only in mothers, but in all group members after the birth of new babies.)

But other factors also enter in, including the allomother's own physical condition and past caretaking experiences, and alternatives available, as well as the infant's vulnerability and level of need. Facing this uncertainty, cues from infants themselves to elicit allomaternal involvement would again be paramount. Over time, human allomothers become sensitive to the same viability cues that mothers respond to. Magnetic resonance images of the brains of modern humans reveal that even nulliparous women find the faces of plump, healthy-looking (read full-term) babies ‘cuter’ and more rewarding to look at. Not only physical viability cues, but also behavioural interactions, will attract carers. Humans are born with neurological capacities comparable with those of other apes, but differences soon emerge. At birth, both chimpanzee and human newborns seek out eyes, are capable of mutual gazing, and caught just right, may imitate someone else's outstretched tongue or other facial expressions. Both species exhibit reflexive ‘fairy smiles’, soon to be replaced by more open-eyed ‘social smiles’ in response to someone else. Among newborn chimpanzees however, that someone else would always be their own mother. In traditional human societies, however, blearily gazing newborns engage a wider audience. Over time as infants grow accustomed to and learn to trust specific allomothers, the sort of emotional bonds primate infants forge with mothers prove sufficiently elastic to encompass multiple attachment figures, an average of six attachment figures among the Central African Aka hunter–gatherers Courtney Meehan studied. It is not known whether human infants are more prone to forge multiple attachments than are other apes if cared for by both mothers and others because the latter virtually never are.

A challenge unique to immatures of cooperatively breeding primates is that they are not in continuous contact with their carer. This can be buffered by proactive caring motivations by adults, as in callitrichids, where group members check babies on carriers, eager to take over when necessary, or proactively announce that they have found food and are ready to share it. Such provisioning is different from food sharing patterns in other primates, where at most, immatures are passively tolerated when taking their mother's food. Nevertheless, without being in constant body contact with a single carer, cooperatively breeding immatures face the chronic risk of being overlooked.

Among apes such as chimpanzees, gorillas or orangutans, newborns constantly held by mothers in direct skin-to-skin contact have less need to smile or vocalize. Calling would only be useful if separated, or later, at weaning, as youngsters object to maternal rejections. Otherwise, low, scarcely audible sounds make more sense than loudly advertising to predators ‘vulnerable baby here!’ Among primates with shared care, life tends to be noisier. Infants need to stay ‘in touch without touch’ and may complain to prompt maternal retrievals. Infant langur monkeys spend up to 50% of their first day of life being held and carried by females-other-than-mothers, calling incessantly.

Life is even noisier in animals with biparental and alloparental provisioning, where babies beg for treats. This correlation is best documented in birds, but it also holds for callitrichids and humans, who fall among the most voluble of primates. Vocalizing starts early in marmosets and tamarins, becoming more frequent and specialized over the course of development. Begging calls spike around weaning, when allomaternal provisioning is most critical. But these infants not only are noisy beggars, but also engage in babbling-like behaviors, by producing repetitive, random-sounding streams of elements of adult vocalizations that can last for more than a minute. This babbling-like behaviour comes with likely cost because it is noisy and makes infants conspicuous to predators. It peaks around weaning, when allomaternal provisioning is most critical, and turns out to be an effective attention getter, as adults are more likely to approach and interact with immatures that are babbling.

Something similar goes on in humans, with the onset of babbling around the time (in hunter–gatherers at least) when allomothers begin providing edible treats (discussed below). Within weeks of birth, human infants emit engaging noises. Learning progresses more rapidly if infants notice others reacting. By 10 weeks some actually take turns vocalizing. The sound of a baby laughing generates an especially powerful stimulus, audible at some distance and signalling emotional engagement. As babies put two and two together, conditioning plus early glimmerings of inter-subjectivity lead them to incorporate sensory biases and preferences of potential caretakers into their own expanding repertoires for ingratiating themselves with others. By nine months, little humans go out of their way to be helpful. Human youngsters clearly care about what others think of their performance.


Vocal control and more flexible vocalizing

Old World monkeys and apes are sophisticated communicators. Vervet monkeys, for example, emit one kind of call to alert group-mates of raptors, a different alarm call for terrestrial enemies. They are also sensitive to context, taking into account who is listening and who is out of range, modifying calls accordingly. Apes, particularly chimpanzees and bonobos, also make extensive use of hands and arms to communicate what they want, extending an arm palm up when requesting something. Even so, their vocal repertoires never achieve the richness, sophistication and flexibility of their gesturing. Rather, non-human apes seem surprisingly limited in the kinds of vocalizations they emit, a marked contrast with humans, who early in development increase vocal control and start to build larger and more flexible vocal repertoires. So how did this get started?

One important element developed elsewhere concerns the challenges that adults, rather than the immatures of cooperative breeders, are confronted with. They face increasing necessity to coordinate their activities, such as for instance infant transfers, with others and their prosociality motivates them to share not only food with others, but also information that is useful for them. Vocal communication is a prime candidate to provide a solution to exactly these type of challenges, and accordingly, the large vocal repertoires of cooperatively breeding birds are driven by an increase in contact and alarm calls. But a critical element is added by immatures, who grow up in an increasingly voluble environment.

From a comparative perspective, it seems clear that shared care with babies carried by others increases vocalization frequency. Allomaternal provisioning and contingent reinforcement raises the stakes, with begging leading to more calling, especially if immatures have to compete for rewarding attentions. Through the expression of otherwise latent capacities and their subsequent shaping, attention-getting and begging set the stage for selection to favour enhanced vocal control accompanied by goal-oriented shaping of acoustic structure. Indeed, as in marmosets, vocal development in humans occurs earlier than motor development. By contrast, infants in constant close contact with single-mindedly dedicated mothers (as in independently breeding species such as chimpanzees) would more often be called upon to cling than cry.

Experiments with marmosets undertaken by Asif Ghazanfar and his team demonstrate how contingent responsiveness by caretakers generates turn-taking and also speeds development of specialized, more mature-sounding calls. For 40 min a day during the first two months of life, each of a pair of marmoset twins was separated from their parents and allowed to call. Whereas one twin was provided consistent feedback from taped parental calls, the other twin received less consistent feedback. The more reliable the feedback, the more rapidly infants progressed from the coarse, random-sounding vocalizations typical of immatures to cleaner, more tonal, adult-like phee calls. By two to three months of age, their utterances resembled the turn-taking ‘conversations’ human babies engage in with their caretakers. Chow et al. further showed that parents actively intervene when immatures make typical mistakes while learning to engage in turn-taking. If immatures get timing wrong and ‘interrupt’ their parents, parents add an extra break before responding. When immatures respond with a wrong call type, the parents themselves interrupt them with the correct phee call. In another example of convergent evolution between human cooperative breeders and these tiny-brained, distantly related New World monkeys, Takahashi and colleagues noted that infant marmosets responding to contingent reinforcement rely on one of the same circuits to guide their phee calls that humans use in speech. The patterning of FoxP2 expression in marmosets' cortico-striatal circuit turns out to be analogous to that in both humans and songbirds. Moreover, a role of oxytocin has recently been proposed for the social motivation and evolution of vocal learning and language, which is consistent with the increase of oxytocin in all group members after the birth of marmoset immatures and its link with prosociality among group members.

Observations of golden lion tamarins (Leontopithecus rosalia) in Brazil illustrate how these increasingly complex, two-way conversations function in natural habitats. Solitary adults traverse the treetops hunting for spiders, insects, and small frogs, prying prey from inside holes or tangled foliage. Youngsters learn to locate, stalk, and dexterously extract and dispatch struggling, sometimes biting or stinging, prey. Learning takes time and practice as immatures grow more adept at responding to adults volunteering prey. Deliveries peak near the end of weaning, when up to 90% of their diets are provided by (mostly male) allomothers. Food transfers are often initiated by youngsters begging. But when adults locate food, provisioners too emit staccato ‘food-offering calls’. Mothers, probable fathers, and other helpers extract the food and call the infant to come and get the food out of their hands. As prey-catching efficiency improves, but before youngsters reach adult proficiency, mentors switch from ‘come and get it’ calls, to ‘hey, look here’. Adult calls direct older immatures' attention to a particular patch of substrate where prey have been detected. The finder then waits nearby while the young locate and extract it for themselves. Such adjustment of adults to immature skill levels has also been found in other callitrichids in captive studies (cotton-top tamarins, common marmosets). As infants increasingly associate an allomother's particular call with a particular reward, they register regularities in how others respond to particular sounds they themselves make.

Opportunities to link own vocal productions to regularities in how others respond to them are particularly evident for babbling (humans) or babbling-like behaviours (callitrichids). In humans, babbling emerges spontaneously at around five to seven months, about the same time as the emergence of milk teeth, which among hunter–gatherers often coincides with allomothers beginning to offer premasticated and other (sometimes ‘kiss-fed’) treats to infants. At some level (consciously or not), children recognize that babbling attracts rewarding attention. This may help explain why older children revert to ‘baby talk’ after the birth of a younger sibling (S. B. Hrdy 2019, personal observation). Interestingly, babbling in marmosets not only attracts carers, but also speeds up the acquisition of adult-like forms of vocalizations. Moreover, babbling similarly can resume and spike among juvenile marmosets following the birth of new infants in their group. Apparently, the same message is being conveyed: ‘pay attention to me!’

‘If babbling changes adult behaviour in predictable, infant-oriented ways’, as Goldstein and colleagues propose, ‘infants should be able to recognize changes in others' actions as a result of their vocalizations’ [p. 8034], launching more goal-oriented vocal control. As with other apes, humans are born with limited motor control over articulation, but beginning around six months humans gain increased vocal control, including more tongue involvement with vocal tracts continuing to develop over the first 15 months, contributing to greater vocal flexibility and larger vocal repertoires in humans than other apes. Impressed by the coincidence in timing between increased vocal control and the transition from baby-calls to babbling-like streams of consonants and vowels, Klaus Zuberbühler makes a compelling case that increased control derived from hominin infants' need to attract allomaternal attentions [pp. 71, 77–79]. Although ‘babbling’ is widely assumed to have first emerged in human children in preparation for the acquisition of spoken language, akin to Mother Nature adding training wheels on a bicycle, it makes more sense (and is far less teleological) to consider the initial emergence of traits like babbling as byproducts of infantile needs to attract carers. A key innovation here was increased motor control over articulation. Once vocalizations become subject to voluntary control they can be shaped via conditional reinforcement, critical preadaptation for the eventual evolution of spoken language.


Incorporate others' preferences

These novel capacities emerged within broader sociocognitive contexts where apes were already endowed with rudimentary Theory of Mind, already using rich gestural repertoires, already employing tools and devising new modes of extracting food. By the Late Pleistocene, selection pressures from a range of new subsistence and socioecological challenges also favoured greater inter-individual coordination. It is within this broader context that recent proposals need to be understood that link cooperative breeding to the evolution of enhanced capacities not only for joint attention but also for language.

Social selection favouring more flexible communication coincided with other coevolving feedback loops. But, by themselves, neither larger brains nor increased uses for cooperation are sufficient to explain the evolution of language. As psychiatrist Peter Hobson reminds us ‘before language there (had to be) something else … that could evolve in tiny steps … that something else was social engagement with each other. The links that can join one person's mind with the mind of someone else are, especially to begin with, emotional links' ([p. 2]; emphasis in original). But what about the foundational steps? Klaus Zuberbühler's speculations point us in a promising direction: ‘Once vocal control has evolved to help infants secure care, it is only a small step to producing utterances in context-specific ways’ [p. 80]. But, Zuberbühler adds, such a transformation ‘may only be possible against a background of other psychological skills, such as the ability to share intentions and attention, and well-developed comprehension’ [p. 80]. He expands on Tomasello's insight regarding a ‘major difference’ between humans and other primates, involving (as Tomasello would later phrase it) capacities for ‘intersubjective sharing’ [pp. 121–122].

Eagerness to ingratiate themselves with others would be enhanced by allomaternal care, an interpretation consistent with observations of captive chimpanzees who, when co-reared by responsive human caretakers (allomothers of a different species) as well as their mothers, become more eager than wild chimpanzees are to engage in targeted helping of others. Even though human-tended chimpanzees do not acquire spoken language and other distinctively human traits, they nevertheless develop greater concern for the intentions and goals of others, learning the power that particular gestures, facial expressions and utterances exert on others. For example, human-reared chimpanzees point to what they want in ways that wild apes almost never do. The expression of such interactive potentials in ape phenotypes would increase opportunities to share and increase effectiveness of helping. Over the course of human evolution, such opportunities may have increased selection favouring neuroendocrine systems conducive to prosocial responses, including the increasingly ‘dopamine dominated’ striatal systems being documented by palaeontologists working in concert with neuroscientists. Interactions with processes that opened parental neural care systems to a wider range of social stimuli might have resulted in more unsolicited food sharing and general prosociality. Apes who needed to be more interested in the preferences of others would also find it more emotionally rewarding to do so. This chain of admittedly speculative reasoning brings us to a key component to the hominin infant's to-do list.


Add psychological dimensions to Kindchenschema

Like all other catarrhine primates, apes in the line leading to the genus Homo would grow up keenly aware of kin ties, alliances, statuses and friendships as well as competencies and reliability of group-mates. The quantitative skills and manipulative capabilities of a chimpanzee or orangutan fall in the same ballpark as those of two-and-a-half-year-old humans. They too exhibit rudimentary capacities for theorizing about what others know. Our Last Common Ancestors with these apes were already beginning to register what others intended or wanted.

So imagine such an ape growing up reliant on the competencies and motivations of others. If contingent reinforcement from allomothers encourages turn-taking and speeds up acquisition of adult vocalizations in tiny-brained marmosets with only minimal awareness of what another marmoset knows, how much more sensitive to the thoughts and preferences of others would apes already attuned to the thoughts and intentions of others become? Contingent allomaternal responses generate new psychological dimensions to Kindchenschema as apes growing up this way are conditioned to become more aware that others have preferences worth appealing to.

Youngsters would be conditioned not only to monitor the intentions of others, but increasingly to probe their thoughts and feelings so as to better conform to their preferences. Over time, learning which facial expressions, sounds or conversational rhythms result in solicitude would mature into more sophisticated understanding of how others perceived their own intentions, behaviours, and thoughts and to begin to care about their ‘reputations’.


New dimensions to social learning


Expanded avenues

All apes are endowed with inordinate behavioural flexibility along with aptitudes for manipulating objects and imitating others. In the case of chimpanzees and orangutans, knowledge about what to eat, where to find and how to process it, is transmitted vertically during 5–8 years of intimate association with one other trusted individual, their mother. Mothers set the stage for socially induced independent practice or, as in the case of chimpanzee nut-cracking, very occasionally make helpful adjustments. The processes by which little apes copy and learn from others are however primarily self-initiated. Provisioning and shared care broadens this initial context for social learning.

From an early age, youngsters with shared care observe a wider range of role models. For example, cooperatively breeding magpie jays with many helpers become more adept at harvesting arthropods than jays growing up with few. Furthermore, demonstrators among cooperative breeders tend to be more prosocial, even deliberately helpful. Recall that golden lion tamarin allomothers (often probable or possible progenitors) provide the majority of food for nearly weaned infants. First, adults call when they have food to offer, but with older immatures, they call them to places where prey is hidden and the immatures have to do the extraction themselves. As performance levels plateau, food calls cease. Rapaport [p. 746] compares the progressive, developmentally sensitive behaviours and vocalizations tracking the needs and skills of youngsters that allomothers use to provide foraging assistance to ‘teaching-like’ behaviour (cf. for cooperatively breeding meerkats).

Incorporating situation-dependent vocalizations enhances effectiveness of demonstrations while contingently delivered food rewards rivets the attention of mentees. Anyone who has ever tried to habituate wild creatures, or even skittish domestic ones, know that food rewards provide the quickest short-cut to taming or training them. Now add to this prosocial–provisioning–vocalizing mix mentalizing mentees eager to accommodate their mentors. Possibilities for information transfer expand exponentially.


Emotionally modern and mentalizing mentees

Even in the absence of detectable Theory of Mind, tiny-brained marmosets prove remarkably prosocial, sharing food or rushing to assist others. Marmosets coordinate with others to crack open tough fruits. They take babies from mothers then voluntarily return them for nursing. Tamarins even use guided demonstrations accentuated by vocalizations to transmit age-appropriate information. In this respect, tiny-brained callitrichids converge on something close to what ethnographers studying hunter–gatherers term ‘natural pedagogy’. Yet even as tamarins adjust demonstrations to the skill level of pupils, they do so without mentalizing what another knows. Marmosets who readily follow the gaze of another individual do so without registering what that individual is seeing.

So what would happen if instead of the reflexive responsiveness of marmosets, the primates undertaking shared care and provisioning of young were already larger-bodied, bipedal, tool-users possessed of rudimentary Theory of Mind, with brains in the process of doubling from the 400 cm3 of chimpanzees or australopiths to the more expansive brains typical of H. erectus? And what if novel contexts for social development coincided with new foraging tactics, more valuable food packets, and with these, a raised ‘grey ceiling’ so that over time, whenever—and for whatever reasons—they became favoured, even costlier brains could evolve?, Little hominins growing up as cooperative breeders would have opportunities to observe group members of different ages and sexes, trust them as their mothers do, gauge their competencies and intentions, decide who was likely to be helpful or not—something modern humans begin to do from as early as three months old. And what if at the same time these infants were beginning to monitor the intentions of others, seeking to conform to their preferences, even beginning to internalize their preferences, and at the same time also developing larger and more flexible vocal repertoires?

Many factors were involved in the evolution of language. Some clearly had to do with the unusual way apes in the line leading to H. sapiens were reared. Learning language is a highly social endeavour. Anyone who has ever spent time with babies knows that their mother is not the only person who speaks to them in high-pitched ‘motherese’. It is from eagerly listening to others that youngsters acquire new phonemes and words. Immatures learn new sounds better in the presence of someone else than if by themselves. As young as nine months, babies watching instructive videos more readily discriminate sounds and learn foreign phonemes when another child is present.

Not only current interactions but also past experiences with others influence children's readiness to mentalize what someone else knows. When experimenters set up a computer game where 5-year-olds must explain to someone else where to collect a digital prize, they were told that the unseen other (really the experimenters' confederate) was either a toddler or another 5-year-old. Subjects adjusted instructions accordingly. When told their partner was a toddler, subjects spent longer explaining the game than when they assumed the other child was older. The more days between birth and age four that the subject had spent with others in daycare, the readier that child was to take the others' level of understanding into account, mentalizing what they were likely to already know.


Concern for reputation and learning

Within the first year of life, hominins approaching this emotional modernity would, like behaviourally modern humans today, actively seek to become the object of someone else's attention, and feel at least a glimmer of pride when approved of, and shame when disapproved of. After a year or so these youngsters may have already been disposed to spontaneously offer something interesting or desirable to someone else, the way 14-month-old behaviourally modern humans do today, even proffering an item differing from their own preference. Today's behaviourally modern Western children readily absorb and follow normative rules [pp. 224–225], expect others to do so, and care desperately about their own reputations. When someone is trying to teach them something they not only feel pride at success, but want others to know ‘I did it!’ Equipped with sophisticated language these same children as early as 3 or 4 years of age employ flattery to cultivate the goodwill of others. By early adulthood, behaviourally modern humans find it so pleasurable to talk about themselves that among contemporary Westerners, it stimulates the same neural regions as anticipating something delicious to eat would. This concern with presentation of self, reputation and impressing others may fuel tendencies to register the intentions and preferences of others who are modelling behaviour and then conform. This may explain why human children, but not other apes, do not just imitate demonstrators, but sometimes ‘over-imitate’ them, adding all the same ritualized bells and whistles even if these exceed procedures needed to accomplish a task. Acute sensitivity to the intentions, thoughts and preferences of others, eagerness for their approval, and a rush of dopamine and other neurochemical rewards when sensing approval, add new dimensions to social learning.

Primatewide, youngsters learn to conform to social rules while growing up, for example internalizing proper etiquette for approaching a dominant group member. But human children display special eagerness to ingratiate themselves with others and internalize their preferences, adding subjective dimensions to this quest. Evolutionary psychiatrist Randolph Nesse hypothesizes that runaway social selection favouring self-consciousness and concern with reputation in creatures already interested in mentalizing what others think explains why our ancestors evolved the internal self-monitoring known as ‘a conscience’.

Whether or not such ingratiating tendencies encourage humans to behave in fair, generous, or civic-minded rather than more self-serving ways probably depends more on socioecological contexts and immediate goals than on what are sometimes taken to be hard-wired moral sensibilities. As early as six months, long before language, infants exhibit preferences for helpful versus hurtful others. However, it is unclear how prosocial versus self-interested such preferences are. In experiments simulating voir dire in an imaginary courtroom, Melnikoff & Bailey asked adult subjects who they would prefer in the jury, depending on whether they served as lawyer for the defence or for the prosecution. The researchers were struck by how conditional on peoples' current goals their preferences for moral versus immoral actors could be. Whatever standards prevail, quests to demonstrate mental and behavioural responses conforming to others’ preferences pave the way for internalizing group norms and for behaviour that others consider ‘moral’. It is exactly this third party perspective that is strikingly lacking in non-human primates, who otherwise exhibit various building blocks of morality. Other primates may conform to local traditions, but they do not seem to care if others do so or not, and even unusually prosocial primates such as marmosets do not manage their reputations by increasing helping efforts when observed by others. Humans, being able to represent how their behaviour appears to others (perhaps as a result of their great ape cognitive heritage), appear distinctively motivated to care about their reputations. The same would be advantageous for marmosets too, but they may simply not be able to cognitively represent how they appear to others.


Conclusion

Across taxa, longer spans of post-weaning or post-fledging dependence are predictable corollaries of cooperative breeding. In the case of the cooperatively breeding apes in the line leading to the genus Homo, reliance on care and provisioning from alloparents as well as parents conditioned dependent immatures to develop un-ape-like eagerness to monitor and care about the intentions of others, mentalize what they were thinking and feeling, and seek to ingratiate themselves with them, leading to the expression and refinement of otherwise latent ape potentials. This novel context for development and social learning coincided with directional social selection favouring youngsters best at ingratiating themselves with protectors, mentors and providers. By 2 Ma this combined process of development-plus-social selection was already contributing towards the emergence of ape cognitive and emotional phenotypes very different from those among our Last Common Ancestors with chimpanzees and other apes.

Without any foresight on Mother Nature's part concerning how important questing for intersubjective engagement and escalating concerns with reputations would eventually turn out to be, H. erectus infants would have been conditioned to monitor and care about what others were thinking, including thinking about them, and rewarded for internalizing their preferences in ways others apes were not. Reputational concerns make having a conscience increasingly useful. Long before the emergence of anatomically modern big-brained humans by 300 000 years ago, or before behaviourally modern humans with symbolic thought and language, these emotionally different apes were already eager to appeal to and help others. Furthermore, observation of humans today suggests that these tendencies emerge early and in both sexes, with girls if anything better able to interpret others' expressions and feelings than boys.

By the Late Pleistocene, when cooperative hunting of big game, division of labour and sharing of food became important, hominins of both sexes must already have become predisposed to read the intentions of others in order to coordinate with and perhaps help them. By the time coordinated hunting of large animals was established in the human repertoire—whether by 400 000 years ago as in Tomasello's reconstruction or closer to Chris Boehm's ‘magic number’ [p. 313] of 250 000 years ago—it was probably accompanied by ‘punitive social selection’ against stingy or overly domineering men, as documented for most well-studied hunter–gatherer societies [p. 164]. If so, these members of the genus Homo would have already become motivationally very different from their more self-centred, solipsistic ape ancestors. In Boehm's account, sanctions against bullies could extend to exile or even execution, pressuring group members to conform and adopt normative ‘moral’ behaviour. But with internalization of norms already underway, archaic humans were, from an early age already sensitive to what others felt and thought about them, concerned about personal reputations, and eager to cooperate. They were preadapted to internalize ways of behaving and expressing themselves that others preferred.

With higher quality food sources and with multiple provisioners continuing to buffer weanlings from recurring shortages, the grey ceiling limiting energy available for brains was raised. The stage was set for these emotionally modern early humans to meet Late Pleistocene social and ecological challenges in ways that would favour the evolution of even more costly, anatomically modern, brains. Accompanying motivations would also lead to the emergence of more sophisticated modes of vocal communication that would vastly expand both the ability to learn from multiple others (via gossip and teaching) and the reach and importance both of normative ways of doing things and of reputations. Such processes would stress conformity and further favour the internalization of group norms and human indoctrinability, hallmarks of behaviourally modern humans.


Rules of collective migration: from the wildebeest to the neural crest

Adam Shellard, Roberto Mayor — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2020. PMC7423382, CC BY 4.0.

Collective migration, the movement of groups in which individuals affect the behaviour of one another, occurs at practically every scale, from bacteria up to whole species' populations. Universal principles of collective movement can be applied at all levels. In this review, we will describe the rules governing collective motility, with a specific focus on the neural crest, an embryonic stem cell population that undergoes extensive collective migration during development. We will discuss how the underlying principles of individual cell behaviour, and those that emerge from a supracellular scale, can explain collective migration.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Multi-scale analysis and modelling of collective migration in biological systems’.

Keywords: neural crest, collective migration, contact inhibition of locomotion, supracellular, co-attraction, alignment


Collective migration

The annual migration of the great wildebeest in the Serengeti, a group of malignant cancer cells escaping into a blood vessel, bacteria swarming over solid surfaces to produce a biofilm: all of these are examples of collective behaviour, which refers to the phenomenon that an individual unit's actions are dominated by the influence of others. More specifically, these are all examples of collective migration, which is defined by the movement of groups whereby individuals both move in concert with one another and affect each other's behaviour. This differs from individual migration, whereby movement is undertaken solitarily, and individuals do not influence each other. The interactions between individuals migrating collectively leads to emergent behaviour. For instance, birds show patterns of movement that are only achieved when they are part of a flock, and swarming bacteria perform large-scale swirling and streaming motions which are not seen during individual bacterial migration (which instead, move by swimming).

Collective migration can offer distinct advantages over solitary migration. The swarming behaviour of bacteria, whereby movement of multicellular bacterial aggregates is powered by rotating flagella, optimizes the search for nutrients and other necessary resources. Most invasive cancers infiltrate collectively, which defines malignant function, and cancer aggression is likened more to collective cell migration than to single-cell migration. At the other end of the spectrum, animals like the great wildebeest must relocate to new sources of food; their enormous herd size providing protection and a greater chance of survival from predators during their migration. Collective motion also appears as an emergent trait in artificial self-propelled particles and other non-living systems. Thus, collective migration is evident at practically all scales, in both natural and artificial systems.

The universality of this phenomenon has led to intense investigation; collective migration has been studied substantially in animals, but only comparatively recently in cells. The fact that collective motion is conserved at different scales suggests that there may be common, underlying principles that govern the movement of groups. It has long been noted in animals that there is a remarkable degree of long-range organization that cannot be apparent to each individual, meaning there must be some degree of leadership or communication. Likewise, embryonic morphogenesis involves large-scale tissue movements that presumably require cells to direct one another because communication and influence are necessary to organize large groups.


Rules for collective migration

Altogether, the combined empirical evidence and computational simulations of collective motion of different entities suggests that three ‘rules’ are sufficient to describe and explain collective movement: repulsion, attraction and alignment.


Definitions of the three rules of collective migration.

Attraction: a behaviour that causes individuals to steer towards the centre of mass, which is the average position of individuals within a certain radius.

Repulsion: the behaviour that causes individuals to steer away from all its neighbours.

Alignment: a behaviour that causes an individual to line up with individuals close by, such that it moves with the averaged heading of the nearby individuals.

Firstly, repulsion, whereby individuals separate to avoiding crossing neighbours, is exhibited between all individuals of the group. Individuals cannot exist in the same space as one another; rather, they are loosely connected. Secondly, the group's cohesion is driven by individuals being attracted to one another, which means that individuals steer towards the average position of neighbours, which ensures that the group migrates collectively rather than individually. Repulsion is finely balanced with attraction to maintain the integrity of the group as a loose collective. Thirdly, the movement of neighbouring individuals is aligned, meaning they coordinate motion and move in the same direction (the average heading of neighbours). For example, starlings decide their orientation from only the six or seven closest birds. When neighbour velocities are not aligned, the group becomes disorganized and collective motility is impaired. The ubiquity of these ‘rules’ has led to intense investigation. For example, these principles form the basis of a multiplicity of mathematical models that are used to study collective motion. One of the first simulations of collective motion was an artificial program called Boids, which simulates the flocking behaviour of birds. Since then, the principles of swarm intelligence, the collective behaviour of self-organized systems, has even been employed in artificial intelligence, such as robotics. In this review, we will focus on how these rules work during collective cell migration, and how they fit with phenomena that emerge at a higher level: that of the whole migratory group.


Collective cell migration: epithelial versus mesenchymal cells

Collective cell movements underly many developmental and pathological processes including embryonic morphogenesis, wound healing and diseases like cancer invasion. During collective cell migration, many cells move together, cooperatively and coordinately, in a manner similar to that of animals. To a large degree, the behaviours exhibited depend on the type of cells that are moving: collective migration events can involve epithelial sheets with cells retaining apicobasal polarity markers, including strong, stable intercellular junctions; alternatively, they can involve the cooperative interaction between looser mesenchymal cohorts mediated by transient adherens junctions.

Epithelia are normally quiescent, with cells ‘jammed’ in their respective positions, lacking the energy to overcome high junctional tension. Fluidization of the tissue via an unjamming transition in which tension is reduced permits collective motility of large epithelial groups, such as those cells involved in wound healing or cells from asthmatic airway epithelium. During such large-scale movements, cell adhesion is high, and the group remain tightly bound, and all cells contribute equally to the group's movement. For example, leader and follower cells produce protrusions oriented in the direction of migration, and both produce traction forces that pull on the substrate. The arrest of cellular monolayers can also be driven by strong cell–cell binding.

By contrast, mesenchymal cells, such as the mesendoderm (also called the prechordal plate) or neural crest, display front-rear polarity with weaker, more transient cell contacts, which may redirect protrusion formation contributing to the overall directionality. This allows them to migrate as a loosely connected pack. Mesenchymal migration is, therefore, far more akin to the type of collective motion observed in animals, bacteria and synthesized self-propelled particles than epithelial migration is. Consequently, the three conserved ‘rules’ of collection motion are likely to be more applicable to mesenchymal migration than to epithelial migration.

Surprisingly, the concepts that emerge from the study of cells reveal that the types of interactions, behaviours and movements are like those of collectively moving animals. Repulsion between cells arises as a consequence of the formation of cell–cell contacts between individuals, and it has been observed in the collective migration of mesenchymal cell populations like the neural crest, the mesendoderm and cancer cells. By contrast, in epithelia, repulsion does not occur as cells are tightly held together by strong intercellular junctions.

Group cohesion arises when cells express both a ligand and its receptor. This leads to cells being mutually attracted to each other. For example, Dictyostelium amoebae secrete the chemoattractant cyclic AMP (cAMP), which encourages aggregation, whereas mutual cell attraction is not required in epithelial cells because they maintain strong intercellular adhesions which keep them together.

Finally, in all the cases, cell motion is aligned. For instance, Xenopus axial mesoderm cells move in the same direction as one another. Surprisingly little is known about the mechanisms governing cell alignment, despite it being essential for collective motion. In some cases, such as the collective migration of keratinocytes in vitro, alignment is partially a consequence of each individual cell responding to growth factor signals, although this also does not totally account for their coordinated alignment. Likewise, the orientation of daughter cells following mitosis can form locally ordered regions, but this does not explain the aligned motion of non-proliferative cells. Instead, coordination of motion requires direct or indirect communication between cells of the migrating group.

Various models of self-propelled particles and inelastic collisions between particles have demonstrated that collision properties affect alignment. The collision properties of certain malignant cancer cells also mediate the alignment of cell motion. Cells at the edge of the group have more propulsion than those in the centre because they experience less contact inhibition of locomotion—a mechanism of cell repulsion that repels cells away from cell–cell contacts—which leads to edge cells having stronger alignment interactions compared with those at the centre of the cluster.

In fibroblasts, cell collision guidance, which refers to the reorientation of cells to one another after collision, is vital for generating long-range alignment patterns in a mechanism that involves suppression of the actomyosin machinery at the cell contact. A consequence of this behaviour is the generation of an anisotropic extracellular matrix (ECM), which then feeds back to cell alignment. For instance, contact guidance, which refers to the response of cells to the underlying substrate or hard boundaries, can mediate the orientation of cells. Thus, mutual alignment between fibroblasts and underlying collagen fibres produces a long-range ordered cell pattern.

The surge of research into collective migration over the past decade has led to various simulations being developed. Computational models that simulate collective cell migration in a variety of morphogenetic processes have also shown that, like for animal migration, repulsion is needed. Likewise, spontaneous emergent coordinated patterns of movement, such as streaming and swirling, arise in models as a consequence of the inherent cellular behaviours involved in contact-dependent repulsion, such as cell repolarization.

Although collective migration can be simulated in various ways, the enormous availability of quantitative biological data on cells means quantitative mathematical models which incorporate experimental values can be of great benefit to understanding the relationship and relative importance of various parameters, such as attraction, repulsion and alignment. The quantitative information from cell dimensions, cell trajectories (such as velocity and persistence) and gene expression are all parameters that can be incorporated into models to test their relative contribution to collective behaviour. For example, quantitative modelling was important in concluding that although aligned fibroblasts are more persistent in their movement, this was insufficient to drive alignment and lead to anisotropic ECM.

Interestingly, many different experimental and theoretical studies have described that directional movement by chemotaxis is enhanced when cells cooperate as a group compared to if they responded as individuals, including neural crest cells, lymphocytes and breast organoids. Thus, theory and empirical observations have shown that these simple interaction rules are sufficient to generate the mechanisms responsible for emergent group migratory properties and highly efficient collective behaviour.


Collective migration of neural crest cells

Many of the cellular mechanisms responsible for controlling these ‘rules’ have been discovered in a model system for collective mesenchymal migration: the neural crest. The neural crest is a multipotent stem cell population of vertebrate embryos. It is initially formed from the ectoderm, at the border of the neural plate. It then delaminates and undergoes extensive migration to colonize the pharyngeal arches on the other side of the embryo, where they contribute to many different tissues. Different subpopulations of neural crest arise from and inhabit different regions along the embryo. For example, the cranial neural crest contributes most of the tissues that make up the craniofacial structures, including bones of the skull, cartilage and connective tissue of the nose and the underlying nerves.

Most neural crest migrate collectively as chains, in streams or as sheets, in a manner that has been likened to invasive cancers. For example, cephalic neural crest cells maintain short and long-range cell–cell interactions. Like other cell types that have the capacity to migrate both collectively and individually, overall movement is faster and more directional when the cells migrate as a group, which indicates that interactions between individuals of the group promote directionality. Interestingly, the emergence of improved efficiency of motion in collectives, compared to individuals, is also evident at other scales; collective bacterial swarming is more efficient than solitary swimming. Similarly, chicks of king penguins, larval damselfish and pigeons all move straighter, faster and via more efficient routes when moving as a group rather than alone.

Repulsion between neural crest cells is mediated through contact inhibition of locomotion (CIL; a), which refers to the phenomenon by which colliding cells repolarize and move away from each other. CIL is the driving force for the collective cell migration of many different cell types. The mechanism by which CIL occurs depends on the type of migratory cohort, but in the case of the neural crest it involves N-cadherin, ephrins and planar cell polarity signalling from sites of cell–cell contact, which leads to high levels of RhoA at the contact and high levels of Rac1 away from the contact. These small GTPases regulate adhesive forces such that cells pull away from each other.

The attraction between neural crest cells is mediated by short-range chemotaxis (also called co-attraction; b). Each cell within the group expresses both chemoattractant, C3a, and its cognate receptor, C3aR, meaning cells are attracted to each other. A balance between the repulsive and attractive mechanisms is essential for collective migration, ensuring the neural crest is maintained as a loosely connected migratory group, which behaves in a fluid-like manner. When the attraction is too strong, the group fails to move; when repulsion is too strong, the cells disperse away from each other, and migration becomes individualistic rather than collective.

Finally, cell tracking and particle image velocimetry has revealed that there is alignment of motion during collective neural crest migration, with neighbouring cells tending to move in the same direction at a similar speed (c). The mechanisms governing aligned cell movement are unclear, but likely involve space limitations and the fact that cells are adhered to one another. Also, N-cadherin-dependent adhesion junctions form between colliding cells, meaning that through physical attachment, cell movement is aligned until the repulsion stage is reached. This is further supported by theoretical and experimental evidence, which shows that the emergence of persistently polarized collective cell movements when they are under confinement can arise from CIL between colliding cells. Dictyostelium cell alignment in collective migration is, in part, directed by the induction of a new leading edge from cell–cell contact and the accompanying forward protrusion, which has been called contact activation of locomotion (or contact following of locomotion), indicating that the effects of cell collision may be more multifaceted than initially thought.


Directional collective migration requires external cues

Unlike the motion of some animal groups, like many shoals of fish, or synthetic self-propelled particles, collective cell migration normally displays persistent long-range directionality. However, whereas collective motion emerges from the ‘rules’ outlined above, when cells are confined, overall net displacement does not, because these ‘rules’ alone do not confer front-rear polarity on the group, nor necessarily a mechanism by which to move in a persistently directed manner. This implies that there are mechanisms of guidance. For the neural crest, it is the cell's interaction with the surrounding environment that directs their persistent directional movement. The directionality of neural crest migration is dependent on collective chemotaxis, which refers to the movement of a cell group along a gradient of soluble chemical cues. Various chemokines and growth factors have been identified for neural crest migration in different species and subpopulations. In Xenopus and zebrafish, placodal cells, which give rise to structures of the sensory nervous system, secrete the chemokine SDF1 (also called CXCL12), which attracts cranial neural crest cells. The neural crest expresses its cognate receptor, CXCR4, causing it to ‘chase’ after the placodes by collective chemotaxis. CIL mediates repulsion between the cell populations, meaning the placodal cells ‘run’ away. This ‘chase and run’ mechanism results in the directional movement of both populations. Computational and experimental evidence supports the idea that collective migratory streaming exhibited by the neural crest is an emergent property based on the combined interactions of neural crest cells with each other and with the placodes. Chemotaxis similarly mediates the directional migration of most of the other collectively migrating cell populations, including border cells, the posterior lateral line primordium, tracheal cells during branching morphogenesis and endothelial cells during angiogenesis. Non-artificial systems of collective migration also rely on external signals to direct motion; bacterial swarming is a chemotactic response to nutrient gradients, and many animal groups move along food gradients.

A variety of other mechanisms also play a role during neural crest migration. Repulsive signals, including ephrins, semaphorins, extracellular matrix molecules like versican and the BMP antagonist, DAN, exist between the neural crest to confine them into streams, promoting directional migration and preventing ectopic neural crest invasion. Mechanical signals of mesoderm stiffness are sensed by the overlying neural crest to controls its migration; it can only migrate when the mesoderm is rigid and not when it is soft, meaning both chemical and mechanical signals control collective neural crest migration. Confinement of neural crest cells also promotes directional persistence by optimizing density based on the parameters of CIL and co-attraction. These mechanisms all work together to regulate neural crest cell migration, but they are not exclusive to the collective migration of neural crest: sensing of mechanical signals, chemorepellents and confinement also control collective cell migration in other systems, and external attractive and repulsive cues are easily analogous with collective movement at other scales.


Supracellular mechanism of collective chemotaxis

At all scales, although the three rules of attraction, repulsion and alignment can generate collective motility, they are insufficient to explain persistent directional collective migration; instead, external signals are required to direct movement. For the neural crest, collective chemotaxis to placodal cells secreting SDF1 is essential in determining directionality. The mechanism by which the cranial neural crest of Xenopus and zebrafish undergo collective chemotaxis has been recently elucidated; this shows that the neural crest move by supracellular migration, which is a type of collective migration whereby movement can be better described by the behaviour and activity of the group as a whole rather than by the individuals of which it is comprised.

Neural crest cells at the edge of the group are mechanically connected by a multicellular actin cable, seemingly via N-cadherin adherens junctions across cell contacts. The actin cable is associated with the motor protein, non-muscle myosin II, which exerts contractile force synchronously between adjacent cells at the rear of neural crest groups. At the front, contraction is inhibited by neural crest chemoattractants such as SDF1 or PDGF. This contraction forces cells to intercalate forwards from the rear, with a knock-on effect causing those cells in front of them to move forward. Overall, this causes cells in the group to flow forward, and they do so with liquid-like behaviour thanks to loose N-cadherin-dependent cell adhesions that are rapidly turned over. Thus, a physical supracellular mechanism coordinates long-range collective chemotaxis of neural crest cells.

Alongside contractile forces traction forces also contribute to the directed migration of collective chemotaxis. Cells at the free edge have larger protrusions than those in the centre, and SDF1 enhances Rac1 activity in leading cells, meaning traction forces are higher at the front than anywhere else. High traction at the front and high contraction at the rear likely work together to move the group forward, in a similar way to how single cells move, therefore, making the cluster act like a ‘supracell’.


Integrating individual rules with supracellular behaviour

How do the three rules that govern collective cell migration (i.e. attraction, repulsion and alignment) espouse those at the supracellular level? Supracellular contractile forces make neighbouring neural crest cells come closer together (a). These forces cause cells to intercalate forward from the rear (b, blue cell). This intercalation at the rear of the cluster moves this rear cell forward, increasing the contact with the cell immediately in front of it which was unpolarized (b, yellow cell). This increased contact leads to a CIL response in the front cell favouring its forward polarity (c, yellow cell). This polarized cell will move forward, contacting other cells and inducing the same cycle of polarization by CIL leading to the propagation of a forward wave of movement (d). Interestingly, the movement of edge cells into the middle was also observed and modelled in collective malignant cancer cell chemotaxis.

The mechanism of supracellular contractility, therefore, complements the rules of collective motion. In the absence of an actomyosin cable, the neural crest are motile but do not display chemotaxis, which indicates it is required for directed movement but not cluster motility. Supracellular contractility supports co-attraction, by forcing cells to move together. In doing so, colliding cells form cell adherens junctions and often move together before the repulsion phase of CIL. Thus, contractility promotes the alignment of neighbouring cell motion by promoting CIL to generate directed flow. This enhancement of CIL may explain why clusters of neural crest cells are more persistent and directional than cells that move alone. Cell flow is also dependent on the group's low intercellular adhesion strength. In support of this idea, mathematical modelling has shown that collective movement can be heavily modulated by changing CIL parameters. Finally, the supracellular polarity of traction forces likely also contributes to aligned cell movement in the group.

The role for supracellular behaviour may be different in other systems. However, similar to the neural crest, the actomyosin network is highly organized across epithelial sheets during wound healing, including a supracellular actomyosin cable at the wound edge that is required for coordination of cell movements and to prevent scarring.


Conclusion

There is substantive evidence that repulsion, attraction and alignment are sufficient for the collective movement of animals, and equivalent behaviours have been described for the collective migration of many cell types, especially mesenchymal cells. We are now also beginning to understand the mechanisms by which directed movement emerges. The mechanism of directed migration for the neural crest is supracellular, however, it remains an interesting and open question as to whether supraorganismal behaviour exists. Like in cells, the long-range direction can be imparted through communication between individual animals within a group, and leader and follower individuals can emerge. In some animal groups, individuals do not take on specific roles of leaders and followers; instead, directed movement is imparted by each individual knowing how much local food there is. Unlike in cells, animals do not have a physical structure that coordinates their directed movement; instead, group awareness and behaviour can emerge when organisms move more quickly in unfavourable environments; this modulation of speed as a function of local conditions allows the group to detect gradients even when any particular individual cannot. These individual-to-individual behaviour differences result in fluid-like movement similar to that of supracells, which suggests some collective animal migration may be better understood at the level of the group. And in the case of animals, there is also growing evidence that migratory animals use social cues and that collective factors can shape movement.

The cellular mechanisms by which alignment arises are also unclear. Although CIL can contribute to cell alignment, whether this is the predominant, or only, mechanism by which alignment occurs is not known. Given alignment only constitutes a portion of the CIL response, it is likely that other methods of cell–cell communication contribute to aligned motion.


Data accessibility

This article has no additional data.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

This article has no additional data.


Dimensions of Animal Consciousness

Jonathan Birch, Alexandra K. Schnell, Nicola S. Clayton — Trends in cognitive sciences, 2020. PMC7116194, CC BY 4.0.

How does consciousness vary across the animal kingdom? Are some animals ‘more conscious’ than others? This article presents a multidimensional framework for understanding interspecies variation in states of consciousness. The framework distinguishes five key dimensions of variation: perceptual richness, evaluative richness, integration at a time, integration across time, and selfconsciousness. For each dimension, existing experiments that bear on it are reviewed and future experiments are suggested. By assessing a given species against each dimension, we can construct a consciousness profile for that species. On this framework, there is no single scale along which species can be ranked as more or less conscious. Rather, each species has its own distinctive consciousness profile.


The Emerging Science of Animal Consciousness

A conscious being has subjective experiences of the world and its own body. Humans are conscious beings, but are we alone? In 2012, the Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness crystallised a scientific consensus that humans are not the only conscious beings and that ‘non-human animals, including all mammals and birds, and many other creatures, including octopuses’ possess neurological substrates complex enough to support conscious experiences. This consensus has allowed debates about animal consciousness to move on from the old question of whether any non-human animals are conscious to the questions of which animals are conscious and what form their conscious experiences take.

In the past 5 years, an interdisciplinary community of animal consciousness researchers, drawn from neuroscience, evolutionary biology, comparative psychology, animal welfare science, and philosophy, has begun to coalesce around these questions, as shown, for example, by the founding of the journal Animal Sentience in 2016. The aim of this field is to study the inner lives of animals (their subjective experiences and feelings) in a scientifically rigorous way, on the model of the scientific study of human consciousness.

The field faces significant methodological challenges because non-human subjects cannot verbally report their experiences. But if you think the absence of verbal report precludes any scientific investigation of animal consciousness, you should be prepared to say the same about consciousness in preverbal infants and patients in a minimally conscious state. Animal consciousness research rests on the idea that, by synthesising the insights and methods of multiple disciplines, and by identifying a battery of behavioural, cognitive, and neuronal criteria for attributing conscious states, these challenges may be overcome.


Are Some Animals ‘More Conscious’ Than Others?

At present, the field is young and beset by foundational controversy: controversy about the criteria for consciousness and the methods for studying those criteria. At the heart of these debates lies a conceptual question: How can we make sense of variation in consciousness across the animal kingdom? Does it make sense to say that some animals are ‘more conscious’ than others? Does consciousness come in degrees? If it does, how can ‘degrees of consciousness’ be measured and investigated? For example, could a bird be more conscious than a fish? Could an octopus be more conscious than a bee?

In studies of disorders of consciousness in humans, the idea of ‘levels of consciousness’ has been influential. Clinicians assessing patients with disorders of consciousness assign a level of consciousness, with coma at one end of the scale, conscious wakefulness at the other, and various intermediate grades (such as deep sleep and light sleep) in between. It is tempting to apply this to non-human animals. We could attempt to construct a single sliding scale of animal consciousness, along which birds (such as corvids), fish, cephalopods (such as octopuses), bees, and so on could all be placed.

This, however, would be a mistake. Recently, the value of the ‘levels of consciousness’ framework for conceptualising disorders of consciousness in humans has been called into question. The main concern is that, if we try to force states of consciousness into a one- or twodimensional scale, we will inevitably neglect important dimensions of variation. Critics of the ‘levels’ framework argue that we should instead adopt a multidimensional framework, capturing several different dimensions of variation.

This point carries over to the case of animal consciousness, where the variation is likely to be even more substantial and multifaceted. If the overall conscious states of humans with disorders of consciousness vary along multiple dimensions, we should also expect the typical, healthy conscious states of animals of different species to vary along many dimensions. If we ask ‘Is a human more conscious than an octopus?’, the question barely makes sense. Any single scale for evaluating questions such as these would end up neglecting important dimensions of variation. For this reason, we suggest that animal consciousness research should adopt a multidimensional approach, not a single-scale approach, when thinking about variation across the animal kingdom.

What are the main dimensions of variation we can investigate? What do we currently know about those dimensions? What future work would help us learn more about them? Our aim here is to propose a multidimensional framework for thinking about animal consciousness. We will highlight five significant dimensions of variation: perceptual richness (p-richness), evaluative richness (e-richness), integration at a time (unity) and across time (temporality), and self-consciousness (selfhood). For each dimension, we will briefly review existing evidence that bears on that dimension and we will propose future work that could help us rank a given species along that dimension. We will then consider some of the challenges for a multidimensional framework. We turn now to our five dimensions.


P-Richness

Our first dimension of variation is p-richness (the ‘p’ stands for ‘perceptual’). Animals vary in the level of detail with which they consciously perceive aspects of their environment. Animals that make fine-grained conscious discriminations in a particular sense modality (e.g., vision) can be said to have p-rich experiences in that modality. Any measure of p-richness is specific to a sense modality, so we should not refer to a species’ overall level of p-richness. A species might have richer perceptual experiences than another in one modality, but less rich experiences in a different modality. For example, given their sensory abilities, elephants are likely to have much richer olfactory experiences than humans but less richly detailed visual experiences.

Within a given sense modality, it is possible to resolve p-richness into different components. For example, the richness of visual experience depends on bandwidth (the amount of visual content experienced at any given time), acuity (the number of just-noticeable differences to which the animal is sensitive), and categorisation power (the animal’s capacity to sort perceptual properties into high-level categories). Does this make it impossible to develop overall evaluations of p-richness for conscious vision? Not necessarily. If one species outperforms another with respect to all three components, it has richer visual experiences overall. However, if the different components of p-richness are poorly correlated (e.g., because some species have low bandwidth and high acuity, or vice versa), we may decide that cross-species comparisons should use these finer-grained dimensions rather than p-richness. That is an issue for further investigation.

To probe questions of p-richness rigorously, we need a way of disentangling conscious and unconscious perception. Blindsight illustrates the difference: subjects report blindness in part of their visual field, but they are able to use visual information about objects in that region to guide action. The standard interpretation of blindsight is that the subject has no conscious experience of what they perceive in the blind region. In the absence of verbal report, what provides evidence that a particular stimulus is perceived consciously rather than unconsciously?

In broad terms, there is a neurological route and a cognitive route to evidence of conscious perception. The neurological route involves experimentally induced blindsight. Monkeys with lesions of the primary visual cortex, V1, have been shown to respond like humans with blindsight.

When trained to report the presence or absence of a visual stimulus, they report its absence in a region of their visual field, but they can still use information about that stimulus to guide action in forced-choice tasks. This leads to the following thought: if a stimulus is processed in a brain region such that damage to that region results in blindsight, then a healthy, blindsight-free animal of the species in question probably perceives that stimulus consciously. In principle, this strategy could be extended to non-mammals, based on identifying homologues or analogues of V1 in those animals. While blindsight solely concerns vision, there is some evidence for parallel phenomena in hearing and olfaction. The drawback to this neurological route is that it is invasive and difficult.

The cognitive route involves looking for cognitive tasks that are linked to conscious perception in humans and then testing how well the target species of animal performs those tasks when the stimuli are presented in a particular modality. Various forms of learning have been linked to conscious perception. One important example is trace conditioning, a version of classical conditioning in which the conditioned and unconditioned stimuli are separated in time. For instance, a tone may be followed, a second later, by a blast of air in your eye. There is evidence that humans learn the association between the tone and the blast only if they consciously experience the stimuli and the temporal relation between them. This points to a possible link between conscious perception and the learning of temporal relations. If we find that an animal is able to do trace conditioning on some stimulus, then that is some evidence, albeit not conclusive evidence, that it consciously perceives that stimulus. This cognitive route is likely to be easier and cheaper to apply to a wide range of animals. Whichever route we take, one crucial challenge is to design tests that push an animal’s conscious perception to the limit, inducing maximally p-rich experiences. To achieve this, the stimuli need to be carefully tailored to the animal’s sensory abilities and ecology.


E-Richness

The second dimension of variation is e-richness (the ‘e’ stands for ‘evaluative’). Some conscious emotions, such as pain, fear, grief, and anxiety, feel bad. These are affective experiences with negative valence. Others, such as pleasure, joy, comfort, and love, feel good. These are affective experiences with positive valence. All affective responses have positive or negative valence. Valence provides ‘an evaluative “common currency” for use in affectively-based decision making’. Animals are likely to vary in the richness of their experiences of valence. We think valence is likely to prove a particularly useful concept for understanding variation because, while it may be dubious to attribute specific human emotions (such as anxiety and grief) to a wide range of animals, valence must be present wherever there is affect-based decision making. Some human emotions, such as thirst, hunger, and pain, are plausibly shared by a wide range of animals, but we do not want to take this for granted.

Finding out how positive and negative valence are produced in an animal, and how these processes vary across taxa, should be a central goal of animal consciousness research. Assuming that all conscious animals have an evaluation system of one sort or another, there remains room for grades of sophistication. Some animals may be constantly evaluating small changes in their internal states and external surroundings, as we do, whereas others may respond only to more substantial changes. Like p-richness, e-richness has more than one component. Rich affect-based decision making takes many inputs into account at once (evaluative bandwidth) and is sensitive to small differences in those inputs (evaluative acuity). If these components turn out to be poorly correlated, we may decide that cross-species comparisons need to use finer-grained dimensions.

Experiments probing motivational trade-offs can provide insight into how evaluation systems vary. In one such experiment, rats (Rattus norvegicus domestica) were presented with an opportunity to access a sugar solution by entering a cold chamber. The rats traded off the sugar content of the solution against the temperature of the chamber: all else being equal, they were willing to withstand colder temperatures to get sweeter rewards. This is evidence of an evaluative common currency: the value of sugar is weighed subtly against the disvalue of cold. Is it also evidence of conscious experience of the currency? It is relevant that the trade-off is crossmodal: this is not an animal evaluating options using information from a single sense, but an animal weighing the taste of a liquid against the temperature of the ambient environment. This requires the crossmodal integration of information, which has often been linked to consciousness, although it may not strictly require it.

Similar experiments have been done on iguanas (Iguana iguana) and hermit crabs (Pagurus bernhardus), with similar results. What is lacking, so far, is interspecies comparisons of the sophistication of the evaluations being made by different species and investigations of how sophisticated the evaluations need to be to indicate conscious affect. The motivational tradeoff paradigm has great potential and should be a priority for future work.


Integration at a Time (Unity)

Conscious experience in healthy adult humans is highly unified. You have a single perspective on the world and everything of which you are consciously aware is part of that perspective. All the experiences generated by your brain have a common subject. There are not two or more subjects housed within the same skull.

Psychologists have long been fascinated by pathologies, such as the split-brain syndrome, in which this unity apparently breaks down. Subjects who have had the corpus callosum wholly or partially severed sometimes display disunified behaviour when different stimuli are presented to the two halves of the visual field. If these subjects are asked to verbally describe what they see, they will report what is visible on the right-hand side of their visual field. This is because language is predominantly controlled by the brain’s left hemisphere, which only has access to visual information from the right-hand side. Yet, when asked to draw with the left hand what they see, they will draw what is visible on the left-hand side of the visual field. This is because the left hand is predominantly controlled by the right hemisphere, which only has access to visual information from the left-hand side. This disunity of behaviour leads to a debate about whether experience itself is also disunified. Could there be two subjects within one skull?.

The same questions can be asked of non-human animals. Birds are particularly interesting in this respect because they are natural split-brains. They have no structure akin to the corpus callosum connecting the two hemispheres of the dorsal pallium, which is homologous to the cortex in mammals. Could every bird be a pair of conscious subjects, intimately cooperating with each other? A similar debate arises with respect to the cerebral ganglia and brachial plexus (a nerve ring around the top of the arms) of the octopus. These structures are connected, but they have some degree of functional autonomy from each other. Could an octopus have two, or even nine, conscious perspectives on the world? Current evidence does not settle these questions; our aim is only to raise them.

What provides evidence that an animal has a single, unified perspective as opposed to multiple perspectives? It is crucial to investigate cognition as well as neuroanatomy. Here we can draw inspiration from experiments on split-brain humans. One paradigm involves training an animal to perform a task in response to a stimulus presented to one eye and seeing whether the task can still be performed when the stimulus is presented to the other eye: interocular transfer. In pigeons (Columbia livia), the visual field for each eye can be divided into two regions: the red field, which is the lower frontal region important for guiding pecking, and the yellow field, which covers the upper frontal and lateral regions. There can be interocular transfer between the red fields of each eye, but there seems to be no interocular transfer between the yellow fields in nearly all individuals. Some particular individuals can do it, but no one knows why.

There is a need for more experiments that investigate the integration of the two visual hemifields and the related question of whether information presented to one hemisphere is accessible for the guidance of actions controlled by the other. For cephalopods, there is a further question about the extent to which information presented to the arms is accessible to the brain, or vice versa. The existing evidence in corvids and cephalopods presents a complicated picture, with some studies pointing towards surprising dissociations and others indicating substantial integration.

Clues regarding the unity of consciousness may also come from unihemispheric sleep. If one hemisphere sleeps while the other is awake, that is suggestive of more than one stream of consciousness, though not conclusive. This has been observed not only in various birds, but also in dolphins and seals.


Integration across Time (Temporality)

Normal human experience is highly integrated across time. Our experience of the world takes the form of a continuous stream, one moment flowing into the next. For example, we experience the leaves of a tree blowing in the wind; we do not infer the motion from a series of static snapshots. Human experience is also temporally integrated across longer timescales. We are able to recall past experiences and simulate future experiences, a form of ‘mental time travel’. Let us call this dimension temporality.

What could constitute evidence for a temporally integrated stream, rather than a staccato series of fragmented experiences? One possibility is to look for mechanisms that edit sensory input to produce a coherent, continuous stream from discontinuous stimuli. In humans, evidence for such mechanisms comes from the colour-phi illusion, in which two spatially separated, differently coloured dots flashed in sequence are perceived as a single moving dot that changes colour halfway across the gap. The brain is not simply mistaking two static stimuli for a moving stimulus: it is constructing a coherent account of how the stimulus is changing. Colour-phi has received a great deal of discussion in the philosophy of consciousness. What matters here is simply that, if we found colour-phi in non-human animals, this would be evidence that they too have mechanisms that transform a series of discrete stimuli into a coherent experience of change. Although our evidence of colour-phi in humans comes from verbal report, it is possible in principle to study colour-phi in the absence of verbal criteria. Animals could be trained to respond differently to perceptions of continuous and discrete stimuli and to stimuli that change colour half-way and stimuli that do not. We could then present them with a colour-phi test stimulus, gradually reducing the interstimulus interval. Would there be a threshold at which the animal switched from categorising the stimulus as discrete to categorising it as continuous and would the animal categorise the stimulus as one that changes colour half-way?

Turning to integration over longer timescales, what provides evidence for conscious mental time travel? This higher grade of temporality probably requires substantial cognitive sophistication. The most promising places to look for it are great apes, cetaceans, corvids, and cephalopods. The evidence for mental time travel in corvids is particularly strong. Corvids are able to produce rich and flexible representations of past events and prepare for specific future scenarios. For example, California scrub-jays (Aphelocoma californica) plan ahead when making decisions about where to store food, and there is evidence that ravens (Corvus corax) plan ahead when offered tools or tokens that they will need later for a task that they would never have encountered in the wild. There is evidence that some corvids can plan spontaneously, and such future-oriented behaviours cannot be solely explained through reinforcement learning. Although these results have been criticised, we regard spontaneous planning as a promising nonverbal indicator of conscious temporal integration.

There is a need for more evidence that planning and remembering in animals involves conscious simulation. What form could this evidence take? If an animal can remember the source of a memory (e.g., vision or smell) and not just the content, that is suggestive of conscious recall, though not conclusive. In humans, a simulated episode (for example, walking across a room) unfolds over the same length of time as a perceptual experience of the same episode. If we found evidence that the mental rehearsal of future actions unfolds over the same length of time as the actions themselves, this would be evidence of something strikingly close to human mental time travel.


Self-Consciousness (Selfhood)

Self-consciousness, or selfhood, is the conscious awareness of oneself as distinct from the world outside. Like all the other dimensions, this is a capacity that admits of gradations. A minimal level of self-consciousness may be present in a wide range of animals. It involves registering a difference between self and other: registering some experiences as representing internal bodily events and other experiences as representing events in an external world. Any complex, actively mobile animal needs a way of disentangling changes to its sensory input that are due to its own movements from changes due to events in the world.

A more sophisticated grade of self-consciousness involves awareness of one’s own body as a persisting object that exists in the world. This capacity is plausibly needed to pass a mirror-mark test, in which the test subject is able to recognise a mark seen in a mirror as a mark on its own body. Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus), Asian elephants (Elephas maximus), and magpies (Pica pica) have reportedly passed such a test. A striking study in 2019 reported that a fish, the cleaner wrasse (Labroides dimidiatus), can also pass the test. Fish able to view a coloured mark on their throat in the mirror were much more likely to exhibit throat-scraping behaviour, as if to remove a parasite, than fish who had transparent marks or no access to a mirror. These results are controversial, but they suggest that the grade of self-consciousness required to pass the mirror-mark test is possessed by a wide range of animals.

This falls short of a yet more sophisticated grade of self-consciousness, which involves awareness of oneself as the persisting subject of a stream of experiences, distinct from other such subjects. This is an ability related to mindreading (or theory-of-mind). It involves turning mindreading inward, to recognise oneself as the subject of mental states. We take this to be a form of metacognition, although the relation between metacognition and mindreading is contested. Humans possess this grade and there is (debated) evidence to suggest that non-human apes and corvids possess some mindreading ability. However, there is very little evidence of the ‘turning inward’ of mindreading. Evidence that animals can make experience projections, inferences from what they experience in a particular situation to what others will experience, bears on this question. Such evidence has recently been found in great apes. In a study involving chimpanzees, bonobos (Pan paniscus), and orangutans (Pongo genus), only apes who had themselves experienced a barrier as opaque were able to infer that others would not see objects on the other side of it.


Challenges for a Multidimensional Framework

A multidimensional approach to animal consciousness faces several key challenges. One is to find dimensions at the right grain of analysis. If our goal were to capture all interesting variation in conscious states, we would never have enough dimensions. We have to be pragmatic. The five dimensions discussed previously are intended as top-level categories that can help us coordinate inquiry into finer-grained variation. As noted in the sections on p-richness and e-richness, there may well be ways of resolving our top-level dimensions into new spaces of further, finer-grained dimensions. We welcome debate on the issue of whether our five dimensions achieve the appropriate grain of analysis.

A second challenge is to make sure the dimensions are distinct enough from each other. What is not required is that the dimensions should be completely uncorrelated. If one dimension is found to correlate positively with another, this is an interesting result, not a problem. For example, it may turn out that temporality is correlated with selfhood, because richer forms of temporal integration enable a species to evolve a higher grade of self-consciousness. This is a hypothesis worthy of further investigation. It does, however, matter that the dimensions are conceptually distinct from each other (that they are not the same thing described in two different ways). We have tried to ensure that our dimensions are conceptually distinct. For example, although temporality and selfhood may be correlated, they are different concepts: it is conceivable that an animal could have a richly temporally integrated stream of experiences without any awareness of itself as the subject of those experiences, and it is conceivable that an animal could have temporally fragmented ‘staccato’ experiences while being aware of itself as the subject of those fragments.

A third challenge is to find dimensions that facilitate informative comparisons between species. We hope it will ultimately be possible to devise a standardised battery of tests that generate a ranking of species on each dimension, but we are not there yet. That is a big challenge for the future (see for experimental paradigms with the potential to provide some insight). Our aim has been to present dimensions that allow for fruitful experimental investigation, in the hope of stimulating further discussion about how we might try to rank species along these dimensions.


Concluding Remarks

Our five dimensions of animal consciousness vary across and within species. Instead of thinking about variation between species in terms of levels of consciousness, we should think about multidimensional consciousness profiles.

We are not yet in a position to construct numerical measures of all five dimensions. What we can do is make broad, evidence-based comparisons. For example, neuroanatomical considerations suggest that conscious experience in mammals (which have a corpus callosum) may be more highly unified than in birds (which do not) and that experience in birds may be more highly unified than in cephalopods. This conjecture may be overturned by more detailed evidence, but it is a starting point. Comparisons of this type can be made along all five dimensions, allowing us to build up consciousness profiles that tell us where a species is most likely to fit in the space of possible forms of experience, given the evidence we currently have (see for a conjectural starting point, intended to illustrate the general idea of a consciousness profile). A summary of the current evidence regarding corvids and cephalopods is given in and.

We are still some way from being able to construct detailed, evidence-based consciousness profiles for a wide range of species (see Outstanding Questions). Our aim here has been to make a case for the value of consciousness profiles in preference to the idea of a single sliding scale on which some animals are considered more or less conscious than others.


Synchronisation of Neural Oscillations and Cross-modal Influences

Anna-Katharina R Bauer, Stefan Debener, Anna C Nobre — Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2020. PMC7653674, CC BY 4.0.

At any given moment, we receive multiple signals from our different senses. Prior research has shown that signals in one sensory modality can influence neural activity and behavioural performance associated with another sensory modality. Recent human and nonhuman primate studies suggest that such cross-modal influences in sensory cortices are mediated by the synchronisation of ongoing neural oscillations. In this review, we consider two mechanisms proposed to facilitate cross-modal influences on sensory processing, namely cross-modal phase resetting and neural entrainment. We consider how top-down processes may further influence cross-modal processing in a flexible manner, and we highlight fruitful directions for further research.

Keywords: multisensory, cross-modal influence, neural oscillations, phase reset, neural entrainment, causal inference


Cross-modal Activations in Unimodal Cortices

In our daily life, we continuously receive information from different sensory modalities, such as sight, sound, and touch. Think of a glass falling and breaking on the floor or footsteps of a person walking into a room. Incoming sensory signals are often interrelated and provide complementary evidence about our environment. To form a rich and adaptive understanding of our environment, signals from different modalities can influence one another. When originating from common sources, spatial proximity and temporal correlation may lead to integration into multisensory representations. To shed light on the mechanisms of cross-modal influences and integration, in this review we consider whether and how oscillatory activity in cortical areas may contribute. Specifically, we use the term ‘cross-modal influences’ to express how the processing of sensory stimulation in one modality affects the neural processing or behaviour associated with another sensory modality.

The first cortical regions that process incoming visual, auditory, and somatosensory information are the primary visual (V1), auditory (A1), and somatosensory (S1) cortices. According to the standard understanding of perceptual systems, processing of incoming sensory information evolves from the extraction of simple features in these highly specialised primary cortical structures through progressively more integrated representations in unimodal and multimodal associative regions. Outputs from these loosely hierarchical sensory networks then converge in multisensory and higher order cortical regions, in particular the superior temporal sulcus (STS), intraparietal sulcus (IPS), and prefrontal cortical regions (PFC). Traditionally, it has been believed that the merging of sensory information from different modalities in cortex occurred exclusively in these multisensory and higher order regions.

However, several human and animal studies have provided convincing evidence that cross-modal cortical influences can occur much earlier, even at the level of the primary sensory cortices. These early cross-modal influences in primary sensory cortices are modulatory in nature. Rather than driving neuronal activity, sensory signals from another modality change the cortical excitability to the signals in the dominant modality. These findings have prompted a revision of our understanding of unimodal cortical regions and of the pathways that enable cross-modal influences and the integration of sensory information in cortex. In addition to indirect cross-modal influences through higher order multimodal cortical regions (STS, IPS, and PFC), there are pathways through multimodal subcortical regions (e.g., superior colliculus and the pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus), and possibly direct lateral connections between unimodal cortices. In principle, multiple pathways may coexist, and involvement of different pathways may depend on the specific stimulus parameters, task demands, and presence of top-down factors.


Neural Oscillations as a Substrate of Cross-modal Influences

Recently, several studies promoted the notion that the synchronisation of neural oscillations may be an important mechanism for enabling cross-modal influences by facilitating the transfer of information across sensory modalities (for a recent review). Neural oscillations reflect the rhythmic fluctuations of excitability in neuronal ensembles related to the dynamics of the circuits in which ensembles are embedded as well as the kinetics of their ionic channels. Rhythmic transitions between states of relatively high and low excitability can be characterised in terms of their frequency, amplitude, and phase. The phase indicates the particular point along the oscillatory cycle between 0 and 2 pi, corresponding to the peak, trough, or somewhere in between. Sensory inputs coinciding with the high-excitability state elicit stronger neural responses, whereas inputs coinciding with the low-excitability phase are attenuated. This suggests that there are phases at which the processing of sensory information is optimised. Indeed, several studies have shown that behavioural performance across various tasks and in different sensory modalities fluctuates according to the phase of ongoing neural oscillations (for a review). While amplitude and frequency can also impact neural excitability and behavioural performance, this review mainly focuses on phase-dependent effects.

Neural oscillations have been repeatedly suggested to facilitate cross-modal influences between primary visual, auditory, and/or somatosensory areas. In general terms, two brain regions are considered to be synchronised or ‘phase coherent’ when there is a constant phase relationship between the two modality-specific activations over time. Previous theoretical and empirical work suggests that the synchronisation of ongoing neural oscillations is essential for determining the selection and routing of information both within and between cortical areas. Whereas signals occurring in synchrony with high-excitability phases are effectively exchanged, asynchronous signals or signals linked to low-excitability phases are likely impeded. Synchronisation of oscillatory activity is usually considered to come about through one of two different mechanisms: cross-modal phase resetting (for a review) or neural entrainment (for a schematic representation).


Cross-modal Phase Reset

The concept of phase resetting was first introduced to intramodal processing and has sparked interest in the non-invasive study of event-related brain dynamics. Cross-modal phase reset refers to the process by which the phase of ongoing neural oscillations in one sensory modality can be ‘reset’ by a transient event in another sensory modality (A). The benefits of synchronising neural processing by transient events may bring similar benefits to cross-modal influences. In this case, a single salient or attended external (or internal) stimulus can ‘set’ the phase of a neural oscillation to a particular state of excitability within another sensory modality.


Phase Resetting Mechanism

The phase of an ongoing neural oscillation can be reset by a salient external (or internal) event. In visual tasks, salient visual events result in fluctuations of behavioural accuracy and reaction times in the theta and alpha frequency bands. In audition a recent study further demonstrated behavioural fluctuations of auditory target detection performance in the theta frequency range in response to a salient auditory tone. Phase resets have also been observed across sensory modalities at different frequency bands in response to salient visual cues (e.g., red disk), brief auditory tones (e.g., white noise burst), or in response to somatosensory stimulation (see also in the main text). Internal events can also reset the phase of periodic behavioural performance. Recent studies have shown that internally generated motor events can reset performance fluctuations on visual tasks (for review). Overall, the emergence of behavioural periodicities time-locked to a reset event is a prime indicator of the involvement of neural oscillations.

On a physiological level, difficulties may arise in determining a genuine phase reset. A pure phase reset is characterised by a stimulus-induced phase realignment of oscillatory activity without any concomitant change in power. In the brain, phase resets by transient events are unlikely to be pure. Stimuli evoke a time-locked neural response characterised by an increase in power across a range of frequencies, thus also leading to an increase in phase concentration measures. Cross-modal influences by phase reset involve the evoked response to a salient unimodal stimulus in one modality resetting the phase of oscillatory activity in another modality. Separating evoked responses from phase resets can be problematic. The high spatial and temporal resolutions of intracranial recordings make it easier to distinguish evoked responses from phase reset than is possible using standard scalp EEG data. To overcome limitations in non-invasive studies, it is necessary both to increase the spatial resolution of the recordings by using dense sampling and computing the sources of the cortical oscillations and to increase the temporal resolution of analysis methods to investigate the instantaneous phase of oscillatory activity before, during, and after a transient stimulus.

Alt-text: Box 1

Cross-modal phase reset was first described in nonhuman primate studies investigating auditory cortical responses to auditory and nonauditory stimuli. For instance, somatosensory stimulation of the median nerve preceding a brief auditory tone changed the phase of ongoing oscillations in A1. Moreover, the response to the subsequent auditory tone was modulated by the reset phase of auditory neural oscillations. Somatosensory modulation of auditory oscillations led to the auditory input arriving during a high-excitability phase, resulting in an enhanced auditory cortical response. The authors suggested that the functional role of this cross-modal phase reset is to aid or impede the selection of paired cross-modal signals according to task demands, by either aligning or misaligning the high-excitability states across sensory modalities. Subsequent studies in nonhuman primates further showed that oscillatory phase in the auditory cortex can be reset by visual input, and vice versa.

In humans, most studies investigating cross-modal phase reset focus on the interaction between the auditory and visual modalities using a range of different experimental tasks and imaging techniques. Evidence for cross-modal auditory-to-visual influences in the primary visual cortex is provided by studies demonstrating that auditory input can reset activity in visual cortex and modulate visual perceptual performance. For instance, a behavioural study demonstrated that the presentation of a short auditory tone resulted in the rhythmic modulation of visual target detection performance persisting for up to 6 s after tone onset. The study was able to probe the periodicity in behavioural performance by prompting a perceptual decision at different time points relative to the phase-resetting event. The distance between these time points over the various trials yields a sampling rate. The sampling rate constrains how well it is possible to resolve the frequency of the behavioural oscillation, and insufficient sampling can be a major limitation in some studies. For example, by sampling behaviour every 500 ms, only oscillations ~1 Hz can be resolved. Periodicities in purely behavioural measures are a strong indicator for the involvement of neural oscillations, but they remain indirect.

Direct evidence for auditory-induced visual phase reset comes from a study using electrocorticography (ECoG). Patients undergoing epilepsy surgery performed a simple detection task, in which they responded to unimodal auditory or visual stimuli or to bi-modal auditory-visual stimuli. Analysis of activity in visual cortex after unimodal auditory stimulation revealed an increase in the phase alignment of visual oscillations in the theta (4–8 Hz) and alpha band (8–12 Hz), as measured using intertrial phase coherence (ITPC). A similar pattern of results was obtained using non-invasive recordings in healthy volunteers. Unimodal auditory stimuli led to phase resetting of visual alpha activity. In addition to the physiological effects, behavioural periodicities were also observed. Phosphene perception induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) of the visual cortex also fluctuated around 10 Hz, time locked to sound onset.

In many natural situations, visual events precede, or even generate, sound events (e.g., lip movements typically precede vocal sounds), which has motivated studies investigating cross-modal visual-to-auditory influences. In an ECoG study participants were presented with unimodal or bi-modal visual and auditory stimuli while electrocorticography was recorded from the auditory cortex. Visual stimuli reset oscillatory activity in auditory cortex in the delta (1–4 Hz) and theta bands. Converging evidence for visual-to-auditory influences comes from scalp electroencephalography (EEG) recordings. In an auditory frequency-discrimination task, participants were presented with repeated pairings of asynchronous visual and auditory stimuli and judged the pitch of the final tone relative to the preceding ones. The lag between visual and auditory stimuli varied across trials. The recordings showed visually induced phase resetting of auditory signals in the theta and alpha frequency ranges. Effects were strongest when visual stimulation preceded the auditory stimulation by 30 to 75 ms. Increases in ITPC were further associated with faster reaction times.

summarises the results from human and nonhuman primate studies on cross-modal phase reset, providing evidence for phase resetting based on visual, auditory, and somatosensory stimuli. The studies report periodic fluctuations in behaviour as well as in neural activity following a cross-modal phase reset. Furthermore, these periodic fluctuations have been observed across a range of frequencies, indicating that cross-modal phase reset may operate across multiple timescales.


Cross-modal Entrainment

Neural activity and behavioural performance are also sensitive to (quasi-)rhythmic external stimulation. Many natural stimuli, such as speech and music, follow a regular rhythm that can entrain oscillatory brain activity (for recent reviews on neural entrainment). According to dynamical systems theory, entrainment is defined as the synchronisation of two (or more) self-sustained oscillators. In cognitive neuroscience, neural entrainment is most commonly described as the gradual phase alignment of an ongoing neural oscillation to external rhythmic or quasi-rhythmic stimulation. Oscillatory entrainment has been noted predominantly in the delta and theta frequency ranges. Such entrainment of neural oscillations to rhythmic stimulation has been considered as a powerful neural mechanism to enhance the processing of predicted future events (for a review). Neural entrainment has been proposed to support periodic perceptual modulations, where behavioural performance is generally better at on-beat relative to off-beat times. High-excitability phases of neural oscillations come to be aligned with the onset of the regular stimulation, thus conferring behavioural advantages. In the auditory modality, neural entrainment effects have been observed in response to discrete and continuous sounds, speech, musical rhythms, and even to perceptually subthreshold stimuli. Furthermore, visual oscillations synchronised to the regular presentation of visual stimuli. Similar to phase reset, neural entrainment has also been proposed to mediate influences between sensory cortices.


Entrainment Mechanism

Psychophysical experiments were the first to demonstrate that behavioural performance ebbs and flows in pace with periodic stimulation. Auditory perceptual identification and discrimination were enhanced when stimuli were presented in time with a sequence of stimuli separated by a constant interval. Such observations led to the ‘dynamic attending theory’ (DAT), which proposed that isochronous rhythmic stimulation entrained an attention-related function of expectancy that resulted in better performance for stimuli temporally predicted by the previous stimulation. Recordings in sensory cortices of nonhuman primates later showed synchronisation of oscillatory activity to (quasi-)rhythmic stimulus streams, thereby providing a plausible basis for DAT. Although the current review focuses on cortical mechanisms, entrainment is not restricted to cortical regions.

Entrainment requires that two oscillators interact through direct synchronisation. When it comes to the sensory entrainment of brain activity, one oscillator is usually the external rhythmic (or quasi-rhythmic) input stream and the other is the neuronal ensemble, which displays intrinsic rhythmic changes in excitability. Synchronisation can be measured by the increase in phase coherence in M/EEG recordings at the driving stimulation frequency. Once the external stimulation ceases, the neural system will return to its default, characteristic intrinsic oscillatory frequency.

Establishing neural entrainment effects during ongoing rhythmic stimulation is not trivial, because phase locking can also arise from non-oscillatory sources. For example, in the case where a series of individual transient events is presented separated by constant, isochronous intervals; it is expected that each stimulus would evoke time-locked neurophysiological potentials. When analysed with Fourier-based methods, these would lead to increased power and phase coherence at the driving stimulus frequency, similar to what would be observed if real entrainment were occurring. The fact that stimuli elicit evoked potentials does not negate them also eliciting entrainment, but separating the two effects remains a challenge.

Interestingly, the steady-state evoked potential method (SSEP) uses rapid isochronous presentation of stimuli at different frequencies to tag and individuate their respective neural responses. By combining this method of stimulus presentation with frequency-based analyses, the method has generated rich insights into perceptual and attentional processing. In light of the entrainment literature, it is interesting to consider whether steady-state sensory stimulation does not itself change the very nature of the neural processing it is intended to measure.

Neural entrainment should also be distinguished from resonance responses. In contrast to neural entrainment, resonance describes the response of a system that does not exhibit self-sustained oscillatory activity, but that resonates briefly when stimulated. Even a singular event can trigger a frequency-specific resonance response, which is reflected by an increased amplitude in the M/EEG. This similarity in neural responses as measured by M/EEG makes it hard to differentiate pure oscillatory entrainment from resonance responses. While few studies fail to test explicitly for the different possible explanations, recent papers investigating responses to visual as well as auditory rhythmic stimulation argue for the involvement of oscillatory rather than evoked responses.

Given that different underlying mechanisms can result in similar phase and amplitude modulations during rhythmic stimulation as revealed by standard analysis methods, it is important to consider the prestimulus phase and/or the period after termination of sensory stimulation. Indirect support for the existence of entrainment mechanisms comes from a recent study showing periodic fluctuations of behavioural performance that outlasted the rhythmic stimulation by several cycles. In the brain, recordings from auditory cortex similarly showed persistence of oscillations in step with rhythmic stimulation sustained even after the stimulation ended.

Alt-text: Box 2

An increasing number of studies have investigated the role of neural entrainment in cross-modal processing. For instance, a series of behavioural experiments tested the influence of auditory rhythmic stimulation on visually guided behaviour. The regular presentation of short auditory tones (presentation rate: 1.67 Hz) influenced the temporal allocation of visual saccades. In particular, saccade latencies were shorter when the target onset occurred on beat with the preceding auditory rhythm, relative to when the target onset occurred off beat.

In another study using scalp EEG recordings, visual targets were presented either on or off beat with a preceding slow auditory rhythm (1.3 Hz). Analysis of visual oscillatory activity at the time of visual target onset revealed phase differences in the lower beta band (13–20 Hz) depending on whether the target occurred in versus out of pace with the preceding auditory rhythm. Moreover, these phase differences were directly linked to target-related visual potentials. N100 amplitudes were larger over occipital sensors when visual targets were presented in time with the preceding auditory stream.

The classic example for a (quasi-)rhythmic visual-to-auditory influence is speech, because seeing the lip movements typically precedes hearing the corresponding voice. A recent EEG study compellingly demonstrated how lip movements entrain low-frequency neural oscillations in the delta and theta frequency ranges in visual and auditory cortices. Participants observed audiovisual videos containing either matching or non-matching auditory and visual content in natural speech. Comparing the synchronisation of neural oscillations in visual and auditory cortices between conditions revealed enhanced neural entrainment effects for the matching speech condition, as measured by increased coherence. It would be interesting to investigate the extent to which such effects are purely stimulus driven or are also modulated by higher level factors, such as speech comprehension or task engagement (for a recent review).

Both auditory and visual (quasi-)rhythmic stimulation can influence behavioural performance and neural processing across sensory cortices (see for a summary of studies on cross-modal entrainment). Most studies so far have used regular auditory rhythms as the entraining sequence. This is not surprising given the abundance of auditory environmental stimuli that are intrinsically rhythmic in nature. Sounds naturally evolve over time and often contain a predictable temporal structure, which can provide a pacing signal for neural oscillations across multiple frequency bands. So far, presentation rates used for entraining sequences have been exclusively in the delta and theta frequency ranges, which correspond to the time scales in which typical environmental rhythms, such as speech or biological motion, operate. An outstanding question is whether visual rhythms (other than speech stimuli) prove equally effective at entraining neural oscillations in the auditory cortex and at enhancing behavioural performance.


Distinct Roles of Cross-modal Phase Reset and Neural Entrainment

The two mechanisms, cross-modal phase reset and neural entrainment, have a similar functional outcome. They reorganise the phase of ongoing neural oscillations so that high-excitability phases across sensory modalities align to the timing of relevant events, resulting in enhanced neural and perceptual processing. However, these functional consequences come about through different means. While neural entrainment entails the gradual phase alignment of two (quasi-)rhythmic processes, phase reset involves a transient phase reorganisation due to a transient event. Hence, the two mechanisms may transmit distinct types of information across sensory modalities: either the timing of an expected stimulus (neural entrainment) or the timing of an external stimulus (phase-reset).


Top-Down Control and Cross-modal Influences

In complementary literatures, we find substantial evidence that top-down attention-related processes, such as task goals or temporal expectations, modulate multisensory processing as well as neural oscillations (for a review). It will be fruitful to explore whether and how top-down processes influence the synchronisation of signals across sensory modalities. In the case of phase resetting, the modulation of a neural response by a punctate stimulus would be likely to modulate its effect on an ongoing oscillatory signal. In the case of neural entrainment, one could imagine that changes in oscillatory power by selective attention might modulate the ability of oscillatory signals to interact. Interestingly, when top-down information includes predictions about the temporal onset of events and enables temporal expectations, it may even be possible for internal signals to alter phase-reset or neural entrainment mechanisms directly.

A seminal nonhuman primate study showed how the task relevance of a specific modality can modulate the degree of neural entrainment between a (quasi-)rhythmic stimulus stream in that modality and oscillatory activity in primary sensory areas. Macaque monkeys were exposed to concurrent visual and auditory near-rhythmic streams presented in anti-phase (each at 1.5 Hz). Attention to one of the two streams resulted in a relative increase in delta-phase synchronisation in the respective primary sensory cortex compared with when that same stream was unattended. This selectivity of modality-specific neural entrainment has also been observed in humans using ECoG and a related task design. Participants were either presented with a regular or jittered stream of interleaved auditory and visual stimuli. When participants attended to one of the two streams, low-frequency delta oscillations became entrained to that modality, and the strength of entrainment was further dependent on the temporal predictability of the sensory stream. Although these studies target intermodal selection rather than cross-modal influences, they provide an excellent example of the proactive phase synchronisation of neural oscillations due to top-down factors in a cross-modal context.

One interesting EEG study suggested that temporal expectations related to the regular temporal co-presentation of visual and tactile stimuli led to increased phase coherence at the stimulation rate (delta) in somatosensory cortex. In addition, when participants focused on either the visual or tactile stimuli, local power modulations were observed for visual alpha or somatosensory beta oscillations, respectively, in line with selective attention to that modality. Evidence for the modulation of cross-modal synchronisation was also obtained in an EEG study involving cued cross-modal temporal expectations. In this study, a visual cue predicted the timing of an upcoming near-threshold tone. The visual cue was observed to reset low-frequency oscillations (around 1 Hz), resulting in their realignment to the onset of the auditory target. These two studies provide a promising base for future investigations of how top-down factors, and especially temporal expectations, may modulate or drive synchronisation of processing across the sensory modalities.


Computational Principles of Cross-modal Influences

Recent advances in the field of computational modelling provide new insights into how the brain can correctly apportion incoming signals across various modalities to their events of origin, integrating and segregating across modalities accordingly. Recent psychophysical and neuroimaging studies support the theoretical proposal that the brain solves this problem through mechanisms approximating Bayesian Causal Inference. Bayesian modelling has been successful in describing human perception in various cross-modal settings and has been suggested as a framework to map neural processes onto distinct sensory computations in line with integration (or fusion), segregation, and causal inference.


Bayesian Causal Inference

To make sense of the environment and incoming sensory signals, the brain must solve several computational problems. First, a brain needs to solve the causal inference problem: do incoming sensory signals originate from a common source and, hence, provide complementary evidence about the environment or do they represent different sources? To solve this problem, the brain relies on several factors, such as temporal coincidence, spatial location, and structural congruency between incoming stimuli, and is further influenced by our prior knowledge and expectations. Second, if a common cause is concluded, the brain must determine how information about the different sensory modalities should be integrated across the senses. Behavioural and neuroimaging studies proposed that the human brain solves these computational problems optimally using a mechanism akin to Bayesian Causal Inference. Bayesian Causal Inference provides a rational strategy to arbitrate between information segregation versus integration in perception and cognition (A–C). In the case of independent sources (C=2), incoming sensory signals from different modalities should be segregated (A). Under the assumption of a common cause (C=1), signals should be merged across sensory modalities (forced fusion, B). Critically, the brain cannot directly access the causal structure of our environment and has to infer whether incoming sensory signals originate from a common or two separate sources. To account for observers’ causal uncertainty, an estimate can be obtained by combining the forced-fusion and the unimodal segregation estimates under various causal structures using decisional strategies, such as model averaging, model selection, or probability matching (C).

To probe whether Bayesian Causal Inference can account for human perception, previous studies mainly focused on spatial location tasks, but some recent studies have also used temporal designs. In these studies, sensory stimuli are presented with varying degrees of either temporal or spatial disparity. Bayesian Causal Inference can explain perceptual judgements across the range of discrepancies, spanning a continuum, from fusion to partial integration to segregation (D–F).

Alt-text: Box 3

Evidence for which brain regions may reflect computational processes comes from a recent magnetoencephalography (MEG) study. Streams of visual flickers and auditory tones were concurrently presented (at one of four different presentation rates), and participants categorised the rate of either the visual or auditory stream. The study identified early cross-modal auditory-to-visual influences in primary visual cortex, which is in line with the earlier studies showing early cross-modal influences in primary sensory cortices. In addition, by using representation similarity analysis, the authors observed a systematic progression from segregated unimodal representations (~100 ms visual and ~140 ms auditory), to fused multimodal representations (~180–260 ms), to causal inference (~620 ms). A recent EEG study investigating the temporal dynamics of Bayesian Causal Inference provided a similar picture, although the precise timings of the effects were not consistent. Visual and auditory stimuli could appear within any number of simultaneously presented four frames, and participants were then prompted to report the number (1–4) of visual or auditory stimuli. Event-related potentials showed an early auditory–visual interaction effect starting at ~70 ms after stimulation onset. By combining Bayesian modelling with EEG representational similarity analysis, the authors also noted a progression from segregated unimodal representations (~100 ms), to fused multimodal representations (~200–300 ms), to causal inference (~400 ms). Moreover, the authors provided first evidence that prestimulus oscillatory alpha power as well as phase correlated with an observer’s prior belief about the causal structure of the world.

Thus, research based on both oscillatory activity and computational modelling suggest early cross-modal influences. Interestingly, however, although the computation work reveals early cross-modal influences, it also suggests a hierarchical view for integrating signals across modalities. Although the timings across studies do not match perfectly, they are consistent in suggesting a slow and protracted process of modality integration and causal inference. It will be worth investigating these timings in greater depth, to understand whether the results so far may reflect limitations in the sensitivity of analysis methods. It will also be interesting to understand whether there exist very early cross-modal influences, as suggested by oscillation research, that are independent of cross-modal mechanisms that are specifically related to integrating signals into multisensory representations.


Future Directions

A growing body of evidence suggests that cross-modal influences in primary sensory cortices are mediated by the synchronisation of neural oscillations. This synchronisation may be driven by cross-modal phase reset, neural entrainment, or a combination of the two mechanisms. Both phase reset and neural entrainment are adaptive mechanisms and enable mutual influences and the flexible integration of multiple sensory stimuli across multiple time scales.

One important open question is whether and how the synchronisation of neural oscillations across sensory cortices is influenced by individual differences. These may arise from differences in people’s intrinsic brain rhythms as well as a result of their experience. Interestingly, when participants are asked to detect subtle gaps within a rhythmic auditory stimulus, performance shows that individuals differ from one another in their lag between stimulus-to-behavioural entrainment. The next step would be to probe whether there are consistent individual differences in the timings of cross-modal entrainment, and whether they have functional consequences for cross-modal influences and integration. So far, one study has highlighted the importance of individual differences in cross-modal phase reset by demonstrating that the periodicity in phosphene perception was related to a participant’s individual alpha frequency. Therefore, to understand how phase alignment facilitates cross-modal influences, future studies need to take account of individual differences. For external rhythmic stimulation, this could be done by presenting targets at multiple phase delays. One could then determine a participant’s preferred phase lag a priori and investigate whether cross-modal influences are enhanced when targets are presented in phase with a participant’s preferred phase delay and impeded when presented out of phase.

In addition to individual differences related to intrinsic factors, experience may also shape the temporal parameters of cross-modal influences. For example, long-term musical training was shown to increase the temporal sensitivity for auditory–visual synchrony. Functional imaging revealed the effect to be accompanied by modulation in multisensory cortex (STS) and cerebellar and premotor regions. Electrophysiological studies will prove informative in testing for changes in the strength and precision of synchronisation of cross-modal signals related to long-term experience. Effects on cross-modal influences can also develop quickly. In temporal recalibration experiments, participants’ perception of the timing between events changes as they adapt to regular intervals. Studying the modulation of synchronisation in recalibration studies will reveal interesting insights. For instance, one EEG study found phase alignment of oscillatory activity in tandem with auditory–visual lag adaptation.

The synchronisation of neural oscillations likely facilitates information transfer across sensory cortices by linking information in local and large-scale brain networks. As noted earlier, at least three distinct types of anatomical pathways may support cross-modal influences: indirect input from higher order multimodal cortical areas (e.g., IPS, STS, and PFC); connections through multimodal subcortical regions (e.g., superior colliculus and the pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus); and possibly direct lateral connections between unimodal cortices. Depending on the nature of the stimulation and/or the tasks, different pathways may come into play and, in some cases, interact. One interesting line of future research will be to understand the different oscillatory signatures of the various pathways and to investigate the extent to which synchronisation facilitates cross-modal influences and sensory integration within and between them.

A prevailing view, as presented in this review, is that selection and routing of sensory information and ultimately cross-modal integration, is facilitated by the synchronisation of sustained rhythmic fluctuations. However, recent studies have highlighted the possibility that, in some cases, information is instead coded through transient burst-events. While burst-events might enable transient cross-modal communication through brief synchronisation across neuronal ensembles, it is less clear how they might enable longer-lasting information transfer. Therefore, it would be fruitful to test whether individual stimuli may synchronise brain activity through phase reset mechanisms triggered by burst events, whereas longer lasting rhythmic stimulation may synchronise brain activity through the entrainment of more sustained oscillations. To identify and accurately separate burst events and continuous neural oscillations, and to test their relative contributions to cross-modal influences, we need analysis tools with better temporal resolution so that we can characterise and quantify the real-time rhythmic structure of brain activity. Typical Fourier-based methods rely on temporal windowing and/or on imposing temporally extended filters in the form of wavelets. Happily, new analytical approaches are being applied to brain signals that can characterise moment-to-moment fluctuations in oscillatory activity. The Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) uses a data-driven approach to separate time series into their various constituent frequency modes, and is beginning to be applied to analyse how instantaneous phase and morphology of activity in different frequency bands influence neural activity and behaviour. Hidden Markov modelling (HMM) is also being used to increase substantially the temporal resolution of M/EEG analysis. HMM-based analyses can flexibly incorporate parameters, such as phase of different oscillations, to describe and compare different brain states and evaluate their functional consequences. Such methods, combined with increased spatial resolution, for instance as obtained with ECoG and depth-electrode recordings, should significantly enhance our ability to test the involvement of short-lived neural bursts and more prolonged oscillations in phase-reset and neural entrainment mechanisms in selecting, routing, and integrating information across different neural circuits to guide adaptive performance.

Presently, most studies investigating cross-modal influences in humans focus on the interactions between the auditory and visual modalities. The temporal order in which auditory and visual stimuli occur has an important role in how we perceive them (for a review). Looking ahead, a more detailed picture of cross-modal influences can be achieved by incorporating the somatosensory, as well as other sensory modalities.

Studies highlighted in this review have investigated neurotypical populations. However, we have also learned that individual differences, due to intrinsic physiological differences or to experience, can impact the parameters of cross-modal influences. Therefore, a fuller understanding of cross-modal influences may emerge by comparing effects across the lifespan or in populations with sensory deficits, such as patients with visual or hearing impairments. To date, there is no consistent picture regarding putative systematic changes in mechanisms of cross-modal influences as our senses mature in early life or degenerate in later years. Regarding clinical populations, early EEG studies testing patients with cochlear implants have suggested that cross-modal functional activation patterns, such as visual takeover, are maladaptive for later sensory restitution. However, more recent work clearly shows that cross-modal cortical reorganisation can be beneficial. A lifespan developmental approach will provide a strong test of the functional contributions of oscillatory synchronisation in support of multisensory processing.


Concluding Remarks

There is ample evidence that cortical cross-modal influences start early, at the level of primary sensory cortices, inviting us to re-examine how we conceptualise unimodal cortices. Computational modelling is likely to have an important role in helping to understand whether and how different types of oscillatory processes support cross-modal influences and integration. Regulation of the synchronisation of rhythmic, oscillatory activity in the brain has been proposed to facilitate the selection, routing, and integration of neural activity within sensory modalities. Here, we have considered evidence suggesting that synchronisation of neural oscillations also has a vital role in facilitating the transfer and integration of sensory information across modalities. We focused on two oscillation-related mechanisms that can promote cross-modal synchronisation: phase reset and neural entrainment. We have suggested that these mechanisms for cross-modal synchronisation display flexibility and are modulated by task goals and temporal expectations. In particular, evidence thus far suggests that low-frequency neural oscillations in the delta, theta, and lower alpha range provide permissive temporal windows for cross-modal influences.

Several important and exciting questions remain open for further research. Our success in revealing the fundamental principles of cross-modal influences will depend on considering interindividual differences in our experimental tasks, comparing oscillatory mechanisms across development and in clinical populations, and developing new analysis methods to individuate and characterise the duration and morphology of rhythmic brain activity in different frequency bands.

How do individual differences, such as experiences or intrinsic brain rhythms, modulate cross-modal influences in general and phase alignment of neural oscillation in particular? For instance, do individual differences, such as musical experience, influence the quality of cross-modal phase alignment?

How is information transferred across sensory cortices? Is cross-modal information routed through sustained rhythmic fluctuations or via transient burst events (or both)? New methodological approaches will help to address this question.

Most studies have focused on probing cross-modal influences with auditory or visual stimulation. Does (rhythmic) somatosensory stimulation prove equally effective to influence perception in the visual and/or the auditory modalities?

What is the modulatory role of top-down factors, such as goals, expectations, or memory, on cross-modal influences? What are the oscillatory signatures underlying such cognitive top-down processes and which cortical networks are involved?

How do cross-modal influences between sensory cortices develop over the lifespan?

What are the oscillatory signatures of cross-modal processing in clinical populations with sensory deficits, such as individuals with hearing or visual impairments?

How can we bridge the gap between computational modelling work and findings based on oscillation-related mechanisms, such as phase reset and neural entrainment?

Alt-text: Outstanding Questions


Reconsidering the evidence for learning in single cells

Samuel J Gershman, Petra EM Balbi, C Randy Gallistel, Jeremy Gunawardena, Laura L Colgin, Laura L Colgin — eLife, 2021. PMC7781593, CC BY 4.0.

The question of whether single cells can learn led to much debate in the early 20th century. The view prevailed that they were capable of non-associative learning but not of associative learning, such as Pavlovian conditioning. Experiments indicating the contrary were considered either non-reproducible or subject to more acceptable interpretations. Recent developments suggest that the time is right to reconsider this consensus. We exhume the experiments of Beatrice Gelber on Pavlovian conditioning in the ciliate Paramecium aurelia, and suggest that criticisms of her findings can now be reinterpreted. Gelber was a remarkable scientist whose absence from the historical record testifies to the prevailing orthodoxy that single cells cannot learn. Her work, and more recent studies, suggest that such learning may be evolutionarily more widespread and fundamental to life than previously thought and we discuss the implications for different aspects of biology.


Introduction

The emergence of learning was a major event in evolutionary history, allowing organisms to adapt to their environment on time scales much faster than genetic selection. But when exactly did learning emerge, and in what form? The vast majority of research on learning has been conducted in multicellular organisms, mostly vertebrates with complex nervous systems. This focus has led to biological models of learning based on synaptic plasticity (Martin et al., 2000). A plastic synapse, also known as a Hebbian synapse, changes its conductance in response to the close temporal pairing of pre- and post-synaptic spiking. In spike-timing-dependent plasticity, this temporal pairing is measured in milliseconds. A change in synaptic conductance is a change in the magnitude and sign (excitatory/inhibitory) of the postsynaptic currents produced by a presynaptic spike. In connectionist models of learning and memory, synaptic conductances are represented by signed connection weights with a scalar effect on the postsynaptic signal.

However, unicellular organisms capable of complex behaviors (see Dexter et al., 2019; Jennings, 1906) existed for over a billion years before the appearance of multicellular organisms (Wright and Lynn, 1997). This raises the question of whether unicellular organisms are also capable of learning, despite lacking nervous systems, as an evolutionary solution to the information processing challenges common to all living systems. The answer to this question has the potential to profoundly reshape our understanding of learning in multicellular organisms, as we discuss below.

To avoid ambiguity, we begin by fixing some terminology. Broadly construed, learning refers to any persistent and adaptive modification of an organism’s behavior as a function of its experience (see Barron et al., 2015, for further discussion). This behaviorally focused definition avoids reference to underlying mechanism at the cost of confounding a variety of processes (e.g. maturation, fluctuating motivational states) that we would not wish to include (Domjan, 2014). For that reason, it is common to include an appeal to an hypothesized mechanism. In empiricist philosophy, behaviorist psychology and connectionist cognitive science, the hypothesized mechanism is the formation of associations (philosophy and psychology), connections (connectionism) and alterations in the strengths of plastic synapses (neuroscience). The information-processing tradition in cognitive science, sometimes called the computational theory of mind, by contrast, conceives of learning as the extraction of information from sensory experience and the storage of that information in a memory (Gallistel and King, 2011). The memory is the channel by which information extracted from present experience is communicated to the computational operations that inform behavior in the indefinite future. The difference in the two theoretical frameworks can be summarized as saying that the first approach focuses on the acquisition of information and the second approach focuses on the information itself.

In this article, we will focus on a canonical form of learning, Pavlovian conditioning (Pavlov, 1927), while acknowledging the evidence for other forms of learning in unicellular organisms (e.g. habituation; Wood, 1969; Tang and Marshall, 2018). In Pavlovian conditioning, an initially neutral stimulus (the conditioned stimulus, or CS) comes to elicit a conditioned response (CR) when it reliably predicts the occurrence of a motivationally attractive or aversive stimulus (the unconditioned stimulus, or US). Despite its apparent simplicity, Pavlovian conditioning is a sophisticated form of learning that eludes a simple characterization in terms of association formation between stimuli (Rescorla, 1988; Gallistel and Gibbon, 2002; Gershman et al., 2010), which is the standard textbook story. It is an open question whether unicellular organisms exhibit a comparable level of sophistication in their learning capabilities. We note that the question of learning, and especially of Pavlovian conditioning, in non-neural organisms continues to elicit both interest and controversy (Eisenstein, 1975; Reid et al., 2016; Markel, 2020a; Gagliano et al., 2020; Gagliano et al., 2016; Markel, 2020b; Baluška and Levin, 2016).

Pavlovian conditioning is particularly interesting for our purposes because of the prevailing theory that it is mediated by synaptic plasticity. This theory has been criticized on several grounds: that synaptic plasticity cannot account for the behavioral features of Pavlovian conditioning (Gallistel and Matzel, 2013); that it is too unstable to implement long-term memory storage due to molecular turnover (Crick, 1984; Mongillo et al., 2017); that it can be experimentally dissociated from behavioral measures of memory (Chen et al., 2014; Ryan et al., 2015); and that behaviorally relevant information is not stored in a readable format (Gallistel, 2017). Furthermore, a synaptic memory substrate requires that computations operate via the propagation of spiking activity, incurring an energetic cost roughly 13 orders of magnitude greater than the cost incurred if the computations are implemented using intracellular molecules (Gallistel, 2017).

As an alternative (or complement), it has been proposed that memory may be stored using a cell-intrinsic substrate, such as polynucleotide sequences (e.g. RNA), post-translational histone modifications, or DNA methylation patterns (Landauer, 1964; Crick, 1984; Day and Sweatt, 2010; Abraham et al., 2019; Gräff and Tsai, 2013; Gallistel, 2017). These theories posit a mapping from experienced quantities, like the duration of the interval between the onset of the conditioned stimulus and the onset of the unconditioned stimulus, to the hypothesized changes in molecular level structures that encode them. The biochemical processes that produce these changes in response to relevant synaptic input and that later convert the encoded information to appropriately timed output signals remain unknown, although recent work revealing a CamKII-dependent tunable event timer provides a possible biochemical mechanism for interval timing (Thornquist et al., 2020).

The possibility of a cellular-level mechansim for storing acquired information with delayed behaivoral consequences is exciting from an evolutionary perspective because it suggests that the mechanisms for memory storage in complex multicellular organisms may have been inherited from much simpler organisms, possibly even protozoa, that share the same intracellular molecular repertoire. Synaptic plasticity is clearly not an option for protozoa, so if evolution hit upon a way to implement learning in these organisms, it is natural to conjecture that such a mechanism would be conserved across phyla, given its computational and energetic advantages. A convincing demonstration of Pavlovian conditioning in a unicellular organism would render less surprising recent results that imply that the encoding of the CS-US interval in Pavlovian eyeblink conditioning is intrinsic to the cerebellar Purkinje cell (Johansson et al., 2014).

At present, this evolutionary argument is speculative, and comparative studies have often focused on animals (Ginsburg and Jablonka, 2010). Moreover, the question is complicated by the fact that cell-intrinsic mechanisms interact in complex ways with synaptic mechanisms in multicellular organisms. The most well-established theory is that cell-intrinsic mechanisms, such as histone modification and DNA methylation, serve an enabling rather than a storage function (Kandel, 2001; Lisman et al., 2018). By regulating gene expression, they enable the synthesis of synaptic plasticity-related proteins. This type of theory is clearly not applicable to memory storage in single cells, which lack synapses.

Before we can begin addressing the molecular storage mechanisms in single cells, we must address a prerequisite question: do single cells learn? And if so, what exactly are they capable of learning? This question has been tangled in controversy since the early 20th century. In this paper, we chart the history of past attempts to address the single cell learning question, focusing in particular on the remarkable, and largely forgotten, studies of Beatrice Gelber. At the time of their publication, these studies were criticized for failing to rule out various confounding explanations. We revisit these criticisms, arguing that some of them are misplaced, while some of them can be reinterpreted in a more positive light. In our concluding remarks, we discuss some broader implications for the cell biology of learning.


Historical background

At the turn of the 20th century, the study of protozoa was given a jolt with the publication of the book Behavior of the Lower Organisms by the zoologist Herbert Spencer Jennings. At that time, an influential view, championed by the physiologist Jacques Loeb (see Pauly, 1981), held that protozoan behavior was driven by various ‘tropisms’ (heliotropism, galvanotropism, chemotropism, geotropism, etc.). The concept of a tropism was inherited from the study of movement in plants, where it was observed that some plants reoriented leaf surfaces such that the incident light was symmetric (a form of heliotropism). Loeb and his students applied this concept more broadly to algae and animals, arguing that many movements could be conceptualized as reactions to an asymmetrically impinging force (e.g. light, electrical currents, chemical gradients, gravity), resulting in either approach or avoidance. Like Loeb, Jennings believed that there were deep connections between patterns of animal behavior and those of simpler organisms. However, they understood the nature of these connections, and the nature of behavior itself, quite differently. Unlike Loeb (who was essentially a behaviorist in his sympathies), Jennings sought mechanistic ‘sensorimotor’ explanations of behavior, on the belief that the mechanisms in animals were an elaborated form of similar mechanisms found in simpler organisms.

Most importantly for our purposes, Jennings, 1906 argued that one of the relevant mechanisms underlying protozoan behavior was learning. Because tropisms were typically conceptualized as unlearned stimulus-response mappings, the learning hypothesis was problematic for Loeb’s tropism-based theory of protozoan behavior. For example, Jennings observed that repeated aversive stimulation of the ciliate Stentor roeseli resulted in a characteristic sequence of distinct avoidance behaviors (resting, bending away, ciliary alteration, contraction, and detachment). This sequence could be interpreted as an elementary form of learning, in that the same stimulus came to elicit a different response. Jennings recognized that this implied a change internal to the organism. The change, he argued, was adaptive, a key feature of learning in ‘higher’ organisms:

"The essential point seems to be that after experience the organism reacts in a more effective way than before. The change is regulatory, not merely haphazard." (Jennings, 1906, p. 178).

On this score, Jennings took pains to rule out the hypothesis that the sequence reflected some form of fatigue.

Jennings’ study of elementary learning was largely discredited among the experts because of claims of non-reproducibility (Reynierse and Walsh, 1967). However, this was likely the result of experimental failings, most glaringly the fact that Reynierse and Walsh used a different species of Stentor, and recent experimental work with the correct species has vindicated Jennings (Dexter et al., 2019). The reception of Jennings’ work on S. roeseli illustrates the prevailing tendency to discount complex behaviour in unicellular organisms, to the point of being less critical of experiments which give the expected result. It is also a reminder that even if learning is phylogenetically widespread it still needs to be studied in the ecological context of a particular organism: what one species of Stentor learns may be irrelevant to another.

Jennings arrived at some of the same ideas about associative learning that were concurrently being investigated by Ivan Pavlov in dogs, in particular the idea that the response to an aversive or appetitive stimulus could be ‘transferred’ to a neutral stimulus by virtue of an association between the two stimuli. Nonetheless, Jennings had little evidence for this claim. It was left to later scientists to fill the gap.

Day and Bentley, 1911 placed Paramecia (another ciliate) into a capillary tube, observing that the Paramecia turned and eventually reversed direction. With repeated trials, the Paramecia increased the speed with which they achieved reversal (see also Smith, 1908). Inspired by Day and Bentley, French, 1940 used a larger capillary tube, allowing easier turning, and found that over the course of trials the Paramecia became faster at escaping from the tube by swimming downwards. This pattern has been interpreted in terms of associative learning (e.g. Huber et al., 1974), based on the hypothesis that contact with the tube walls is aversive, so that the Paramecium forms an association between its swimming actions and relief from the aversive stimulus. However, Hinkle and Wood, 1994, using Stentor as their subjects, presented evidence that the learning effect may be confounded with the orientation of the tube: the subjects increased the frequency of downward swimming even when the escape was from the upper end of the tube. More recently, Armus et al., 2006 showed that Paramecia learned to associate the location of cathodal stimulation (which exerted an attractive effect) with a light-conditioned stimulus. Other studies used aversive unconditioned stimuli such as shock or heat (Bramstedt, 1935; Soest, 1937; Hennessey et al., 1979), but the results were inconsistent (Best, 1954; Mirsky and Katz, 1958) and beset by alternative interpretations, such as changes in the chemical composition of the medium (Grabowski, 1939).

Taken together, these studies leave an equivocal picture of single-cell learning capabilities. Moreover, even those studies that successfully demonstrated learning often did not systematically investigate the parameters governing the strength of the effect, its retention, or any hypothesis about the underlying mechanism.

We next turn to one of the most systematic programs of research on learning in Paramecia—one which ignited considerable controversy during its heyday, but was eventually consigned to the scientific waste-bin. The remarkable scientist who single-handedly carried out this program, Beatrice Gelber has since been largely forgotten. The sole photograph we have been able to trace of her comes from a news story. Our goal is not only to rehabilitate her scientific legacy, but also to amplify some of her visionary ideas about the molecular biology of memory.


The contributions of Beatrice Gelber

In the late 1940s, Beatrice Gelber was a divorced mother of 3 living with her grandmother in Long Beach, NY (Census data for 1930–1940). After her youngest child departed for college, she decided to follow her curiosity and enrolled in the graduate Psychology program at Indiana University. Her advisor was Roland Clark Davis, a leading proponent of ‘psychophysiology’, which sought to establish links between physiological and psychological phenomena. Davis primarily conducted electrophysiological experiments on humans (he was a pioneer in the study of the galvanic skin response), but just down the hall B.F. Skinner was conducting experiments on learning in pigeons. This made for a rowdy work environment:

"[T]he lab had a distinctive odor, which came from the multichannel recorder, an early inkless polygraph. Electrically activated metal pens—old phonograph needles through which a sizable current was passed during recording—traced the signal onto thin tar paper that was coated with gunpowder. As the paper flew through the recorder at 50 mm/s, the powder exploded off, leaving a fine black tar recording—and the room filled with smoke… [T]he acrid smell of the recording paper mixed with the stench of clucking pigeons." (Gabbay and Stern, 2012, p. 445).

Amidst this cacophony, while simultaneously pursuing her thesis research on muscular contraction, Gelber somehow found time to train Paramecia. In this effort, she benefitted from interactions with Tracy Sonneborn’s laboratory in the Department of Biology. Sonneborn was trained by Jennings in the study of ciliates, specializing in the study of Paramecia and becoming one of the leading geneticists of the era before molecular biology (Sapp, 1987). He made pioneering contributions to the study of non-Mendelian forms of inheritance (Preer, 1996). In addition to Skinner and Sonneborn, Indiana University was inhabited at that time by a number of other important figures in biology and psychology: Salvador Luria (whose collaboration with Max Delbrück, showing that bacteria and phage had genes, earned them Nobel Prizes), Luria’s first graduate student James Watson (co-discoverer of the structure of DNA), and William Estes (a former Skinner student who became faculty, making important contributions to learning theory). It is conspicuous that Gelber’s interests occupied the epicenter of this intellectual cauldron. Yet she appeared to be sui generis. Davis’ son, Chris Davis, who followed his father into psychophysiology, worked with Gelber as an undergraduate student and recalls her being a demanding experimentalist as well as a pleasant, if formal, supervisor, who occupied a place within the department that was apart from both her fellow students and the faculty (personal communication). Gelber seems to have had considerable independence in her research while still a PhD student, reflecting perhaps both her own maturity and her supervisor’s encouraging mentorship (Gabbay and Stern, 2012).

Taking advantage of the fact that Paramecia feed upon bacteria, Gelber asked the following question: would Paramecia learn to approach a wire that was repeatedly coated with bacteria? In her first experiment, Gelber, 1952 compared one group of Paramecia who received reinforced training with another group that received no training (top). Each reinforced trial consisted of swabbing the wire with a bacterial suspension and then dipping it into the Paramecia culture for 15 s. Both groups were given preliminary and final tests, which consisted of dipping the wire without any bacteria. Gelber reported that the reinforced group clung to the wire in greater numbers on the test trials compared to the preliminary tests, and also compared to the no training group.

One problem with Gelber’s first experiment was that it did not control for repeated exposure to the wire itself as a driver of behavioral change. Accordingly, in her second experiment (bottom) she tested a non-reinforced training group that received wire-alone trials; this group did not show any evidence of conditioned responding. Thus, the combination of wire and bacteria was necessary to produce the learning effect.

It is worth noting here that Gelber was a very careful experimentalist. She knew that reorganization of nuclear material occurs during conjugation (sexual reproduction) and autogamy (self-fertilization) and was keen to avoid this because of her initial hypothesis that the memory trace (engram) was stored in the macronucleus (see Gelber and Rasch, 1956; Gelber, 1958). To accomplish her goal, she used a single mating type (eliminating conjugation) and small amounts of bacteria (suppressing autogamy). She also tracked the number of fissions, knowing that autogamy would occur after a certain number of fissions.

Having established the basic learning phenomenon, Gelber moved to the University of Chicago. She appears to have been a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Psychology, judging by the affiliation given in her papers (Gelber, 1957), and again to have had substantial independence in formulating her own research. The Chicago Maroon describes her on 3 June 1955 as a NIH Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of Physiology (which we presume to be a misprint for the Department of Psychology) and a recipient of NIH grant funding, in the same company as the psychologist Bruno Bettelheim and the biophysicist Aaron Novick.

Gelber proceeded to examine how a number of different factors influenced both learning and retention. In one of her only collaborative papers, she worked with Ellen Rasch to determine Paramecium DNA content and carefully analyzed the interplay between feeding, fission and autogamy (Gelber and Rasch, 1956). In her solo work, she first demonstrated that Paramecia would not approach the wire when tested in the dark (Gelber, 1956), indicating that they relied on photosensing to detect the conditioned stimulus in the absence of chemical gradients from the bacteria. Second, she demonstrated that Paramecia retained their memory 3 hr after spaced (long inter-trial interval) training but not after massed training (Gelber, 1958). This finding agrees with spacing effects observed in many animal species, ranging from bees (Menzel et al., 2001) to humans (Ebbinghaus, 1885; Cepeda et al., 2008). She acknowledged that this was a rather short retention interval compared to animal studies, but also noted that Paramecia can go through two reproductive cycles during this time, so it could be argued that 12 hr is a long period of time for a Paramecium. In later work, she showed that retention could last up to 12 hr (Gelber, 1962b), and other work using a different paradigm has shown retention up to 24 hr (Hennessey et al., 1979). Third, she observed a phenomenon known as reminiscence (Payne, 1987), where performance increases with moderate retention intervals before declining again, a more complex picture than the one classically given by monotonic forgetting functions. A recurring theme in these investigations was the parallel between learning in animals and Paramecia.

Gelber was repeatedly confronted by critics who denied that Paramecia were capable of sophisticated behavior. Donald Jensen, another psychologist working with Paramecia, argued that the increased rate of attachment to the wire as a consequence of training could be a form of ‘thigmotropism’ (attraction to a haptic stimulus) induced by the bacteria, possibly due to release of metabolic products like carbon dioxide or carbonic acid. He showed that addition of bacteria to a culture increased attachment to the bottom of the slide, but he did not demonstrate that bacteria increase attachment to the wire (which was not used at all in this experiment). Indeed, by the same logic we might expect thigmotropism to inhibit the learning effect, since the wire contacted the bottom of the depression slide, and therefore the Paramecia would be attracted to both the slide surface and the wire. In any case, Gelber, 1957 failed to replicate Jensen’s findings.

Jensen further argued that Gelber’s findings might be an artifact of changes to the culture induced by training, rather than any persistent change in the organism itself (Jensen, 1957a). In support of this claim, Jensen showed that samples taken from the vicinity of the wire contained large numbers of bacteria after training, in contrast to samples taken far away from the wire. In response, Gelber, 1957 pointed out that she obtained a learning effect despite routinely stirring the slide between trials, presumably diluting any residual concentration of bacteria around the wire. Jensen, 1957b retorted that this stirring method was not sufficient to disperse the bacteria. She also showed that inserting the wire with food after training produced a greater response than food alone, indicating that the wire was contributing something beyond the effect of the bacteria. Finally, she pointed out that Jensen deviated from her experimental procedures in a number of other ways, including using bacterial concentrations several magnitudes higher than she had used (a point brushed aside by Jensen without any justification), and introducing the bacteria into distilled water instead of culture fluid (“the amount of steak found in a dish placed on the floor in an empty room would be very different from the contents of the same dish with a hungry dog present.”). The difference in bacterial concentration may have resulted in a greater amount of residual bacteria after removal of the wire, thereby degrading the contingency between the wire and bacteria (see further discussion below). It is now understood, as it was not at the time of this controversy, that when the background frequency or concentration of US is as frequent as that in the presence of the CS, no conditioning occurs (Rescorla, 1988).

Gelber’s dog analogy struck a chord with Jensen:

"The use of this analogy symbolizes what is perhaps the most basic difference of opinion between Gelber and me. Gelber freely applies to Protozoa concepts (reinforcement and approach response) and situations (food presentation) developed with higher metazoan animals. I feel that such application overestimates the sensory and motor capabilities of this organism… If analogies are necessary, a more apt one might be that of an earthworm which crawls and eats its way through the earth, blundering onto food-rich soil and avoiding light, heat, and dryness. Gelber’s assertion loses its force when the blind, filter-feeding mode of life of Paramecia is considered." (Jensen, 1957b, p. 1341).

In a commentary on this exchange, Kellogg, 1958 remarked that Jensen’s worm analogy was poorly chosen, since there was ample evidence that worms can learn. Kellogg saw in the Gelber-Jensen debate a reflection of the problem that had vexed some of the greatest thinkers: where do we draw the line between ‘higher’ and ‘lower’ organisms? If learning is one of those ‘higher’ faculties, then the demonstration of learning in single-celled organisms contradicts Loeb’s (and Jensen’s) idea that the behavior of apparently ‘lower’ organisms like Paramecia can be explained by various kinds of tropisms, without reference to ‘higher’ faculties.

Shortly after the Gelber-Jensen debate, Katz and Deterline, 1958 replicated Gelber but again raised the issue of changes to the culture due to the presence of the bacteria. They arrived at this conclusion on the basis of an experiment in which the culture was vigorously stirred immediately after the final training trial, before an additional ‘post-stir’ test, finding that stirring eliminated all conditioned responding. Their interpretation was that stirring dispersed any residual concentration of bacteria in the vicinity of the wire, which they assumed was driving the response to the wire. However, there is another interpretation of this result: it is a form of contingency degradation (Rescorla, 1968). The stirring procedure effectively decorrelated the wire (CS) and bacteria (US). It is well-known from Rescorla’s experiments and many others that this procedure suppresses conditioned responding to the CS, even when holding fixed the number of CS-US pairings. Indeed, a later experiment by Hennessey et al., 1979 used Rescorla’s ‘truly random control’, which explicitly decorrelates the CS and the US, finding that this eliminates learning of an avoidance response to a vibratory CS. It is also important to point out that procedurally, Katz and Deterline deviated in an important way from Gelber by measuring the number of bacteria in the vicinity of the wire rather than the number adhered to the wire, which means that in effect they were partially measuring ‘contextual’ conditioning.

Gelber’s subsequent career is hard to track after the lapse of years. The news story in, from the Tucson Daily Citizen of 19 October 1960, describes her as a ‘refugee’ from the University of Chicago, holding a contract of $100,000 from the NIH and launching an institute for ‘off beat’ science. As to what became of this venture, we have no clue. In 1964, Gelber presented her Paramecium work at the symposium on ‘Learning and Associated Phenomena in Invertebrates’ in Cambridge, England (Thorpe and Davenport, 1965; McConnell, 1966). In 1969, she conducted a pilot study for the National Institute of Mental Health on what retired scientists do, having become by then one of her own subjects. She died in 1991. The Wikipedia entry on her arose from our enquiries. We would be delighted to know from any readers who can add to the limited story of her life that we have been able to piece together.

Taking stock, we believe that Gelber’s experiments, though not without their limitations, convincingly demonstrated Pavlovian conditioning in Paramecia. Sadly, her critics seem to have won in the long term. Most reviews of the literature, if they mention Gelber’s work at all, quickly dismiss it on the basis that it was confounded by more plausible alternative explanations (e.g. Warren, 1965; Applewhite, 1979). An exception is the review of invertebrate learning by McConnell, 1966, who was sympathetic to Gelber’s conclusions. In discussing the Katz and Deterline stirring result, he wryly noted that “since these authors failed to control for the effects of ‘vigorous stirring’ on the behavior of Paramecia, and since even an overtrained rat that was ‘well shaken’ right after a final training trial might choose not to run the maze if returned to it immediately, the issue cannot be resolved on the basis of these studies alone’ (p. 112). McConnell, 1966 himself showed conditioning in planaria; his reports of RNA-based memory transfer during regeneration and cannibalism provoked a controversy to which we return in the next section.

In surveying much of this work, it is hard not to feel that participants divided into those opposed to the possibility of learning in single-cell organisms and those sympathetic to the possibility and that their interpretations were strongly influenced by these prejudgements. One of the challenges in revisiting these controversies is how to formulate experiments which can transcend ideological stances and elicit compelling scientific insights.


Implications for the neurobiology of learning and memory

If single cells can learn then they must be using a non-synaptic form of memory storage. The idea that intracellular molecules store memories has a long history, mainly in the study of multicellular organisms. We have already mentioned McConnell’s studies of planarians; similar ideas were espoused by Georges Ungar based on his studies of rodents (Ungar and Irwin, 1967; Ungar et al., 1968). These studies indicated that memories could be transferred from one organism to another by injection or ingestion of processed brain material. Clearly no synaptic information could survive such processing, so transfer could presumably only occur if the memory substrate was molecular. However, these findings were the subject of much controversy. The failure of careful attempts to replicate them led to a strong consensus against their validity and this line of research eventually died out (Byrne et al., 1966; Travis, 1980; Smith, 1974; Setlow, 1997). Nonetheless, several lines of recent work have revisited these studies (Smalheiser et al., 2001; Shomrat and Levin, 2013). For example, Bédécarrats et al., 2018 showed that long-term sensitization of the siphon-withdrawal reflex in Aplysia could be transferred by injection of RNA from a trained animal into an untrained animal. This study further showed that this form of transfer was mediated by increased excitability of sensory (but not motor) neurons, and depended on DNA methylation, although the study did not establish either RNA or DNA methylation as the engram storage mechanism. In another line of work, Dias and Ressler, 2014 showed that fear conditioning in rodents could be transferred from parents to offspring, an effect that was associated with changes in DNA methylation. These studies not only revive the molecular memory hypothesis, but also point towards specific intracellular mechanisms.

The significance of DNA methylation lies in the fact that DNA methylation state can control transcription. Thus, the set of proteins expressed in a cell can be altered by changes in DNA methylation, which are known to occur in an experience-dependent manner. For example, after fear conditioning, the methylation states of 9.2% of genes in the hippocampus of rats were found to be altered (Duke et al., 2017). As first pointed out by Crick, 1984, and later elaborated by Holliday, 1999, DNA methylation is a potentially stable medium for heritable memory storage, because the methylation state will persist in the face of DNA replication, thanks to the semi-conservative action of DNA methyltransferases. A related idea, put forward independently in Lisman et al., 2018, is that a stable memory could arise from the tug-of-war between enzymatic phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. In essence, the idea is to achieve stability through change: a molecular substrate maintains its activation state by means of continual enzymatic activity. Crick and Lisman suggested that this could solve the problem of molecular turnover that vexes synaptic theories of memory. Consistent with this hypothesis, inhibition of DNA methyltransferase disrupts the formation and maintenance of memory, although it remains to be seen whether methylation states themselves constitute the engram (Miller and Sweatt, 2007; Miller et al., 2010). The proposals of Crick and Lisman apply generally to enzymatic modification processes (e.g. acetylation or glycosylation) acting on macromolecules, provided that the biochemical dynamics can generate the appropriate stable states (Prabakaran et al., 2012).

An important distinction between the forms of dynamical information storage proposed by Crick and Lisman and the storage provided by DNA is that the latter is largely stable in the absence of enzymatic activity, under conditions of thermodynamic equilibrium. In contrast, the former typically relies on enzymatic activity and is only stable if driven away from thermodynamic equilibrium by chemical potential differences generated by core metabolic processes. In other words, the latter may accurately retain information in the absence of a cell over a substantially longer period than the former, which may lose information rapidly in the absence of supporting enzymatic activity.

Another candidate medium for intracellular memory storage is histone modification. In eukaryotes, DNA is wrapped around nucleosomes, composed of histone proteins, to form chromatin. Gene transcription can be controlled by changes in the modification state (acetylation, methylation, ubiquitination, etc.) of these histones. In the cell biology literature, an influential hypothesis posits the existence of a histone ‘code’ (Jenuwein and Allis, 2001; Turner, 2002) or ‘language’ (Lee et al., 2010) that stores information non-genetically, although the nature of that information has been a matter of debate (Sims and Reinberg, 2008; Henikoff and Shilatifard, 2011). Early work demonstrated that learning was accompanied by increased histone acetylation in the rat hippocampus (Schmitt and Matthies, 1979), and more recent work has established that memory can be enhanced by increases in histone acetylation (Levenson et al., 2004; Vecsey et al., 2007; Stefanko et al., 2009). Bronfman et al., 2016 provide an extensive survey of the molecular correlates of learning and memory.

In parallel with these findings, molecular biologists grappling with the information processing that takes place within the organism have begun to suggest that signaling networks may implement forms of learning (Koseska and Bastiaens, 2017; Csermely et al., 2020). In this respect, Koshland’s studies of habituation of signaling responses in PC12 cells, a mammalian cell line of neuroendocrine origin, are especially resonant (McFadden and Koshland, 1990). Koshland’s work was undertaken in full awareness of learning studies conducted by Kandel and Thompson in animals but his pioneering efforts have not been explored further. This reflects, perhaps, the intellectual distance between cognitive science and molecular biology, which the present paper seeks to bridge. The information processing demands on a single-celled organism, which must fend for itself, are presumably quite different from those confronting a single cell within a multi-cellular organism during development and homeostasis, so what role learning plays within the organism remains a tantalizing open question.

Beatrice Gelber, though she could not have known about the specifics of DNA methylation or histone modification, was uncannily prophetic about these developments:

"This paper presents a new approach to behavioral problems which might be called molecular biopsychology… Simply stated, it is hypothesized that the memory engram must be coded in macromolecules… As the geneticist studies the inherited characteristics of an organism the psychologist studies the modification of this inherited matrix by interaction with the environment. Possibly the biochemical and cellular physiological processes which encode new responses are continuous throughout the phyla (as genetic codes are) and therefore would be reasonably similar for a protozoan and a mammal." (Gelber, 1962a, p. 166).

The idea that intracellular mechanisms of memory storage might be conserved across phyla is tantalizing yet untested. The demise of behavioral studies in Paramecia and other ciliates has meant that, despite the wealth of knowledge about ciliate biology, we still know quite little about the molecular mechanisms underlying Gelber’s findings. Nonetheless, we do know that many intracellular pathways that have been implicated in multicellular memory formation exist in ciliates. For example, ciliates express calmodulin, MAP kinases, voltage-gated calcium channels, in addition to utilizing various epigenetic mechanisms that might be plausible memory substrates, such as DNA methylation and histone modification. In like manner, key molecular components of neurons and synapses emerged in organisms without nervous systems, including unicellular organisms (Ryan and Grant, 2009; Arendt, 2020). We believe it is an ideal time to revisit the phylogenetic origins of learning experimentally and theoretically.


Conclusion

Single cells continue to surprise us. Robert Hooke, peering through his microscope in the 17th century, first likened cells to the small rooms (cellula) inhabited by monks. Fast forward to the 21st century, and it is now banal for cell biologists to think of the cell as a miniature computer, capable of sophisticated information processing (Bray, 2009). Among their many capabilities, it is now appreciated that cells have memory, possibly in the form of a ‘histone code’ (Jenuwein and Allis, 2001; Turner, 2002), though a precise computational understanding of this code has remained elusive. Whatever the memory code may be, its implications for neuroscience are far-reaching: we may finally be poised to link cellular memory codes with cognitive information processing. In this context, the studies by Gelber and others of learning in Paramecia become freighted with significance. They suggest that single cells have the ability to carry out a form of information processing that neuroscientists have traditionally attributed to networks of cells. We still do not understand how Paramecia accomplish this feat. If the hypothesis is correct, then single cells hold more surprises in store for us.


Funding Statement

No external funding was received for this work.


Contributor Information

Samuel J Gershman, Email: gershman@fas.harvard.edu.

Jeremy Gunawardena, Email: jeremy_gunawardena@hms.harvard.edu.

Laura L Colgin, University of Texas at Austin, United States.

Laura L Colgin, University of Texas at Austin, United States.


Linking mPFC circuit maturation to the developmental regulation of emotional memory and cognitive flexibility

Cassandra B Klune, Benita Jin, Laura A DeNardo — eLife, 2021. PMC8099425, CC BY 4.0.

The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and its abundant connections with other brain regions play key roles in memory, cognition, decision making, social behaviors, and mood. Dysfunction in mPFC is implicated in psychiatric disorders in which these behaviors go awry. The prolonged maturation of mPFC likely enables complex behaviors to emerge, but also increases their vulnerability to disruption. Many foundational studies have characterized either mPFC synaptic or behavioral development without establishing connections between them. Here, we review this rich body of literature, aligning major events in mPFC development with the maturation of complex behaviors. We focus on emotional memory and cognitive flexibility, and highlight new work linking mPFC circuit disruption to alterations of these behaviors in disease models. We advance new hypotheses about the causal connections between mPFC synaptic development and behavioral maturation and propose research strategies to establish an integrated understanding of neural architecture and behavioral repertoires.


mPFC circuits: prolonged maturation and targets for early intervention

In the rodent, the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) comprises the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), the prelimbic cortex (PL), and the infralimbic cortex (IL), which each have distinct connectivity and functional properties. As a whole, they are densely interconnected with other cortical association areas, the limbic system, midline thalamic nuclei, and an array of midbrain and brainstem nuclei with unique behavioral functions. Through these diverse inputs and outputs, mPFC plays a key role in decision making, memory, social interactions, mood, and cognition (Kolb and Nonneman, 1978; Kolb et al., 1974; Nonneman et al., 1974). In this review, we focus on cognitive flexibility and emotional learning and memory in both the aversive and appetitive domains. Like many mPFC-dependent functions, the encoding and expression of emotional memories, as well as cognitive flexibility, are developmentally regulated, emerging, and maturing during early life and adolescence when the prefrontal cortex is still developing (Kalsbeek et al., 1988; Van Eden and Uylings, 1985; Lewis, 1997; Kolb et al., 2012).

From birth until early adulthood, mPFC cells and circuits undergo changes in their physiological properties and the strength of connectivity with distant brain regions including limbic and neuromodulatory centers (Kolb et al., 2012). This prolonged period of development may be necessary because establishing complex behaviors requires an extended interaction with the environment. However, it opens a long window during which mPFC is vulnerable to disruption. Indeed, numerous mPFC-dependent behaviors are altered in neuropsychiatric disorders that emerge during childhood and adolescence including anxiety disorders, impulse control disorders, depression, schizophrenia, and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (Schubert et al., 2015). Although mPFC dysfunction is strongly implicated in these diseases, we are only beginning to understand the mechanisms that drive the milestones in mPFC neurodevelopment and support the maturation of adaptive behaviors.

Below we discuss converging cross-species evidence from genetic, neuroanatomical, and neurophysiological studies that reveal continuous remodeling of mPFC cells, synapses, and circuits throughout healthy development, with dramatic changes occurring from the end of the juvenile period through adolescence. We focus on the rodent brain because it is a genetically tractable system that can establish causal links between circuits and behavior. We highlight new research, presenting it chronologically according to rodent development. In the juvenile period, mPFC neurons undergo increases in excitability and synaptic strengthening while long-range connections form and oscillatory rhythms emerge. We postulate that these changes may underlie developmental changes in the ability to form long-term fear memories. In adolescence, we focus on the maturation of inhibitory and neuromodulatory circuits. During adolescence, dramatic increases in mPFC synaptic inhibition align with behavioral changes in conditioned fear, reward learning, and reversal learning. At the same time, the staggered maturation of the monoamine and endocannabinoid (EC) systems shapes mPFC development in ways we are just beginning to understand. We consider how these processes may be causally related. New research on key disease-relevant genes underscores mPFC inhibitory microcircuits, neuromodulatory systems, and long-range connectivity as some of the most vulnerable elements of developing mPFC circuits. This new work highlights an urgent need to refine our understanding of the mechanisms governing mPFC circuit assembly and to establish causal links between the maturation of mPFC circuits and behavior.

We define postnatal day (P)0–P27 as the juvenile period, P28–P48 as adolescence, and P49–P60 as young adulthood. Each period is marked by milestones in behaviors, sexual maturity, and the structure and function of mPFC cells and circuits (Callaghan et al., 2019Piekarski et al., 2017a; Agoglia et al., 2017; Brust et al., 2015). Others have defined the adolescent period in rat as P28–P42 based on behaviors such as increased risk-taking and social play, inclusion of peak growth spurts, and the emergence from the parental nest in the wild (Spear, 2000). Still, this age range is noted as conservative and its margins can significantly vary per individual and sex. For example, female rats become sexually mature between P32– and P34, but male rats typically mature much later at P45–P48 (Lewis et al., 2002). Studies on fear learning, addiction, reward, and social behaviors define adolescence from as young as P28 to as old as P60, though they center on the range of P28–P48 (Hefner and Holmes, 2007; Adriani et al., 2004; Simon and Moghaddam, 2015; Bell, 2018). Adulthood is generally considered to begin between P60 and P70 in rats (McCutcheon et al., 2009). We integrated this literature to establish our definitions for rats and mice.

By aligning key events during mPFC development with transition points during the maturation of complex behaviors, this review highlights missing links between genes, circuits, and behaviors. We propose that the maturation of the component parts of mPFC circuitry subserves the ontogeny of complex behaviors, with the behavioral functions of mPFC updating during transitions between critical windows of development. We put forth novel hypotheses that can be tested by using cutting-edge viral-genetic tools to link circuit-level and behavioral changes in the developing brain. New research that addresses these questions could ultimately pinpoint developmental vulnerabilities in mPFC circuits that give rise to pathological states.


The juvenile period: P0–P27

From birth until the week after weaning (P27), neurons in the rodent mPFC undergo a series of remarkable anatomical and physiological transformations while long-range projections establish their connectivity with distant targets. Patterns of oscillatory activity, which can indicate the coordinated activity of mPFC with distal brain regions and can facilitate long-range information transfer, begin to appear. In this section, we align these milestones with evidence that mPFC becomes required for the expression of conditioned fear at the end of the juvenile period. We propose that the juvenile development of mPFC’s long-range connections, particularly those with the basolateral amygdala (BLA), is necessary for mPFC’s ability to regulate conditioned fear. Furthermore, the immaturity of mPFC and its connections may contribute to the rapid forgetting of contextual fear memories that is observed prior to P24. Reward learning studies in juvenile rodents are scarce, likely because of challenges related to food restriction and operant training in young animals. As a result, this section will focus on how the development of mPFC in the juvenile period facilitates fear learning and memory.

During early postnatal development, pyramidal cells within the mPFC show morphological and functional changes characteristic of synapse development and maturation. During the first month of life, pyramidal cells in layer (L)3 and L5 in the mouse mPFC undergo dendritic lengthening and increases in spine density (Kroon et al., 2019). The pyramidal cell growth in mPFC is accompanied by increases in the speed and amplitude of action potentials and decreased input resistance consistent with increases in ion channel density (Kroon et al., 2019). Between P17 and P24, markers of excitatory and inhibitory synapse maturation significantly increase in rat mPFC (Jia et al., 2018). In general, juvenile (P24–P28) pyramidal neurons in mPFC of mice have more dendritic spines and show more spine turnover than in adults (P64–P68) (Johnson et al., 2016). Thus, juvenile development is characterized by a robust period of synaptogenesis as well as synaptic pruning and refinement. For an in-depth review about changes in dendritic spines and synapse numbers during the juvenile period and adolescence, see Delevich et al., 2018.

During the first two postnatal weeks, mPFC neurons ramp up their spontaneous firing rates significantly (Brockmann et al., 2011). At P17, rats display significantly higher levels of the immediate early genes (IEG) Arc, c-Fos, and Zif268 compared to P24 (Jia et al., 2018). IEGs are expressed rapidly in response to cellular events such as depolarization and are often used as markers of neuronal activity (Minatohara et al., 2015). In adults, basal levels of expression are low but IEGs are transiently induced in response to external stimuli (Minatohara et al., 2015). Thus, the increased IEG expression in early life may reflect immature regulatory mechanisms that eventually control neuronal activity in the adult brain including local inhibition and neuromodulation.

Throughout development, there is a gradual yet specific transition in the ratio of excitatory to inhibitory synaptic inputs per cortical layer. This layer specificity is already evident within the first postnatal month. By the second postnatal week, L3 pyramidal neurons exhibit more excitatory than inhibitory spontaneous synaptic events while L5 pyramidal neurons exhibit roughly equal amounts of each (Kroon et al., 2019). While these laminar differences persist until P30, it is not known to what extent they remain in adulthood. Given that mPFC layers have unique inputs and outputs (Gabbott et al., 2005; DeNardo et al., 2015) and display differential receptor expression (Radnikow and Feldmeyer, 2018), layer-specific differences may indeed persist into adulthood. Such spatiotemporal differences could ultimately establish discrete subcircuits that permit the mPFC to partake in several complex behaviors in a multifaceted manner. Further studies need to be done to elucidate the mechanisms of local mPFC circuit assembly in development.

In addition, oscillatory rhythms, which are critical for precise information flow between regions, begin to emerge in the mPFC as early as the first postnatal week. As early as P3, the rodent mPFC exhibits intermittent spindle-shaped field oscillations that are slower (mostly theta frequency), smaller, and less frequent than their counterparts in sensory cortices (Brockmann et al., 2011). By P5, short periods of low gamma frequency oscillation emerge superimposed on top of these spindles (Brockmann et al., 2011). Around P10, continuous oscillations emerge with theta as their dominant frequency. These changes occur along a slower developmental trajectory than in sensory cortices. Theta oscillations are dominant in mPFC-hippocampal communications in the adult brain, and mPFC oscillatory activities show strong coherence with hippocampal theta even in the first postnatal weeks. Interestingly, Granger causality analyses revealed that the hippocampus was a stronger driver of mPFC activity compared to vice versa, but only in the youngest animals studied (P6–P9) (Brockmann et al., 2011). This suggests that initially the hippocampus entrains network's activity in mPFC and that strengthening of descending influence from the mPFC to the hippocampus occurs later. In both humans and rodents, prefrontal theta is important in memory processes including working memory, fear memory, and reward memory (Backus et al., 2016; Lesting et al., 2013; Courtin et al., 2014; Hyman, 2010; Nishida et al., 2009).

Long-range synaptic connections, which support oscillatory rhythms in mPFC, form and strengthen throughout the early postnatal period. By P7, mPFC axons begin to innervate ventromedial (VM) thalamus (Hartung et al., 2016). mPFC axons begin to innervate the BLA around P10 and continue to increase in density until P30 (Arruda-Carvalho et al., 2017). mPFC sends projections to the lateral entorhinal cortex after P7 (Hartung et al., 2016). Afferent axons targeting mPFC arrive along a similar time course. By P16, amygdalar axons have begun to innervate L2 and L5 of mPFC in the PL and IL subregions (Cunningham et al., 2002). By P7, axons from the hippocampus, VM thalamus, and lateral entorhinal cortex have also reached PL where they play a critical role in the development of oscillatory activity (Hartung et al., 2016). Axons from mediodorsal (MD) thalamus are present by P1, decrease their density at P13, and then increase innervation into adulthood (Ferguson and Gao, 2014). Still, most studies of synaptic connectivity in developing mPFC long-range circuits have been purely anatomical or are lacking altogether. As such, there are a tremendous number of future directions in which researchers can examine the developmental time course and mechanisms of synapse formation between mPFC and long-range targets.

mPFC connections with limbic centers and thalamic nuclei play key roles in a number of adaptive, disease-relevant behaviors including the expression of conditioned fear. It is thus likely that synaptic maturation in these pathways is necessary for the maturation of these behavioral functions. Changes in mPFC long-range connectivity with the BLA, which is essential for the learning and retrieval of emotional memories (LeDoux, 2009), may play a key role in the developmental regulation of long-lasting fear memories. Like humans, rodents exhibit infantile amnesia, meaning that memories formed early in life are short lasting, while those formed later in life persist (Ramsaran et al., 2019). This phenomenon has been modeled in rodents with contextual fear conditioning (CFC) (Akers et al., 2012; Akers et al., 2014) and inhibitory avoidance learning (IA) (Travaglia et al., 2016). In both tasks, rodents trained before the third postnatal week undergo rapid forgetting of learned fearful associations within a week. In contrast, rodents trained in the fourth postnatal week exhibit lasting memories of fearful associations (Akers et al., 2012; Akers et al., 2014; Travaglia et al., 2016). Although the causal role of the mPFC has not been explored in depth during CFC and IA in development, there is evidence that the expression of cued fear prior to P23 can occur independently of mPFC signaling (Li et al., 2012). P24 thus seems to be a turning point in the synaptic development of mPFC connections with the BLA, in the involvement of mPFC in associative fear memories, and in the development of persistent fearful memories, suggesting that these processes may be causally linked.

Importantly, in neuropsychiatric disorders, environmental disruptions and genetic mutations occurring in development may disrupt the early stages of wiring in mPFC inhibitory microcircuits and long-range connectivity. There is a rich body of literature demonstrating that early experience shapes mPFC cells and circuits and the behaviors that rely on them. These studies have been reviewed extensively elsewhere (Kolb et al., 2012; McEwen and Morrison, 2013; Nussenbaum and Hartley, 2019). There remain many open questions about the developmental time course and molecular mechanisms that control mPFC circuit assembly at juvenile stages, and the maturation of mPFC-dependent behaviors during the juvenile period is just beginning to be understood. Establishing links between neural and behavioral processes early in development will ultimately inform our understanding of early stages of disease progression, allowing for development of preventative interventions. Later, we discuss how mutations in disease risk genes cause convergent phenotypes in mPFC inhibitory circuits and long-range connectivity and regulate the organization of neuromodulatory systems, underscoring these circuit elements as some of the most vulnerable during disease progression. In the concluding paragraphs, we discuss how new studies can bridge the gaps between circuit maturation and juvenile behaviors using viral-genetic approaches.


The adolescent period: P28–P48

Adolescence is a key period of maturation for fear and reward learning-related behaviors and cognitive flexibility in which animals employ unique behavioral strategies compared to their adult counterparts. Both human and rodent adolescents display heightened novelty-seeking and risk-taking that can broaden the repertoire of neural and behavioral states and, in doing so, assist individuals as they transition to independence from parental caretakers (Spear, 2000). Throughout the adolescent period, rodents gain the ability to form long-term fear memories, begin to display operant goal-directed behaviors, and improve their performance in tasks that require cognitive flexibility. In this section, we focus on three key aspects of development that likely underlie the maturation of these behaviors: (1) the development of inhibitory neurotransmission in mPFC, (2) the development of the monoamine neuromodulatory systems in mPFC, and (3) the development of the EC system in mPFC. Major developmental milestones in each of these areas are discussed and aligned with behavioral changes, while the lack of causal links and gaps in mechanistic understanding is highlighted.


Development of inhibitory neurotransmission

mPFC inhibitory interneurons undergo robust developmental changes in the adolescent period and are critical for the encoding and expression of fear memories in adulthood. During adolescence, the maturation of inhibitory circuits in mPFC may thus drive changes in fear memory expression. Here, we propose that changes in the number of parvalbumin-positive (PV+) and somatostatin-positive (SST+) cells during adolescence represent changing circuit dynamics that are responsible for the suppression of fear expression between P29 and P35. Further, the sex differences and pubertal influence over PV neuron development may underlie the increased fear of generalization displayed specifically in males.

Throughout adolescence, inhibitory neurotransmission in mPFC becomes more prominent as inhibitory interneurons develop, assemble into local microcircuits, and refine the dynamics of pyramidal cell activity. After P15, the balance of excitatory to inhibitory inputs onto pyramidal neurons progresses towards greater inhibition (Bouamrane et al., 2016). This coincides with maturation of all the major inhibitory interneuron groups within mPFC including PV, SST, and calretinin (CR) neurons. These changes in inhibition may explain reductions in the basal expression of IEGs between P25 and adulthood (Jia et al., 2018).

Interestingly, PV development differs between the sexes in certain species. In mice, only males show significant increases in PV+ cell density from postnatal weeks 4 to 6 (Du et al., 2018). In rats, both sexes show increased PV+ cell density from P20 to P40 (Holland et al., 2014). Nonetheless, sex is thought to be an important factor in the development of PV neurons in mPFC. Indeed, manipulations that disrupt PV neuron development have sex-specific effects. Reducing the levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor decreases PV protein expression specifically in males (Du et al., 2018). Female rats exposed to early life stress show decreased PV levels and social deficits earlier than male rats (Holland et al., 2014). Maternal separation also altered the perineuronal nets of PV interneurons in mPFC in a sex-dependent manner (Gildawie et al., 2020). These sex differences are particularly important given that PV+ interneuron numbers (or PV expression) are reduced in neurodevelopmental disorders including ASD, which has a greater preponderance in males (Rapanelli et al., 2017).

These sex-specific findings are also consistent with evidence that pubertal onset and hormone regulation are important influential factors in mPFC interneuron development. Prepubertal gonadectomy in female mice prevents the peri-pubertal increase in inhibitory neurotransmission in the ACC (Piekarski et al., 2017b). Further prepubertal treatment with estradiol and progesterone advanced puberty and inhibitory neurotransmission development (Piekarski et al., 2017b). Together, these studies indicate that sex, pubertal onset, and hormone regulation are important determinants of mPFC development of inhibitory neurotransmission and circuitry.

Despite this, PV expression increases over adolescence in both male and female mice (Du et al., 2018; Caballero et al., 2014). PV interneurons in the cortex are known for their characteristic fast spiking, making them critical modulators of microcircuit function through feed-forward and feed-back inhibition (Hu et al., 2014). PV, a calcium-binding protein, modulates firing rate by regulating intracellular calcium concentrations (Hu et al., 2014). The adolescent increase in PV is consistent with evidence that PV interneurons do not develop their fast-spiking properties in mice until after weaning (Miyamae et al., 2017). If the increase in PV+ expression in adolescence is disrupted, deficits in mPFC gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA)-ergic neurotransmission last into adulthood (Caballero et al., 2020). This defines the upregulation of PV protein in mPFC during adolescence as an important factor that sculpts the local circuit dynamics with lasting effects.

Other classes of interneurons also undergo major developmental changes during adolescence. In contrast to PV, CR, another calcium binding protein that marks a class of non-fast-spiking interneurons, shows decreasing expression throughout adolescence (Du et al., 2018; Caballero et al., 2014). SST protein levels increase over adolescence in females (Du et al., 2018). In males, protein levels stay the same but the number of SST-expressing cells undergoes developmental changes (Du et al., 2018). Together, these findings show that both number of mPFC interneurons expressing PV, SST, or CR and their functional properties change robustly during adolescence albeit with distinct patterns.

Physiological changes during the development of pyramidal cells are also a critical factor in the maturation of GABAergic transmission. Early in development, intracellular chloride concentration is high such that GABAA receptor activation is initially depolarizing (Rinetti-Vargas et al., 2017). As chloride concentration decreases with age, GABA switches to having a hyperpolarizing effect (Rinetti-Vargas et al., 2017). In prefrontal pyramidal neurons, the time course during which GABAA activation becomes hyperpolarizing differs between the dendrites and the axon initial segment (AIS) (Rinetti-Vargas et al., 2017). In dendrites, the switch to hyperpolarization occurs around P10. In the AIS, however, the timing of this switch is prolonged into adolescence (Rinetti-Vargas et al., 2017). The differential effect of GABAA activation contributes to the distinct developmental profiles of inhibitory circuits as specific classes of GABAergic cells target particular subcellular compartments of pyramidal cells. For example, chandelier cells, a subtype of PV interneurons, synapse specifically onto the AIS where they can control action potential generation and potentially synchronize the output of nearby cells (Somogyi et al., 1982). Thus, different interneuron types are able to mature their functional connections with mPFC pyramidal cells along distinct timelines. Further examination of the distinct trajectories along which inhibitory microcircuits develop is needed.

The differing developmental patterns of these interneuron classes are pertinent in understanding the maturation of mPFC-dependent behaviors. Specific interneuron classes play distinct roles in modulating behavior, particularly learned fear, which is developmentally regulated. For example, phasic inhibition of prefrontal PV interneurons is required for the expression of conditioned fear. Through PV neuron-mediated inhibition, prefrontal projection neurons are disinhibited to facilitate fear expression behavior (Courtin et al., 2014). Plasticity in mPFC SST neurons is essential to encode fear memories, and, through synapses onto PV interneurons, mPFC SST neurons modulate the behavioral expression of conditioned fear (Cummings and Clem, 2020).

The regulatory roles of mPFC interneurons in facilitating fear encoding and expression suggest that the maturation of these neurons is a key event in the developmental regulation of conditioned fear. Interestingly, there is evidence that contextual fear memories are temporarily suppressed between P29 and P35. Mice trained at P29 could not express conditioned fear 24 hr later, but did express conditioned fear 13 days later (Pattwell et al., 2011). This suggests that during early adolescence fear encoding remains intact, but fear expression is inhibited. Given that both PV and SST interneurons within mPFC are necessary for fear expression in the adult (Courtin et al., 2014; Cummings and Clem, 2020), the dynamic changes in protein level, cell morphology, and cell density that occur in these interneuron populations through early adolescence may underlie developmental changes in fear memory retrieval. These changes in interneuron populations are likely to interact with developing long-range connections from key regions including the BLA to influence fear memory retrieval. While strengthening of bidirectional connectivity between mPFC and BLA from P10 to P24 may support the ability of rodents to form persistent fearful memories after weaning, dramatic strengthening of inhibitory transmission in mPFC-BLA circuitry may temporarily disrupt fear memory retrieval in adolescence.

The sex differences observed in PV interneuron development may contribute to sex differences in CFC and fear generalization that emerge during development. Males display greater fear generalization to a novel context following CFC depending on the developmental stage (Colon et al., 2018). This phenotype emerges at P37 for generalization displayed 1 day after training and P33 for generalization displayed 2 weeks after training (Colon et al., 2018). In adults, male rodents have been reported to display greater freezing following CFC than females (Wiltgen et al., 2001; Maren et al., 1994). While this increased freezing has not been reported at adolescent timepoints, linear regression analyses of CFC from P24 to P60 suggest that males display an upward trend of fear expression with age while females display a downward trend (Colon et al., 2018). This suggests that the sex differences observed in adulthood with regards to contextual fear expression may slowly develop through adolescence. These phenotypes may result from the increased PV+ cell density observed throughout adolescence in males but not females (Du et al., 2018).

The development of interneuron populations and inhibitory neurotransmission may also be a key event in the development of cognitively guided behaviors such as reversal learning. In reversal learning tasks, rodents must update their response behaviors when the rules required to receive a food reward are changed. Thus, this behavior relies on persistent motivation for reward, the ability to encode reward memories, and cognitive flexibility. Reversal learning is highly dependent on the orbitofrontal cortex (Groman et al., 2019), and while some reversal tasks have been shown to be insensitive to mPFC inactivation (Floresco et al., 2008; Bissonette et al., 2008), others have resulted in deficits (Kosaki and Watanabe, 2012; Li and Shao, 1998). It has been suggested that mPFC may be important for reversal learning tasks that require greater attentional processes (e.g., difficult discriminanda, visuospatial components) (Bussey et al., 1997; Izquierdo et al., 2017).

The ability of rodents to succeed in reversal learning tasks is developmentally regulated. Juvenile rodents (P26–P27) have been shown to perform well on a four-choice discrimination reversal learning task, learning faster than adults. The performance of both juveniles and adults was reduced following lesions to the dorsomedial frontal cortex (i.e., ACC) (Johnson and Wilbrecht, 2011). The onset of puberty (~P30) appears to disrupt this behavior, leading to worse performance as an adult. Prepubertal hormone treatment used to mimic early pubertal onset reduces the rate reversal learning (Piekarski et al., 2017b). Importantly, mice were able to learn the initial reward association and showed deficits only after the rule switch. Prepubertal hormone treatment was the same manipulation that, as discussed earlier, increased prefrontal inhibitory neurotransmission, linking these two phenomena. This suggests that the onset of puberty and increased inhibitory neurotransmission transiently disrupts the regulation of reward memory to promote adaptive responding. From P30 onward, reversal learning performance steadily increases. While this may be related to refinement of inhibitory circuitry in mPFC, developmental changes in the orbitofrontal cortex are also likely critical to this behavioral change (Moin Afshar et al., 2020). Notably, the rate at which reversal learning was acquired during adolescence predicted performance on the task in adulthood (Moin Afshar et al., 2020). This suggests that developmental processes influencing reversal learning in adolescence may have long-term behavioral effects.

A major persisting gap in our knowledge of the development of inhibitory interneurons and their role in cognitive and emotional behaviors stems from a lack of understanding from a circuit perspective. GABAergic neurons in mPFC receive monosynaptic connections from various long-range inputs; however, when these connections form and how this affects interneuron development is not understood (Sun et al., 2019; Ährlund-Richter et al., 2019). Further, it has been documented that mPFC sends long-range GABAergic projections to subcortical targets but their development also remain uncharacterized (Lee et al., 2014). Given the unique behavioral contributions of different classes of interneurons, mapping out the unique spatiotemporal trajectory of their synaptic development within mPFC microcircuits and performing targeted manipulations of interneuron function during behavior will significantly advance our understanding of how the synaptic development of mPFC inhibitory interneurons shapes maturing behaviors.


Development of mPFC neuromodulation

The classical neuromodulators dopamine (DA), serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]), and norepinephrine (NE) are collectively known as monoamine neurotransmitters. These transmitters are released by groups of neurons located in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and substantia nigra, the raphe nuclei, and the locus coeruleus (LC), respectively. Neurons in these regions send dense projections to the mPFC, where they release neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft and into the extracellular space outside the synapse. Upon binding to their respective receptors, they can up- or downregulate the membrane potential in target neurons.

In the upcoming sections, we bring together evidence indicating there is an interdependence between the development of the monoamine systems and discuss work relating these developmental processes to the maturation of cognitive function and emotional learning and memory. The 5-HT system develops early and contributes to the structural development of mPFC while providing a necessary foundation for maturation of the DA system. Given the role of mPFC DA in defensive responses, fear learning, and instrumental reward behavior in adulthood, the increase in mPFC DA during adolescence may underlie the maturation of these behaviors. Because the monoamines are linked to many behaviors that are dysregulated in psychiatric disease, the interdependence of their development may explain, in part, the wide variety of phenotypes and genetic mechanisms associated with disease. Thus, mPFC monoaminergic development may present a convergent target for novel therapies for psychiatric illness.


Maturation of the DA system in mPFC

DA fibers from the VTA heavily innervate the mPFC, where they regulate reward learning, fear conditioning, defensive behaviors, and cognitive control (Reynolds et al., 2018; Vander Weele et al., 2018). DA inputs are already detectable in mPFC at birth and have been observed in L2–L6 by P6 (Kalsbeek et al., 1988). Axonal density of these fibers significantly increases throughout the adolescent period and into early adulthood (Naneix et al., 2012; Willing et al., 2017), with VTA DA axons growing through the nucleus accumbens on their way to mPFC (Reynolds et al., 2018). The magnitude of this innervation is dependent on the disrupted in colorectal cancer (DCC)/Netrin-1 axon guidance system and is vulnerable to disruption through early life drug exposure and psychiatric disease (Reynolds et al., 2018; Manitt et al., 2013; Reynolds et al., 2015). The adolescent maturation of DA axons in mPFC is consistent with the increase in extracellular DA levels in mPFC from P30 to P60 (Niwa et al., 2010). The density of DA receptors increases in the first two postnatal weeks and then declines thereafter (Leslie et al., 1991; Tarazi and Baldessarini, 2000). This decline stabilizes in early adolescence and is maintained into adulthood (Pokinko et al., 2017). The percentage of DA type 2 receptor (D2R)-expressing neurons within PL neuronal ensembles dramatically increases until the fourth postnatal week and remains constant between P30 and P60 (Yu et al., 2019). Importantly, changes in DA receptor levels throughout adolescence are sexually divergent, with females showing a higher D1R/D2R ratio by early adulthood (Cullity et al., 2019). Early life perturbation, including social defeat and stress (Hill et al., 2014; Watt et al., 2014), is also known to disrupt DA receptor levels.

In adulthood, DA in the mPFC plays a crucial role in regulating responses to aversive stimuli and facilitating fear memory. In mice, DA is released in mPFC during the aversive experience of a tail pinch and biases behavior towards defensive reactions (Vander Weele et al., 2018). This suggests that the development of mPFC DA dynamics may play an integral role in the maturation of defensive behaviors. Throughout adolescence, mPFC becomes increasingly involved in the regulation of innate fear responses. At P14, mPFC is not responsive to innate fear (Chan et al., 2011). By P26, PL is responsive to fearful stimuli but not required for fear behavior (Chan et al., 2011). By mid-adolescence (P38–P42), PL regulates freezing behavior for innate fears (Chan et al., 2011). Importantly, mPFC regulation of innate fear modifies neuronal activity in the ventral periaqueductal gray (PAG). DA release in adult mPFC has been shown to enhance signals in neurons projecting from mPFC to the dorsal PAG (Vander Weele et al., 2018). It remains unclear when this response develops and how it may contribute to the mPFC-PAG activity dynamics in response to aversive stimuli throughout development.

In addition to innate fear, mPFC DA modulates fear learning. D1 and D4 receptors work antagonistically to encode aversive signals during associative fear learning (Lauzon et al., 2009). DA dynamics also play a role in the persistence of fear memories. D1R and D5R activation in mPFC is required for the retention of fear memories over the course of a week (Gonzalez et al., 2014). This is supported by evidence that, depending on the magnitude of DA release in mPFC, it is possible to predict the accuracy of performance on a memory-guided delayed response task (Phillips et al., 2004). At P15, contextual fear memory lasts only 14 hr, but by P30, these fear memories can last at least 28 days (Akers et al., 2012). The adolescent maturation of DA dynamics and receptor densities likely contributes to the emergence of persistent fearful memories during the same period.

mPFC DA also modulates reward-motivated behaviors. While these tasks can be difficult to test in young rodents, it is known that instrumental behavior for food reward changes throughout the adolescent period (Naneix et al., 2012). While adolescent rats learn to lever press for a food reward similarly to adults, they show deficits in altering their behavior following contingency degradation. That is, when an action is no longer required for a reward, adolescent rats continue to perform this action, while adult rats decrease their responding in comparison to another instrumental response required to receive a distinct food reward. However, adolescent rats are still sensitive to reward devaluation and perform Pavlovian to instrumental transfer similarly to adult rats (Naneix et al., 2012). Similar to what has been observed with reversal learning, adolescent rats appear to be able to form associative reward memories but demonstrate impairments in updating these memories.

The maturation of this operant behavior parallels the development of DA axon innervation of mPFC. Importantly, while DA dynamics in the dorsal striatum and nucleus accumbens are also key to reward-learning, innervation by DA axons in these regions does not undergo robust increases during adolescence as occurs in mPFC (Naneix et al., 2012). This poises the development of DA neurotransmission in mPFC as a key event to regulate the maturation of particular aspects of motivated behaviors.


Maturation of the 5-HT system in mPFC

The role of 5-HT neuromodulation during mPFC development is vast, modulating cellular, circuit, and behavioral development. The 5-HT transporter (5-HTT) directs early morphogenic processes that produce the laminar and cytoarchitectonic structure of mPFC. 5-HTT knockout (KO) mice display increased dendritic branching in mPFC pyramidal cells, decreased number of reelin expressing cells, and changes in morphogen expression that alter cytoarchitectonic development (Wellman et al., 2007; Garcia et al., 2019). The effect of 5-HT release on mPFC pyramidal cells also changes throughout development. Administration of 5-HT to mPFC induces depolarization of L5 pyramidal neurons in pups younger than P19, but shifts to a hyperpolarizing effect commencing during the third postnatal week (Béïque et al., 2004). This progression is due to an age-dependent coordination of depolarizing 5HT7 and 5HT2A receptors and hyperpolarizing 5HT1A receptors. 5HT7 and 5HT1A receptors significantly increase during the second postnatal week and then decrease to adult-like expression levels throughout adolescence (Soiza-Reilly et al., 2019; Goodfellow et al., 2009).

As in the DA system, afferent innervation of mPFC by serotonergic axons is developmentally regulated. A recent study utilizing whole brain mapping of serotonergic axons throughout development in mice observed a distinct temporal innervation pattern of mPFC. In contrast to subcortical targets of serotonergic axons, which displayed gradual increases in innervation throughout the postnatal period, 5-HT-positive axons peaked in mPFC at P7 (Garcia et al., 2019; Maddaloni et al., 2017). Genetic and environmental factors control 5-HT axonal innervation in mPFC. Deleting the cell adhesion protein-encoding gene Cadherin-13 (Cdh13) from embryogenesis positively regulates 5-HT axonal innervation in mPFC (Forero et al., 2017), and early life experiences can modify serotonergic signaling in mPFC (Ohta et al., 2014). As one of the first neuromodulatory systems to develop in mPFC, 5-HT afferents might be uniquely sensitive to the earliest postnatal experiences and are likely to influence a number of subsequent processes during mPFC development. Indeed, the period of peak innervation falls within what has been suggested as a critical period of mPFC 5-HT signaling. Blockade of the 5-HTT between P2 and P11 in mice results in impaired fear extinction in adulthood (Rebello et al., 2014). This manipulation also resulted in dendritic hypertrophy and reduced excitability of pyramidal neurons in IL, the mPFC subregion known to promote extinction (Rebello et al., 2014). Conversely in PL, which promotes fear expression, pyramidal cells became more excitable (Rebello et al., 2014). This exemplifies how early postnatal 5-HT levels modify mPFC cellular properties to influence behavior throughout the lifespan. It is important to note that the critical period of P2–P11 was established in the 129S6/SvEvTac mouse line, which are known to have higher levels of anxiety compared with outbred mice (Rodgers et al., 2002). This may indicate that blockade of 5-HTT converges with other genetic vulnerabilities to produce the behavioral phenotype seen in adulthood.

A study utilizing 5-HTT KO rats found similar evidence that fear extinction in adults was impaired and extended their behavioral investigation to preadolescent (P24) and adolescent (P35) timepoints. Interestingly, they found that while preadolescent rats also displayed impaired fear extinction, adolescent rats showed typical extinction learning (Schipper et al., 2019). This suggests that particular processes occurring in adolescence, perhaps transient states of circuit maturation or synaptic plasticity, temporarily relieve the inhibited fear extinction induced by the absence of 5-HTT. This further illustrates the complex processes that underlie mPFC-dependent behaviors and how the interplay between serotonergic development and other aspects of mPFC development converges to regulate behavioral phenotypes.

The development of 5-HT and DA systems is highly interconnected. Administration of 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA), which selectively lesions DA neurons, decreases 5-HT innervation of mPFC (Cunningham et al., 2005). Conversely, deleting the 5-HT transporter selectively increases DA innervation in the IL and PL regions of mPFC and decreases DA innervation in the ACC (Garcia et al., 2019). Thus, 5-HT neuromodulation in mPFC plays a critical role in orchestrating mPFC function from early cellular development to shaping neural circuits to guide behavior. Not only can aberrations to the 5-HT system impair fear extinction, as discussed above, but through interaction with DA development, may also affect reward learning and other aspects of fear learning. The mechanisms by which 5-HT and DA development intersect in mPFC require further attention.


Maturation of the NE system in mPFC

NE axons, originating from the LC, innervate the frontal cortex during embryogenesis and reach adult levels by P6 (Levitt and Moore, 1979). Between P0 and P2, there is a sharp increase in NE tissue content that lowers by P4 and then steadily increases into adulthood (Levitt and Moore, 1979). Like the 5-HT system, there is evidence that the NE system interacts with the DA system in mPFC. Depletion of mPFC DA via local infusion of 6-OHDA from P12–P14 reduced NE content in mPFC tissue in rats aged P30–P65 (Boyce and Finlay, 2009). However, the same study found that DA depletion did not significantly affect NE release in response to a stressful tail pinch (Boyce and Finlay, 2009). Given the prolonged periods of both NE and DA development in mPFC, more studies are needed to determine when and how the DA and NE systems influence one another during mPFC development. Further, our understanding of the interaction between 5-HT and NE in the developing mPFC is entirely lacking. This is despite evidence that these systems are highly intertwined. For example, mice lacking the NE transporter show NE uptake and release by 5-HT terminals in mPFC (Vizi et al., 2004). With the recent development and refinement of intersectional tools for circuit mapping (Fenno, 2020), it is now possible to simultaneously visualize and manipulate different classes of neuromodulatory neurons that project to mPFC within a single brain. These sorts of approaches will be key to determining how interactions between neuromodulatory systems shape mPFC development.

In adults, the release of NE in mPFC plays an important role in the responses to both appetitive and aversive cues. mPFC NE is released in response to both natural and drug reward as well as reward predictive cues (Mingote et al., 2004; Ventura et al., 2008; Ventura et al., 2003; Ventura et al., 2005). The magnitude of NE release is related to the salience of the reward, and thus, NE may serve as a salience signal (Ventura et al., 2008). Consistent with this, NE release in mPFC is required for food-seeking behavior in the presence of potentially harmful consequences (Latagliata et al., 2010). Conditioned release of NE is also observed in response to aversive stimuli and aversive predictive cues (Ventura et al., 2008; Feenstra et al., 1999). This suggests that the development of NE innervation of mPFC may shape the maturation of responses to appetitive and aversive stimuli and that highly salient events during early life may alter the responsiveness of this system. Indeed, unstable maternal care induces prefrontal NE release and results in increased sensitivity to aversive stimuli in adulthood (Ventura et al., 2013). In the future, studies that manipulate NE dynamics in the developing mPFC will be necessary to determine whether NE signaling drives the maturation of reward- or punishment-driven adaptive behaviors.


Adolescent changes in the mPFC EC system

Fear, stress, and anxiety are modulated by EC signaling within mPFC (Lin et al., 2009; Hill et al., 2011; Fogaça et al., 2012). Impairments in the EC system are observed in a host of psychiatric illnesses including anxiety and depression (Parolaro et al., 2010). The adolescent period, when many psychiatric illnesses arise, is marked by robust changes in EC signaling. It has been proposed that developmental dynamics in EC signaling may regulate the emergence of fearful and anxious behaviors (Lee et al., 2016). With evidence emerging that EC receptors may play an essential role in circuit development, we outline how the EC system may influence mPFC circuit assembly. We further discuss how genetic mutations associated with the EC system affect mPFC interneuron development, long-range axonal projections, and conditioned fear.

The EC system, which predominantly consists of two inhibitory g-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs; CB1 and CB2) and two ligands (anandamide [AEA] and 2-arachidonoylglycerol [2-AG]), contributes to the balance of excitatory/inhibitory (E/I) synaptic transmission within the mPFC. AEA is a partial agonist of the CB1 receptor while 2-AG is an agonist for both CB1 and CB2 receptors. Serving as a retrograde mechanism to inhibit neurotransmission, EC signaling regulates neuronal excitability.

Adolescence marks a period of dynamic changes in EC signaling within mPFC and other brain regions. In rats, AEA levels in mPFC increase throughout adolescence while levels of 2-AG follow a U-shaped pattern, decreasing from early to mid-adolescence and then increasing from mid- to late adolescence (Ellgren et al., 2008). CB1 receptor expression levels peak around P25, decrease from early to mid-adolescence, and then plateau in late adolescence (Ellgren et al., 2008). Higher expression of CB1 receptors in juveniles coincided with greater CB1-mediated presynaptic inhibition (Heng et al., 2011). Thus, the EC system is likely to be a prime regulator of neuronal excitability prior to the maturation of inhibitory connectivity in mPFC.

Additionally, the EC system stands poised to orchestrate mPFC synapse and circuit development. EC signaling is crucial during the embryonic period for proliferation and specification of pyramidal cell progenitors (Mulder et al., 2008). The CB1 receptor can also act as an axonal guidance cue; however, the role of CB1 in orchestrating mPFC-specific axon guidance is not well understood (Berghuis et al., 2007). Studies conducted in CB1 KO mice have shown that CB1 is required for healthy mPFC development, particularly interneuron development. The loss of CB1 receptors results in decreased levels of the PV protein in PFC (Fitzgerald et al., 2011). Further, altered spatial distribution of D2 receptors and reduced mitochondrial number are observed in PV cells in PFC as a result of CB1 KO (Fitzgerald et al., 2012a). However, because these studies were conducted in mice that lack CB1 throughout their lifetime, we lack an understanding of how ECs alter mPFC function through particular phases of development.

Given the robust changes in concentrations of ECs and their receptors throughout adolescence, it is likely that the adolescent period represents a critical window in which disruption to EC signaling may cause mPFC development to go awry. In support of this, exposure to a CB1 agonist, WIN55,212-2, for a 5-day period during mid (P35–P40) or late (P40–P45) adolescence, resulted in reduced GABAergic transmission in mPFC lasting into adulthood (Cass et al., 2014). Similarly, exposure to tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the CB1 agonist and psychoactive component of marijuana, during adolescence (P35–P45) caused decreased expression of GAD67, the GABA synthesizing enzyme, and increased pyramidal cell firing in mPFC in adulthood (Renard et al., 2017). Given the necessity of mPFC inhibitory neurotransmission in the expression of conditioned fear, these manipulations may have lifelong behavioral consequences.

EC signaling may also be a key influence over development of the DA system in mPFC. CB1 receptors are colocalized at the same GABAergic terminals as D2 receptors and dopaminergic modulation of EC signaling can result in long-term synaptic depression (Chiu et al., 2010). In retinal cultures, CB1 and CB2 receptors have also been shown to modulate axon guidance through interactions with the DCC/Netrin-1 system (Argaw et al., 2011; Duff et al., 2013). Given that the DCC/Netrin-1 guidance system is critical for development of DA axons in mPFC, if interactions between the EC and DCC/Netrin-1 systems also occur in mPFC, EC activity may influence the extent of dopaminergic innervation. For example, as 2-AG and anandamide levels increase in adolescence, changes in CB1 and CB2 activity may in turn alter DCC expression to promote DA axon innervation and branching. This could support increased and sustained DA innervation of mPFC in adolescence. For a detailed review of the interactions between the EC and DA systems within mPFC, see Fitzgerald et al., 2012b.

The enzyme, fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), regulates levels of AEA, thus modulating CB1 receptor signaling. Mutant mice with reduced FAAH protein levels show increased mPFC axonal innervation of the BLA (Dincheva et al., 2015; Gee et al., 2016). Importantly this phenotype emerges in adolescence as increased axon fiber density is observed in mice at P45 and P75 but not P23 (Gee et al., 2016). Behaviorally, these FAAH-mutated mice show decreased anxiety-like behavior and enhanced fear extinction learning. These findings have been recapitulated in humans with those that express the FAAH A385 allele displaying increased mPFC-amygdala functional connectivity and lower anxiety in adolescence (Dincheva et al., 2015; Gee et al., 2016). Thus, EC signaling regulates structural and functional connectivity of mPFC with important consequences for fear and anxiety-related behaviors.

In adults, EC signaling plays a role in modulating mPFC-dependent behaviors. Levels of ECs modulate conditioned fear. CB1 antagonism increases conditioned freezing while CB2 antagonism decreases this behavior (Llorente-Berzal et al., 2015). Further, inhibiting AEA degradation decreases freezing while inhibiting 2-AG degradation promotes the freezing response (Llorente-Berzal et al., 2015). This suggests that anandamide and 2-AG have opposing influences over the fear response. Importantly, these pharmacological manipulations were given systemically, and it is not known whether mPFC is involved in the effects seen. However, other work has specifically pointed to mPFC ECs in regulating fearful behaviors. mPFC CB1 antagonism disrupts fear extinction (Lin et al., 2009). Inducing hypofunction in N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDAR) early in life disrupts EC-dependent long-term depression of synapses in mPFC and results in deficits in specifying between fear memories (Lovelace et al., 2014). CB1 receptor activity in BLA neurons that project to mPFC is necessary for associative fear learning (Tan et al., 2010). Thus, EC actions in mPFC and its long-range connections, including with the BLA, contribute to fear learning.

While multiple lines of evidence point to EC signaling as a critical aspect of mPFC development, further work is needed to understand how ECs and their receptors specifically orchestrate mPFC development. CB1 receptor expression changes throughout adolescence and EC signaling are intertwined with monoamine neuromodulatory and inhibitory transmission, which develop along a similar timescale. CB1 receptors likely make important contributions to mPFC pyramidal cell development and axon guidance over long periods of development. Further, the robust changes in concentration of ECs and receptor density over the adolescent period are likely to shape interneuron development and the maturation of fear learning and memory, but causal links are still lacking.

Finally, there is still much to learn about developmental interactions between the EC system and the monoamine neuromodulatory systems in mPFC. Particularly, the developmental interactions between ECs and the 5-HT and NE systems are not well understood. However, it is known that mPFC EC action in adulthood modulates the efflux of 5-HT and NE (Reyes et al., 2012; Morilak, 2012; McLaughlin et al., 2012; Haj-Dahmane and Shen, 2011). For example, a CB1 agonist can either increase or decrease NE efflux in mPFC depending on whether or not a rat was in a state of stress (Reyes et al., 2012). Therefore, the convergence of neuromodulatory development may be a point of vulnerability for experience to disrupt development. Investigating the developmental interactions between neuromodulators is complex. However, by beginning with large-scale manipulations such as receptor and transporter KO lines, and then refining our understanding with cell-type-specific manipulation (e.g., optogenetics or chemogenetics), and receptor manipulation (e.g., pharmacology), we can begin to disentangle these interactions. Notably, understanding how neuromodulatory systems interact in mPFC also requires a more complete developmental understanding of its descending projections to the LC, dorsal raphe, and VTA as modulation of these projection neurons may alter activity in neurons projecting back to mPFC.


Genetic control of mPFC circuit organization and function

mPFC dysfunction is central to the etiology of neuropsychiatric disorders in which cognitive and emotional behaviors go awry. These include addiction (Hiser and Koenigs, 2018), depression, anxiety (Farrell et al., 2013), ASD, and schizophrenia (Schubert et al., 2015), diseases that all have strong genetic contributions. The prolonged maturation of the developing mPFC permits great regulatory control but also enhances vulnerability to genetic and environmental insults. Up to 50% of these mental conditions emerge by adolescence, with molecular and cellular changes manifesting prior to onset of psychiatric disorders (Shapiro et al., 2017). Studies of cross-species translation in a developmental context have shown that both humans and rodents converge in aspects of mPFC maturation and alignment of critical periods of plasticity (Kolb et al., 2012; Callaghan et al., 2019). Mouse models of schizophrenia and ASD have identified altered expression of signaling molecules and changes in inhibitory circuits that produce abnormal E/I balance and mispositioning of cortical layers and axons in the mPFC (Shapiro et al., 2017; Stoya et al., 2014; Schofield et al., 2011). Taken together, these results provide evidence linking neural signatures of vulnerability to changes in mPFC neurobiology and the behavioral process that rely on those circuits.

Here, we will highlight a series of recent studies that used mouse models to explore the mechanisms of disease progression. We discuss how the genes Cntnap2, Shank3, Disc1, and Dlx5/6 produce overlapping phenotypes in aspects of mPFC synaptic development, which we discussed in previous sections. Specifically, we highlight studies that link developmental changes in inhibitory microcircuit organization and function or long-range synaptic connectivity to cognitive disruptions. We also highlight recent work that has identified genetic regulators of DA and 5-HT systems in mPFC. We further postulate about how these developmental circuit disruptions may lead to deficits in regulation of conditioned fear, reward learning, and cognitive flexibility that are observed in neuropsychiatric disorders.


Genetic regulation of mPFC inhibitory connectivity and emergent circuit functions

Inhibitory neurotransmission shapes the dynamic routing of information through the neocortex (Isaacson and Scanziani, 2011). Growing evidence shows that inhibitory signaling in mPFC undergoes late-stage changes, including dramatic decreases in the E/I balance in mPFC circuits during adolescence. This prolonged period of change likely renders interneurons in mPFC circuits particularly vulnerable to disruption. Indeed, E/I imbalance is considered a pathophysiological mechanism and interneuron dysfunction has been linked to changes in cognition associated with neuropsychiatric diseases that emerge during adolescence, including schizophrenia, impulse control disorders, attention-deficit disorder (ADHD), and ASD (Sohal and Rubenstein, 2019). Elucidating the genetic programs that control the development of mPFC inhibitory interneurons is critical to understand how inhibition shapes the maturation of mPFC-dependent behaviors in health and disease. Here, we discuss several recent studies that reveal convergent roles for Dlx5/6, Disc1, and Cntnap2 in regulating mPFC interneuron physiology and circuit function.

Oscillatory activity can enhance communication between specific brain regions during cognitive tasks. Gamma rhythms driven by PV interneurons are thought to play key roles in cognition and emotional learning (Uhlhaas and Singer, 2010; Cauli et al., 1997; Kawaguchi, 1997; Cardin et al., 2009; Sohal et al., 2009; Fenton et al., 2016). While increased gamma oscillations in PFC have been observed during tasks that require cognitive flexibility, altered gamma oscillations in PFC may be associated with neuropsychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, in which patients exhibit deficits in cognitive flexibility (Green, 2006), impaired fear extinction, and difficulties learning safety cues (Holt et al., 2012). Postmortem analyses have revealed abnormalities in median ganglion eminence (MGE)-derived interneurons, including reduction in the expression of PV and GAD67, a synthetic enzyme for GABA (Volk and Lewis, 2013).

The Dlx1–6 genes encode a family of homeobox transcription factors that play critical roles in the development of MGE-derived cortical GABAergic interneurons. While Dlx6 may have limited expression in adult cortical neurons, Dlx5 is expressed in PV, SST, CR, and neuropeptide Y (NPY) cells in superficial cortical layers, and predominantly in PV cells in deep cortical layers (Wang et al., 2010). Dlx5/6-/- KOs have reduced numbers of cortical PV cells and increased dendritic branching in the PV cells that remain (Wang et al., 2010). In Dlx5/6+/- heterozygous mice, alterations in the properties of mPFC PV interneurons arise in early adulthood, beginning around P63. In these mice, PV interneurons have abnormal physiological properties, including wider action potentials, higher input resistance, and slower membrane time constants (Cho et al., 2015a). These changes result in reductions in the amplitude of gamma frequency-induced inhibitory postsynaptic currents in connected mPFC pyramidal neurons. At the same age, Dlx5/6+/- mice exhibit heightened anxiety and deficits in a rule-shift task that requires cognitive flexibility. Importantly, Dlx5/6+/- mice exhibit deficits in task-related gamma frequency power and task performance that can be rescued by pharmacological augmentation of mPFC interneuron function (Cho et al., 2015a). Together, these studies link mutations in Dlx5 and Dlx6, key genes that regulate mPFC interneuron development, to alterations in gamma oscillations that underlie deficits in cognitive flexibility. These mechanisms may contribute to post-adolescent onset of cognitive changes in schizophrenia as well as aberrations in fear and reward learning (Cho et al., 2020).

Though Dlx5 and Dlx6 have not been linked to specific disorders, Disc1 (disrupted-in schizophrenia-1) and Cntnap2 have similar functions in cortical interneurons. DISC1 is a scaffolding protein that interacts with numerous synaptic proteins and enzymes to regulate diverse processes including cortical development and synapse formation (Brandon and Sawa, 2011). A translocation in DISC1 was reported in a Scottish pedigree as a rare but penetrant risk factor for several mental illnesses including schizophrenia, depression, and bipolar disorder (Millar et al., 2000). Several mouse models of Disc1 have reductions in PV expression in prefrontal cortex (Niwa et al., 2010; Hikida et al., 2007; Shen et al., 2008; Ibi et al., 2010; Ayhan et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2013) and exhibit impairments in multiple cognitive domains (Niwa et al., 2010; Brandon and Sawa, 2011; Lee et al., 2013; Koike et al., 2006; Clapcote et al., 2007; Li et al., 2007; Kvajo et al., 2008). Until recently, however, the function of Disc1 in regulating mPFC inhibitory connectivity and circuit function remained unexplored.

Using mice that are heterozygous for the Disc1 locus impairment (LI) allele, recent work revealed that Disc1 regulates the connectivity between mPFC pyramidal cells and PV interneurons. Beginning as early as P15, mPFC L2/3 pyramidal cells exhibit reduced inhibitory synaptic input that likely results from reductions in release probability in PV interneurons. These changes have consequences for circuit function, causing a significant decrease in the strength of feed-forward inhibition in the MD thalamus–mPFC pathway (Delevich et al., 2020), one of the most prominent sources of input to the mPFC (DeNardo et al., 2015). The authors also observed elevations in the E/I ratio in mPFC pyramidal neurons (Delevich et al., 2020), a property that is hypothesized to be associated with the pathobiology of neuropsychiatric diseases (Sohal and Rubenstein, 2019; Yizhar et al., 2011). Phenotypic analyses of Disc1 mutant mice have revealed deficits in cognition (Clapcote et al., 2007). Further, Disc1 has been shown to interact with cannabis exposure to induce deficits in learned fear, indicating possible vulnerability in the interaction between inhibitory neurotransmission and the EC system (Ballinger et al., 2015). Given the importance of mPFC inhibitory circuit function in these behavioral functions, the identified changes in inhibitory circuits may affect both cognitive and emotive functions.

Cntnap2 encodes Caspr2, a member of the neurexin family of cell adhesion molecules that is expressed widely throughout the brain in development and in adulthood (Poliak et al., 1999). Mutations in Cntnap2 are implicated in a human disorder characterized by cognitive and emotional deficits including schizophrenia, obsesive compulsive disorder (OCD), ADHD, and ASD (Strauss et al., 2006; Alarcón et al., 2008; Arking et al., 2008; Bakkaloglu et al., 2008; Peñagarikano et al., 2011). Like Dlx5/6+/- mice, Cntnap2 KO mice exhibit changes in the physiological properties of PV cells in addition to reductions in the total number of PV-, NPY-, and CR-positive interneurons (Peñagarikano et al., 2011). PV cells lacking Cntnap2 have wider spikes, slower membrane time constants, greater adaptation, and more depolarized membrane potentials compared to controls (Vogt et al., 2018). These data suggest that Cntnap2 may regulate the properties of voltage-dependent sodium and/or potassium channels that mediate action potentials and repolarization in PV interneurons (Vogt et al., 2018).

Consistent with the reduction in the number of cortical interneurons, Cntnap2-/- L2/3 pyramidal cells in mPFC receive fewer inhibitory synaptic inputs than their wildtype counterparts. As Cntnap2-/- mice navigate a virtual environment, interneurons exhibit elevated firing rates during both locomotion and immobility. In addition, Cntnap2 deletion causes reductions in interneuron phase locking to the local field potential (LFP) in delta (4 Hz) and theta (4–8 Hz) frequency ranges and Cntnap2-/- units tended to fire later in the LFP cycle (Lazaro et al., 2019). Delta oscillations in mPFC have been shown to entrain the amygdala during fear expression (Fujisawa and Buzsáki, 2011), and theta oscillations are associated with signaling safety in fear conditioned animals (Likhtik et al., 2014). Thus, alterations in phase locking of mPFC neurons may give rise to cognitive and affective behavioral dysfunction observed in the Cntnap2 mouse model (Lazaro et al., 2019).

Based on these studies, PV interneurons and their emergent circuit functions appear to be some of the most vulnerable elements in mPFC circuitry. In several mouse models that exhibit overlapping cognitive deficits, alterations in the physiology and connectivity of mPFC inhibitory interneurons emerge around adolescence. Taken together with work showing that mPFC interneurons undergo major changes in their physiology and circuit functions during adolescence, these studies suggest that the processes that regulate interneuron development during adolescence may be particularly vulnerable to genetic insults. Perturbations to these processes are likely to be determining factors during disease progression. Using floxed alleles and cell-type-specific cre-driver lines, future research can perform spatiotemporally targeted manipulations in mPFC interneurons to refine our understanding of how and when circuit-level deficits contribute to behavioral deficits in cognitive and emotive domains.


Genetic regulation of excitatory connectivity in mPFC

Cntnap2 also regulates excitatory connectivity and the physiological properties of mPFC pyramidal cells in a manner that converges with other disease risk genes including Shank3. In L5 pyramidal cells, Cntnap2 deletion causes a reduction in action potential frequency and input resistance specifically in subcortical projection neurons (Brumback et al., 2018). In L2/3, Cntnap2-/- pyramidal cells exhibit decreases in the strength and number of excitatory synaptic inputs (Lazaro et al., 2019).

In contrast to Cntnap2, which is expressed broadly across cell types, the expression of Shank3 in the PFC is most prevalent in pyramidal cells, with limited expression in GABAergic interneurons, and no apparent expression in glial cells (Guo et al., 2019). Shank3 encodes an excitatory postsynaptic scaffolding protein that interacts with a variety of postsynaptic density proteins to control dendritic spine morphology and synaptic function (Naisbitt et al., 1999; Sala et al., 2001; Monteiro and Feng, 2017). Shank3 is also associated with ASD (Durand et al., 2007) as well as with schizophrenia and Phelan–McDermid syndrome, in which patients exhibit ASD-like behaviors including intellectual disability (Phelan and McDermid, 2012). Recent work examined the consequences of Shank3 deletion in the ACC.

The ACC is implicated in an array of cognitive functions, including decision making, motivation, cost-benefit analyses, and social behaviors (Apps et al., 2016; Chang et al., 2013). Shank3 KO mice exhibit numerous structural deficits in ACC pyramidal neurons including reductions in dendritic complexity, spine density, and in the length and thickness of postsynaptic densities (Guo et al., 2019). Shank3 KO neurons also exhibit reductions in both the frequency and amplitude of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents, consistent with reductions in both the number and strength of excitatory synapses. The decrease in synaptic strength can be attributed to deficits in α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptor-mediated current, while currents through NMDARs were unaffected. Importantly, these deficits can be rescued by targeted delivery of Shank3 to ACC in the adult brain, indicating that Shank3 acts cell autonomously to maintain the strength and number of excitatory synapses in adulthood (Guo et al., 2019).

In addition to regulating local connectivity within prefrontal areas, both Cntnap2 and Shank3 KO mice exhibit reductions in prefrontal long-range connectivity. In Cntnap2-/- mice, decreases in local and long-range functional connectivity are apparent across prefrontal subregions, but these changes are most robust in the cingulate cortex. Regions that exhibit hypoconnectivity with prefrontal areas include the parietal areas, temporal association areas, and hippocampus (Liska et al., 2018). Similarly, Shank3B-/- homozygous KOs exhibit deficits in local prefrontal connectivity and in long-range connectivity with the retrosplenial (RSP) cortex, ACC, and the striatum. PFC and RSP represent key nodes in the default-mode-network (DMN). In Shank3B-/- mice, PFC was more disconnected from the DMN. In both mutants, effects were specific to the PFC and motor and sensory networks did not show significant changes in connectivity (Liska et al., 2018).

Cntnap2 and Shank3 KO mice exhibit social deficits and motor stereotypies characteristic of ASD and other disorders. However, given their influence over mPFC structural development, synapse formation, and long-range connectivity, both Cntnap2 and Shank3 also stand poised to be critical genetic regulators of both fear and reward learning. However, their role in the development of these behaviors is poorly understood. Future investigations may look to these genes as sites of vulnerability in the maturation of cognitive and emotional behaviors controlled by mPFC.

In distinct mouse models, disruptions in inhibitory signaling, synchrony, and long-range connectivity emerge as key points of convergence. These circuit-level signatures may represent important targets for new interventions designed to prevent or ameliorate the symptoms of neuropsychiatric disorders. To date, most studies of genetic mechanisms of mPFC circuit assembly have used whole-animal KOs, in some cases crossing them to transgenic lines that allow them to perform cell-type-specific investigations. These approaches have revealed specific deficits in PV-pyramidal synapses in Disc1-L1 and Dlx5/6 mutants. However, given that in these studies the genetic manipulations affected cells across the brain beginning from embryonic development, there are limitations in our understanding of the mechanisms of action and their timing. In the future, studies that use spatially and temporally controlled strategies to manipulate gene expression will provide necessary insights into the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the onset of human neuropsychiatric disorders.


Genetic regulation of mPFC neuromodulatory systems

Dysfunction of the neuromodulatory systems in mPFC is associated with neuropsychiatric diseases in which emotional learning and cognitive flexibility are compromised. Thus, the genes that control the developmental wiring of mPFC neuromodulatory systems may play a critical role in the pathogenesis of such diseases. Dysfunction in mPFC DA signaling has been implicated in schizophrenia (Rao et al., 2019; Howes et al., 2017) and depression (Han and Nestler, 2017). As previously discussed, DA axonal innervation of mPFC dramatically increases throughout the adolescent period and is dependent on DCC/Netrin-1 signaling. Dcc knockdown mice show enhanced DA innervation of mPFC and enhanced cognitive flexibility in adulthood (Manitt et al., 2013). This suggests that an increase in DCC expression may cause deficits in cognitive flexibility and contribute to disease phenotypes. Indeed, the rs2270954 polymorphism of the Dcc gene was found to be associated with schizophrenia (Grant et al., 2012).

5-HT innervation of mPFC has been associated with Cdh13. Mice deficient in Cdh13 display increased innervation of mPFC compared to control mice (Forero et al., 2017; Forero et al., 2020). Behaviorally, fear extinction is disrupted in male Cdh13 KO mice but not females. This suggests a sex-dependent mechanism through which Cdh13 deficiency modulates emotional memory. Importantly, Cdh13 also directs development in other brain areas such as the hippocampus (Rivero et al., 2015). Thus, further research is needed to understand how the role of Cdh13 specifically in mPFC may lead to the behavioral impairments seen in Cdh13 KO mice. This is of great importance given that mutations in Cdh13 have been associated with a vast number of neuropsychiatric disorders including ADHD (Rivero et al., 2013), depression (Edwards et al., 2012), schizophrenia (Otsuka et al., 2015; Børglum et al., 2014), and bipolar disorder (Cho et al., 2015b).


Future directions: tackling mPFC complexity in development

The recent circuit analyses in mouse models of neuropsychiatric disorders underscore how mPFC inhibitory microcircuits, neuromodulatory systems, and long-range connectivity – circuit elements that undergo dramatic changes throughout juvenile and adolescent development – are some of the most vulnerable elements in disease progression. Based on this work, there is an urgent need to refine our understanding of the links between these aspects of mPFC neurodevelopment and maturing behaviors. Uncovering the time course and regulatory mechanisms guiding the assembly of mPFC circuits will refine our understanding of which developmental milestones have profound effects on mPFC function and how they come about. This knowledge will be key to understanding the neural basis of behavioral transitions during development and can inform targeted manipulations of mPFC circuit elements to directly test their behavioral functions at distinct developmental stages. For instance, during the juvenile period, new work can test whether the strengthening of long-range mPFC connections with regions including the BLA contributes to mPFC’s increasing role in fear and reward learning and a developmental switch from short- to long-lasting fear memories. In adolescence, targeted manipulations of inhibitory and neuromodulatory cell types can test whether strengthening synaptic inhibition and refinement of mPFC neuromodulation are required for the maturation of reward learning, conditioned fear, and cognitive flexibility. Establishing links between neurodevelopment and behavior is an essential first step to understanding how and when early insults transform these processes and can inform new interventional strategies to slow or prevent disease progression.

With the explosion of viral and genetic approaches over the last 10 years, we have tools in hand to manipulate these developmental processes with unprecedented specificity and resolution (Luo et al., 2018). Thereby, we can directly link the maturation of cells and circuits to the maturation of complex behaviors. The emergent hypotheses we put forth in this review can be tested using viral-genetic approaches to (1) define causal links between specific aspects of cellular and circuit development and cognitive and emotive functions, (2) understand how the developmental processes we describe are contingent on one another, and (3) discover the molecular and cellular programs that control the maturation of mPFC connectivity. Genes that wire specific mPFC synaptic connections can form the basis of new genetic tools to target developing circuit elements with increasing precision.

Developmental changes in the expression of emotional memories and cognitive flexibility may rely on developmental milestones within mPFC inhibitory microcircuits. Around the same time that mPFC inhibitory interneurons undergo changes in the expression of key signaling proteins (e.g., PV and SST) and mPFC inhibitory synaptic currents strengthen dramatically, animals exhibit temporary deficits in fear memory retrieval, increases in fear memory generalization, decreased performance in reversal learning, and insensitivity to reward contingency degradation. Thereafter, as inhibitory circuitry is refined, fear memory becomes robust and persistent, reward learning becomes sensitive to contingency degradation, and performance improves in reversal learning tasks. This suggests that precise inhibitory control over the timing or levels of mPFC activity is necessary for mature forms of cognitive and emotive behavior to emerge. It is unclear whether connections between mPFC interneurons and distinct classes of pyramidal cells uniquely control the maturation of these different behavioral functions, or whether there is a common mechanism governing the observed changes in each behavioral domain. Determining whether this is the case will require a more detailed understanding of synaptic development between classes of mPFC interneurons and pyramidal cells and new research that performs targeted manipulations of activity, connectivity, and synaptic function in different mPFC neuronal types during behavior in developing animals.

Conceptually similar approaches can also be applied to determine how the developing DA, 5-HT, and NE systems shape the maturation of emotional memory and cognitive flexibility. For instance, increased innervation of DA axons in mPFC may promote the maturation of defensive behaviors (i.e., freezing), the retention of fear memory, and instrumental learning, while 5-HT signaling in adolescence may be critical for the development of fear extinction. The development of NE signaling dynamics may promote the attribution of salience and learned associations to reward and fear cues. Addressing these questions will require a more detailed understanding of how neuromodulation shapes both behavior and the underlying neural signaling at different stages of development. We can leverage transgenic tools for activity dependent genetic labeling (DeNardo and Luo, 2017) to capture behaviorally activated neurons in the developing brain and then assess their behavioral functions at later times using invasive methods such as Ca2+ imaging. By performing developmental activity-based tagging with concurrent manipulations of neuromodulatory signaling, we may be able to determine how neuromodulation shapes the neural basis of behavior at juvenile and adolescent stages.

Proper assembly of mPFC circuits requires temporally precise orchestration of multiple interdependent systems. From birth through adolescence, the DA, NE, 5-HT, and EC systems influence each other’s development in ways we are only beginning to understand. As the 5-HT system is one of the earliest to form connections, it might have particularly strong influence over the maturation of the other monoamine systems as they innervate mPFC. Global manipulations of 5-HT signaling during specific developmental windows cause concurrent changes in DA levels in mPFC and impair fear extinction in adulthood. To test whether these interactions occur locally within mPFC, new research could combine viral tracing with genetic deletion of the 5-HT synthetic enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase 2, Tph2. By disrupting 5-HT signaling specifically in projections to mPFC during development, new research can ask whether DA signaling is reduced in a corresponding way. Using intersectional genetic strategies to simultaneously visualize 5-HT and DA axons in mPFC within a single brain can further reveal how disruptions in 5-HT signaling impact the development of both systems. As EC signaling has been shown to regulate DA receptors levels and to interact with Dcc/Netrin-1 signaling to promote axon guidance in the retina, it may regulate development of DA axons in mPFC. The neuromodulatory systems are exquisitely sensitive to early occurring environmental changes and genetic mutations that have lasting behavioral consequences. Because of this, understanding how their development is intertwined may help to explain the spectrum of behavioral phenotypes associated with neuropsychiatric disorders.

Precise wiring of mPFC long-range connections is essential for mPFC function in adulthood, but our understanding of the timeline along which specific pathways mature and how circuit maturation shapes behavior is lacking. In the case of fear learning and memory, mPFC circuits known to play a role in the adult brain may also underlie the developmental regulation of fearful memories. Bidirectional connectivity between mPFC and BLA increases dramatically during the fourth postnatal week. At the same time, fear memories become robust and long-lasting. As such, the developmental strengthening of mPFC-BLA connectivity may be essential to establish prefrontal control of the expression of conditioned fear. To test whether these processes are causally linked, new research can determine whether increasing activity in the mPFC-BLA pathway during fear learning and memory in juvenile development enhances the ability to form long-lasting memories. Interestingly, reward learning and cognitive flexibility mature along a similar timeline and deficits in long-range connectivity are hallmarks of psychiatric disease. Thus, enhanced regulatory control that comes with the maturation of mPFC long-range synaptic connectivity may have broad affects, allowing mature forms of numerous cognitive and emotional behaviors to emerge.

Importantly, the development of many mPFC connections that play key roles in the regulation of emotional memory and cognition, including connections with the medial entorhinal cortex and midline thalamic nuclei, has not been carefully examined in development. In the case of conditioned fear, research that explores the anatomical and functional maturation of these connections, both in naive animals and in those that have undergone fear conditioning in juvenile stages when fear memories are short-lived, can link developmental changes in synaptic function to age-dependent differences in fear memory robustness. Arruda-Carvalho et al. provide an elegant example of how to describe the structural and functional maturation of an mPFC pathway using channelrhodopsin (ChR2)-assisted circuit mapping (Arruda-Carvalho et al., 2017). With this approach, in which mPFC axons are transduced with ChR2 and light-evoked postsynaptic currents are recorded in target cells in a downstream region of interest, we can understand precisely when long-range mPFC synaptic connections form and functionally mature, and how they respond to learning. Given that individual mPFC pathways have been linked to distinct behavioral functions, synaptic connections that mature along different developmental timelines may regulate maturing behaviors during distinct developmental windows. This information will be important for understanding windows of vulnerability during disease progression.

As we gain a more detailed understanding of when particular mPFC connections form and mature, we can begin to investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms. Extracellular signals can be important modulators of synapse development. For instance, the innervation of BLA by mPFC axons is modulated by levels of ECs. As discussed, manipulations to the EC system only affect mPFC→BLA neurons at the beginning of adolescence, suggesting a specific temporal window in which EC signaling may direct mPFC circuit maturation. To hone-in on the precise temporal dynamics with which the EC system acts on mPFC circuitry, conditional KOs or pharmacological manipulations of EC signaling can be performed at discrete time points throughout the developmental period. Further, the EC system may modulate the extent of innervation in other mPFC target regions. Future studies can look at how manipulations in EC levels affect the extent of axon innervation in other mPFC target regions important for fear and reward learning and cognition, including thalamic nuclei and striatal regions.

In addition to external influences from neuromodulatory signals, genes encoding synaptic organizer proteins may also play a critical role in wiring mPFC connections. For instance, Cdh8 is expressed selectively in mPFC neurons that project to the striatum. Given its role in target selection and synaptic plasticity in the retina and hippocampus, Cdh8 may specifically regulate wiring of mPFC-striatal synapses. Cdh13 regulates the development of 5-HT axons in mPFC, and the guidance cues Dcc/Netrin-1 regulate wiring of DA fibers in mPFC, though it remains unclear whether Cdh13 and Dcc/Netrin-1 exclusively regulate 5-HT and DA axons in mPFC, or if their function extends to other pathways as well. If Cdh8, Cdh13, and Dcc/Netrin-1 indeed play specific roles in wiring frontostriatal, serotonergic, and dopaminergic connectivity, respectively, we can then leverage them as tools to manipulate those pathways and measure the impact on developing behaviors. As Cdh8, Cdh13, and Dcc/Netrin-1 have been linked to ASD, depression, and schizophrenia, investigating their role in wiring the healthy brain can provide important clues about how mPFC circuitry is perturbed in disease.

Major hurdles in developmental circuit mapping stem from the challenge of precise stereotaxic targeting in small developing brains. Now, researchers often rely on brute-force approaches to target specific regions in early postnatal development. Wiring specificity genes like Cdh8, whose differential expression patterns in the nervous system allow them to regulate the formation and maturation of specific classes of synapses, could eventually form the basis of new cre-driver lines. New transgenic lines that provide genetic access to particular classes of developing mPFC neurons can ease our reliance on precise stereotaxic targeting in early postnatal stages. In combination with floxed alleles, optogenetics, chemogenetics, and genetically encoded Ca2+ indicators, new cre-driver lines that provide access to particular developing circuit elements will allow us to link the assembly of mPFC circuits to maturing behaviors with unprecedented specificity.


Understanding neural signals of post-decisional performance monitoring: An integrative review

Kobe Desender, K Richard Ridderinkhof, Peter R Murphy, Valentin Wyart, Floris P de Lange — eLife, 2021. PMC8378845, CC BY 4.0.

Performance monitoring is a key cognitive function, allowing to detect mistakes and adapt future behavior. Post-decisional neural signals have been identified that are sensitive to decision accuracy, decision confidence and subsequent adaptation. Here, we review recent work that supports an understanding of late error/confidence signals in terms of the computational process of post-decisional evidence accumulation. We argue that the error positivity, a positive-going centro-parietal potential measured through scalp electrophysiology, reflects the post-decisional evidence accumulation process itself, which follows a boundary crossing event corresponding to initial decision commitment. This proposal provides a powerful explanation for both the morphological characteristics of the signal and its relation to various expressions of performance monitoring. Moreover, it suggests that the error positivity –a signal with thus far unique properties in cognitive neuroscience – can be leveraged to furnish key new insights into the inputs to, adaptation, and consequences of the post-decisional accumulation process.


Main text

Many of the choices that we make every day are based on noisy information, generated in environments that are complex and subject to change. In the face of such sources of uncertainty, it can be of vital importance to evaluate the accuracy of these choices. Estimating confidence in our decisions and detecting mistakes even without external feedback allows us to identify when future behavior should be altered; for example, by taking a more cautious approach to future decisions when we think we have just made an error.

How the brain achieves this feat of performance monitoring without feedback has been a fruitful topic of research in recent decades, and related physiological signals have been identified across several measurement modalities. The first of these came in the form of deflections in the human event-related potential (ERP) that occur following responses on various kinds of choice tasks and were found to be sensitive to whether the executed choice was correct or erroneous (Falkenstein et al., 1991; Falkenstein et al., 2000; Gehring et al., 1993). It was later observed that these signals are sensitive not only to error commission, but also error detection (or ‘error awareness’; Dhar et al., 2011; Endrass et al., 2007; Nieuwenhuis et al., 2001; O'Connell et al., 2007; Steinhauser and Yeung, 2010; Wessel et al., 2011) – that is, whether a committed error was subsequently recognised as such by the participant – and inferred (Scheffers and Coles, 2000; Shalgi and Deouell, 2012) or self-reported (Boldt and Yeung, 2015) decision confidence. Human neuroimaging studies using similar experimental paradigms have identified brain areas where blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) activity exhibits similar sensitivities (Carter et al., 1998; Fleming et al., 2018; Harsay et al., 2018; Hester et al., 2005; Klein et al., 2007). In animal models, post-decisional but pre-feedback firing rates of single neurons in regions of frontal cortex have been shown to encode the preceding decision (Tsujimoto et al., 2009), its accuracy (Stuphorn et al., 2000), and the tendency to opt-out following initial decisions (Middlebrooks and Sommer, 2012) or wait for a delayed reward (Kepecs et al., 2008; both proxies for decision confidence).

The rich collection of findings summarized above suggests that the brain is well-endowed with signals that can be exploited for performance monitoring when feedback from the environment is not available. However, much of this work has been primarily descriptive, highlighting relationships of the neural signals in question to conditions (e.g. correct vs. error), quantities (e.g. graded confidence judgements) and consequences (e.g. next-trial behavioral adjustment) relevant to monitoring. While some authors have begun to interpret these phenomena and antecedents in mechanistic and sometimes also computational terms (e.g. Fleming and Daw, 2016; Kepecs et al., 2008; Yeung and Summerfield, 2012), our aim is to construe an overarching, mechanistically explicit framework that allows us to capture and predict such processes in a more systematic and unifying fashion.

In the current work, we seek to provide such a framework. We pay particular attention to recent findings pertaining to a slow positive wave ERP with a centro-parietal scalp distribution and a peak typically between 200 and 600 ms after choices. Since a cardinal characteristic of this signal is that its amplitude is larger after errors than correct choices (Falkenstein et al., 1991), it is usually referred to as the error positivity, or Pe. We argue that the Pe reflects the computational process of post-decisional evidence accumulation: a proposal that accounts not only for the classical association of this signal with error detection (Dhar et al., 2011; Endrass et al., 2007; Nieuwenhuis et al., 2001; O'Connell et al., 2007; Steinhauser and Yeung, 2010; Wessel et al., 2011), but also specific aspects of its morphology (Murphy et al., 2015) and more recent links with graded confidence judgments (Boldt and Yeung, 2015) and future behavioral adjustments (e.g. Desender et al., 2019a). In turn, we suggest that the Pe – a signal with thus far unique properties in cognitive neuroscience in that it appears to track the dynamic trajectory of a selective ‘metacognitive’ decision variable – provides the critical link to a computational framework for performance monitoring within which the functional significance of related brain signals can be readily understood.

In order for the reader to fully appreciate the details of our proposal, we will start with a brief overview of evidence accumulation models and associated neural signatures. Then, we will explain how post-decisional evidence accumulation provides a mechanistic framework for understanding the Pe. We will end by outlining novel predictions and future research directions arising from our proposed framework.


Choices through evidence accumulation

Convergent lines of theoretical and empirical work, across psychology and neuroscience, suggest that many kinds of decision can be well explained in terms of the accumulation of evidence for different alternatives over time (Gold and Shadlen, 2007; Ratcliff and McKoon, 2008). According to this framework, in the simplest case of a task with two discrete choice alternatives, an agent is assumed to set two decision boundaries, corresponding to each choice option. When presented with noisy evidence (e.g. samples of sensory information in the case of a perceptual choice), the agent then accumulates the evidence for each option, and the option for which the accumulated evidence first transgresses the associated decision boundary is selected, indicating choice commitment. Algorithmic models incorporating these features have been highly successful in fitting choice behavior across many domains (Forstmann et al., 2016; Ratcliff et al., 2016; Shadlen and Kiani, 2013).

A key prediction of models of decision-making through evidence accumulation is that the momentary accumulated evidence – also known as the decision variable (DV) – is represented in the brain. Indeed, signals that appear to track the evolution of the DV have been observed in rodents (Hanks et al., 2014), monkeys (Gold and Shadlen, 2007), and humans (Donner et al., 2009; Heekeren et al., 2004; O'Connell et al., 2012). Of particular relevance here, using scalp electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings, it has been shown that a centro-parietal positivity (CPP) that emerges during choice formation closely resembles a form of the DV (Kelly and O'Connell, 2013; O'Connell et al., 2012; O'Connell et al., 2018). Specifically, in two-alternative decision-making tasks, the CPP bears hallmarks of an unsigned (i.e. not choice-selective) DV that can be read out from evidence accumulation models by taking the absolute of the accumulated evidence (Kelly and O'Connell, 2013; Twomey et al., 2016). Three key dynamical properties of this measure are also seen in the CPP on such tasks: (i) a gradual ramping over time, the slope of which depends on absolute evidence strength and correlates with response time (RT); (ii) a stereotyped peak amplitude that is independent of the evidence strength (putatively reflecting a termination of the accumulation process upon boundary crossing); and (iii) a close correspondence between peak latency and RT (putatively reflecting the timing of the boundary crossing). The CPP on these tasks is observed irrespective of the modality of the evidence (e.g. visual vs. auditory) and the method of commitment (e.g. overtly, with a motor response, or covertly without a measurable motor response), suggesting it is a supramodal, effector-independent decision signal.

Another salient characteristic of the CPP manifests in paradigms requiring detection of faint sensory stimuli (as opposed to discrimination of features of high-intensity stimuli). Here, the CPP exhibits the properties described above only on trials when the stimulus is judged to be present (‘hits’ and, to a less clear extent, ‘false alarms’; O'Connell et al., 2012; Twomey et al., 2015). When the stimulus is presented but not detected (‘misses’), however, the signal is diminished in amplitude or even absent entirely. In these respects, as well as in topographic distribution, there are clear similarities between the CPP and the classic P300 component (Hillyard et al., 1971; Squires et al., 1973; Twomey et al., 2015). The diminution of these signals on miss trials can be easily explained in the context of evidence accumulation models as a case in which a ‘stimulus present’ decision boundary remains unmet due to insufficient evidence. By contrast, this family of signals has not been found to ramp up as clearly when participants are asked to actively confirm the absence of the target stimulus (‘correct rejections’; Hillyard et al., 1971; Squires et al., 1973), suggesting the CPP may not reflect accumulation of internally generated ‘evidence for absence’ (Deco et al., 2007) in detection tasks.

In sum, decision-making has been successfully modelled as the accumulation of noisy evidence over time, and a centro-parietal positivity in the EEG has been proposed to reflect key aspects of this process.


Performance monitoring through post-decisional evidence accumulation

Having described how the process of evidence accumulation provides a plausible account of choice formation in brain and behavior, we now turn to the question of monitoring of choice accuracy in the absence of external feedback. How are decision-makers able to detect their own mistakes without explicit feedback from the environment, and provide fine-grained estimates of confidence in the adequacy of the preceding choice? In order to account for performance monitoring of choices within the same evidence accumulation framework described above, Pleskac and Busemeyer, 2010 proposed that an evidence accumulation process can take place in the post-decisional period and be used to inform estimates of choice confidence. To intuit how such a model explains monitoring of choice accuracy, consider a series of choices made with moderately high evidence strength. For the majority of trials, the DV will reach the boundary corresponding to the correct choice, and post-decisional accumulation of samples from the same evidence source will, on average, furnish accumulated evidence that corroborates the selected choice. This corroborating evidence in turn produces a sense of high confidence. For the few incorrect choices, by contrast, post-decisional accumulation will, on average, furnish accumulated evidence that conflicts with the selected choice. This conflicting evidence in turn results in reduced confidence, doubt, or even a change of mind (van den Berg et al., 2016; Resulaj et al., 2009). Thus, post-decisional evidence accumulation is a candidate mechanism through which performance monitoring can occur. At this point, it is important to clarify that post-decisional processing is not necessarily restricted to the period following an overt behavioral response, but can in principle also take place before any response is executed. This is because there is usually a small delay between a boundary crossing corresponding to initial decision commitment, and subsequent motor execution – a delay that constitutes one component of the so-called non-decision time parameter Ter in evidence accumulation models (visualized by the gray box in; the other component being stimulus encoding time). It has been shown that if the delay between initial boundary crossing and subsequent response completion is sufficiently long (for example, on tasks requiring response execution via protracted limb movement), then post-decisional accumulation during this delay can produce changes of mind before the initially chosen response is completed (Resulaj et al., 2009).

Because ‘performance monitoring’ is a rather broad concept, let us explore further how the simple mechanism of post-decisional accumulation might account for different expressions of performance monitoring (Yeung and Summerfield, 2012). First, post-decisional accumulation can explain categorical expressions of error detection. For example, in many studies of performance monitoring participants are required to signal (e.g. via button-press) when they think that they made an error with a preceding choice (for detailed discussion, see Wessel, 2012). Such error signalling responses can readily be modelled in the context of post-decisional accumulation by imposing a boundary on the post-decisional process (which is distinct from the boundary corresponding to the initial choice): Only when the accumulated post-decisional evidence crosses that boundary is an error-signalling response given (Pleskac and Busemeyer, 2010). As alluded to above, the same principle can also be applied to generate overt changes of mind, when an initial choice (corresponding to the initial boundary crossing) is subsequently overturned in favour of a different alternative (corresponding to a secondary boundary crossing; Resulaj et al., 2009). Second, post-decisional accumulation also naturally explains graded levels of confidence in the accuracy of a choice. Human participants can typically provide well-calibrated estimates of their own performance (Aitchison et al., 2015; Fleming et al., 2018; Sanders et al., 2016). To explain such behavior, it suffices to assume that confidence directly reflects (a transformation of) the accumulated post-decisional evidence. Such an account can explain various patterns that are apparent in empirically observed human confidence judgments (Moran, 2015; Pleskac and Busemeyer, 2010; Yu et al., 2015). For example, it explains why confidence decreases monotonically as difficulty increases (i.e. because post-decisional evidence will, on average, strongly favour the initial, usually correct choice when evidence strength is high), why the accuracy of confidence judgments is better under speed pressure (i.e., because speed pressure increases the probability of ‘fast errors’ even for high evidence strength, which are in turn more likely to generate conflicting evidence in the post-decisional period and be correctly detected; Desender et al., 2021; Desender et al., 2020), and why the accuracy of confidence judgments increases when more time elapses between the first decision and the confidence judgment (Yu et al., 2015). Thus, post-decisional accumulation explains key expressions of performance monitoring (error detection and confidence) and accounts for a range of related findings.

The preceding summary of post-decisional evidence accumulation and its explanatory power vis-à-vis empirically-observed performance monitoring behavior is predicated on the assumption that the post-decisional process operates largely on the same evidence source as the initial choice (Calder-Travis et al., 2020; Pleskac and Busemeyer, 2010; Resulaj et al., 2009; van den Berg et al., 2016). This effective continuation of the initial accumulation is possible in perceptual decision tasks, for example, if the stimulus display remains accessible in the post-decisional period (Fleming et al., 2018), or through accumulation of sensory information that is still in the processing pipeline (e.g. in a sensory buffer) if the stimulus is removed upon choice (Resulaj et al., 2009). Under such a view, the quality of the evidence (or ‘drift rate’) informing the initial and post-decisional accumulation processes will be approximately the same (excluding possible choice-induced biases in evidence weighting; e.g. Rollwage et al., 2020; Talluri et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2015). However, post-decisional accumulation may not be restricted only to the same evidence source that informed the initial choice. Several scenarios are possible where the initial evidence source is no longer available, and other sources of information can be consulted to inform the post-decisional accumulation process. One likely candidate is a short-term memory trace of the stimulus (Smith and Ratcliff, 2009; Vlassova and Pearson, 2013). These traces are known to persist for several seconds after stimulus offset (Wimmer et al., 2015), making them well positioned to furnish input to a deliberative post-decisional accumulation process. Because memory is subject to decay over time, this could produce a case where drift rates can differ between the initial and post-decisional accumulation processes. Post-decisional accumulation could also incorporate new, qualitatively different sources of information that might carry evidence about whether an error was just made. These sources could include an internally generated conflict signal (Yeung et al., 2004), interoceptive signals (Ullsperger et al., 2010), an estimate of elapsed decision time (Desender et al., 2017; Kiani et al., 2014), new information that comes to mind from memory (Nelson and Dunlosky, 1991), or irrelevant signals such as stimulus familiarity (Glenberg et al., 1982) and previous exposure to the same stimulus (Metcalfe and Finn, 2008).

Another important dimension of any post-decisional accumulation process is what we refer to as its reference frame: effectively, what propositions a DV furnished by the accumulation process will serve to arbitrate between. Generally speaking, pre-decisional evidence accumulation will tend to be concerned with mapping accumulated (sensory) evidence to the available choice alternatives (a ‘stimulus/response reference frame’), and it is possible that post-decisional accumulation is simply a continuation of this process. This scenario, which we illustrate schematically in, entails that the mapping of the post-decisional DV onto an internal estimate of confidence will depend on the sign of the initial choice, and so would require an additional transformation before the DV can be used to inform explicit confidence or error detection reports. Alternatively, post-decisional accumulation could take the form of an entirely distinct accumulation process, with a different reference frame that specifically pertains to the accuracy of the preceding choice (Pouget et al., 2016). In this scenario, evidence samples consistent with the initial choice will always drive the post-decisional DV in one direction, while those inconsistent with the initial choice will drive it in the opposite direction. Such a change in reference frames for the post-decisional process could confer certain advantages. It would ensure that the resulting DV can be directly used to inform confidence and error detection, without requiring a transformation. It would also mean that the post-decisional process could in principle exploit additional evidence sources, such as those that we outline above, that are specifically informative about the accuracy of the preceding choice. This scope for multiplexing of multiple sources of ‘error evidence’ could serve to increase the accuracy of confidence and error detection judgements. Importantly, we show through simulations (Appendix 1 - and) that a distinct post-decisional accumulation process with a ‘choice accuracy reference frame’ generates confidence and error detection behavior with equivalent sensitivity, and is subject to the same effects of experimental factors, as a continuation of the initial accumulation process in a stimulus/response reference frame – even when the former is selectively sensitive to evidence samples that conflict with the initial decision (a possible feature of post-decisional accumulation; Yu et al., 2015). Thus, a switch in reference frames, even coupled with a more selective accumulation of the post-decisional evidence, incurs no associated cost in the accuracy of performance monitoring. This question of the reference frame of post-decisional processing is the subject of ongoing interest (Fleming, 2016; Fleming et al., 2018) and one that we will return to later in this review.


The error positivity as a neural marker of post-decisional accumulation

In light of the above insight that post-decisional accumulation accounts for a wide variety of findings related to performance monitoring, an emerging question is whether a neural signature of this process can be identified. As outlined earlier, the CPP has been proposed to reflect the evolution of the DV (i.e. accumulated evidence) during the process of choice formation (O'Connell et al., 2018). Here, we argue that another ramping centro-parietal ERP, the Pe, reflects a functionally equivalent evidence accumulation process that takes place after the choice is made, thus providing a neural readout of post-decisional accumulation. In the following, we discuss the evidence in favour of this proposal with a focus on how the morphology of the Pe is consistent with that of a post-decisional DV, and how this neural signal relates to error detection and decision confidence.


Morphology and functional characteristics of the Pe

In the previous section, we described how the CPP exhibits three key dynamical properties of a DV in bounded evidence accumulation models: gradual ramping with a rate proportional to RT (and absolute evidence strength); a stereotyped pre-response amplitude; and a close correspondence between peak latency and RT. Importantly, models that include post-decisional evidence accumulation predict the same three signatures for the post-decisional DV if it too is subject to a decision boundary – as is expected to be the case for tasks requiring self-initiated error signalling (see also Moran et al., 2015).

Although the apparent similarity between pre-decisional centro-parietal positivities (the P300 and, by extension, the CPP; Twomey et al., 2015) and the Pe has been appreciated before (Ridderinkhof et al., 2009), it was only recently that the same three morphological signatures described above for the CPP were also observed for the Pe. In a difficult Go/No-Go task, Murphy et al., 2015 asked participants to signal commission errors by pressing a designated ‘error detection’ button as fast as possible after realizing they had made an error. The three key signatures predicted for a post-decisional evidence accumulation signal were indeed found in the Pe component that was observed between the initial erroneous response and the subsequent error signalling response. First, the build-up rate of the Pe was proportional to the speed of error detection, such that errors that were detected faster were associated with steeper ramping of the Pe (note that here an objective measure of evidence strength was not available, so directly testing an association with evidence strength was not possible). Second, the Pe reached a stereotyped pre-error-response amplitude on detected error trials that was independent of the detection RT. Third, there was a close correspondence between peak Pe latency and the detection RT. Thus, the Pe exhibited all the properties expected of a post-decisional DV in a speeded, categorical error detection scenario. Accordingly, the simulated DV from an algorithmic model of the error detection process driven by evidence accumulation was found to match the trajectory of the Pe remarkably well (Murphy et al., 2015). Aside from these striking morphological similarities, we note that the Pe also shares functional characteristics with the pre-decisional CPP. In the aforementioned study (Murphy et al., 2015), the authors conducted a second experiment where participants did not explicitly signal their errors. A reliable Pe was still observed, indicating that the Pe, like the CPP (O'Connell et al., 2012), is not tied to motor responding. Also like the CPP (O'Connell et al., 2012), the Pe is independent of the sensory modality in which stimuli are presented (Falkenstein et al., 2000).

Importantly, although these three morphological signatures are a first step in relating the Pe to underlying computational principles, such qualitative assessment of these signatures provides a rather indirect approach to do so. A complementary approach to link both aspects would be through model-based EEG analysis, as was previously successfully employed for perceptual decisions (Berberyan et al., 2021; Philiastides and Sajda, 2006; van Vugt et al., 2012) and associated confidence judgments (Pereira et al., 2020). Potential approaches could be to include single-trial Pe amplitudes as regressors when estimating parameters of post-decisional evidence accumulation models (for a related approach, see: Desender et al., 2019b), or to jointly model behavioral data and single-trial Pe amplitudes (Bahg et al., 2020).

Together, these morphological and functional similarities suggest that the CPP and Pe may reflect the same functional process (cf. Ridderinkhof et al., 2009), and thus emphasize the credentials of the Pe as a candidate signature of post-decisional evidence accumulation.


Error detection and the Pe

Most of the early work on neural signatures of performance monitoring did not place much emphasis on the possible role of the Pe. This was partly because it was unclear whether the Pe truly reflected a distinct neural signal, or was rather produced by the same oscillatory event phase-locked to error commission as the earlier error-related negativity (ERN). This changed with the seminal work by Nieuwenhuis et al., 2001, who were able to dissociate both neural signals. In an anti-saccade task, they asked participants to report their own errors via a manual error signalling response, and they observed a pronounced Pe component for detected versus undetected errors. Contrary to this, the amplitude of the ERN was not modulated by error detection. The association of the Pe with error detection has since been shown to be highly robust (Dhar et al., 2011; Di Gregorio et al., 2018; Endrass et al., 2007; Hughes and Yeung, 2011; Murphy et al., 2012; O'Connell et al., 2007; Wessel et al., 2011), while subsequent studies examining the ERN in this respect have yielded mixed results (see Wessel, 2012).

As alluded to above, the strong association between the Pe and error detection is naturally accounted for by the proposal that the Pe reflects post-decisional evidence accumulation, coupled with the insight that error detection can be treated analogously to a signal detection problem. Within this framework, error detection is determined by the imposition of a boundary on the post-decisional accumulation process. Thus, detected errors (‘hits’, characterized by sufficient accumulated evidence to reach the boundary) will be accompanied by larger Pe amplitudes than undetected errors (‘misses’, where the boundary is not crossed). According to this interpretation, it should be possible to change the relationship between Pe amplitude and error signalling behavior simply by altering the height of this ‘error detection bound’ (i.e. the transition between red and green in the left panel of). Indeed, Steinhauser and Yeung, 2010 incentivized participants to adopt either a liberal or a conservative criterion to report their errors. As predicted, they observed that Pe amplitudes were larger for signalled errors when participants used a conservative criterion, corresponding to a higher boundary requiring more accumulated evidence to be reached (see also Steinhauser and Yeung, 2012). These findings are again consistent with the view that the Pe reflects post-decisional evidence accumulation and further suggest that, as is the case for pre-decisional accumulation processes (Bogacz et al., 2010; Hanks et al., 2014; Murphy et al., 2016), post-decisional boundaries are under strategic control.

We note here that our framework offers a counterpoint to earlier ideas, informed by the aforementioned findings that Pe amplitude differentiates detected from undetected errors, that this signal might reflect ‘error awareness’ (Nieuwenhuis et al., 2001). In the current framework, the Pe does not reflect awareness of an error per se; rather, it reflects the trajectory of a dynamic evidence gathering process that culminates in commitment to the proposition that an error has just been made.


Decision confidence and the Pe

Research on the role of the Pe in performance monitoring has been restricted mainly to paradigms like those described above, where participants indicate whether or not they think they made an error (see e.g. Wessel, 2012). However, if error detection results from imposing a single boundary onto this neural signal, it should be possible for participants to provide more fine-grained estimates of the likelihood that a choice was correct by comparing signal amplitude against multiple discrete boundaries (Yeung and Summerfield, 2012). Indeed, Boldt and Yeung, 2015 reported a study in which participants were asked to evaluate their own performance on a graded scale ranging from ‘certainly wrong’ up to ‘certainly correct’. Consistent with our proposal, they found that Pe amplitude varies near-monotonically with the level of confidence that the preceding choice wascorrect: the more certain the participant was that they made an error, the larger the Pe amplitude. Note that this result dissociates the Pe from a pure uncertainty signal, which would exhibit an inverted-U relationship with the scale ratings. Consistent with post-decisional accumulation models described earlier, this study and others Desender et al., 2019b; Selimbeyoglu et al., 2012 have provided evidence that the same process underlies both error detection and decision confidence: they showed that a classifier trained on post-decisional EEG data to dissociate correct responses from errors also generalized to predict fine-grained differences in decision confidence.

The proposal that the Pe encodes decision confidence has not been unequivocally supported by existing data. It is expected that the amplitude of a pure signal of decision confidence should vary monotonically with the reported level of decision confidence. Contrary to this, in the study of Boldt and Yeung, 2015; shown the relationship between confidence and reported Pe amplitude was not perfectly monotonic, instead showing approximately equal signal amplitudes for trials judged as ‘certainly correct’ and trials judged as ‘probably correct’. We note, however, that the temporal window for measurement of the Pe in this study was early (250–350 ms post-response) compared to some other studies of the Pe (e.g. Murphy et al., 2015), and the signal at later time points appeared to exhibit the predicted monotonic relationship with confidence. A reanalysis of these data in a slightly later time window (300–500 ms post-response) did show a monotonic relation between confidence and Pe amplitude, with a significantly different amplitude when comparing ‘certainly correct’ and ‘probably correct’ trials. However, because one should be cautious with a post-hoc analysis in which the time window is not selected a priori (Luck and Gaspelin, 2017), it remains to be seen in future studies whether indeed the Pe, when measured in a slightly later time window, shows a consistent monotonic relation with the reported level of decision confidence.

In the current work, we make the strong point that decision confidence is computed based on the accumulated level of post-decisional error evidence, as reflected by the (post-decisional) Pe component. Importantly, there is some evidence in the literature that confidence computations can already be tracked prior to response execution (Dotan et al., 2018), and it is known that observers are capable of making well-calibrated confidence judgments at the same time as their primary decisions (Kiani et al., 2014). Furthermore, neural signals have been identified that evolve prior to initial decisions that are predictive of later confidence judgments (Gherman and Philiastides, 2018). Nevertheless, we contend that in contexts where probing of confidence is delayed relative to primary decisions, and relevant information might be available in the post-decisional period to inform those judgments (e.g. when access to the stimulus persists after the initial choice, or when the primary response is highly speeded), post-decisional accumulation will play a central role in determining confidence judgments – and furthermore, can improve their accuracy (Yu et al., 2015).


The Pe reflects accumulation of evidence for an error

One salient aspect of the findings summarized above is that the Pe is generally large in magnitude when a preceding choice is likely to be incorrect (low confidence, or error signalling response), and diminished or entirely absent when the choice is likely to be correct (high confidence, or omission of error signalling response). This insight is likely informative about the nature of the post-decisional process reflected in the Pe in at least two respects. First, it highlights that the Pe is functionally similar to the CPP/P300 in signal detection contexts (Hillyard et al., 1971; O'Connell et al., 2012; Squires et al., 1973; Twomey et al., 2015), and suggests that the post-decisional accumulation process reflected in this signal may be considered analogous to a signal detection problem where the objective is to detect the commission of an error.

Second, this key characteristic of the Pe suggests that it reflects a process that deals specifically in the accumulation of evidence that the preceding choice was incorrect, or ‘error evidence’. At a minimum, this upward ramping of the Pe specifically in response to error evidence would seem to necessitate a reconfiguration of the accumulation process, from a stimulus/response reference frame in the pre-decisional period to a choice accuracy reference frame in the post-decisional period (see above; Fleming et al., 2018; Pouget et al., 2016). In this sense, contrasting with rapid changes of mind that appear to be driven by accumulation of sensory evidence that is still ‘in the pipeline’ at the time of the initial bound crossing (Resulaj et al., 2009; van den Berg et al., 2016), the post-decisional process reflected in the Pe may be considered truly distinct from the pre-decisional accumulation. An important test of this hypothesis, which to our knowledge has not yet been conducted, will be to examine centro-parietal decision signals on a task where the stimulus display remains accessible in the post-decisional period, and participants are instructed to report their confidence in their initial choice after limited post-decisional viewing (Fleming et al., 2018). We predict that while the typical CPP signal evolves during initial decision formation, the post-decisional, pre-confidence judgement signal will only ramp up only on receipt of new evidence that conflicts with the preceding choice.

With this reframing comes the possibility that post-decisional accumulation is informed not only by newly arriving sensory evidence or stimulus information held in short-term memory, but also (or instead) by qualitatively distinct sources of error evidence. Some tentative support for this idea comes from an analysis of the relationship between the Pe and fronto-central theta power – the latter thought to scale with error likelihood, perhaps through encoding of the conflict between competing action plans (Cavanagh and Frank, 2014; Cohen, 2014; Yeung et al., 2004). Single-trial, error-related fronto-central theta power was found to predict successful error detection and to correlate with both detection RT and the build-up rate of the Pe (Murphy et al., 2015) – all properties expected of an error evidence signal providing input to a post-decisional accumulation process that we propose is reflected in the Pe.


Motivational and functional significance of the Pe

As outlined at the outset of our review, the ultimate goal of performance monitoring is to facilitate adjustments to behavior that are adaptive (Botvinick et al., 2001; Fernandez-Duque et al., 2000; Ridderinkhof et al., 2004; Shimamura, 2008): If a monitoring system detects that several errors have been made in a row, this likely calls for a change in the decision policy or model of the world that produced those errors (Purcell and Kiani, 2016a; Sarafyazd and Jazayeri, 2019). Given the close theoretical link between monitoring and adaptation, we now turn our focus to the possible motivational and functional significance of the Pe and post-decisional accumulation process. Harsay et al., 2012 suggested that motivational salience is a useful concept to link performance monitoring and error detection with adaptive behavior. Notable parallels have been observed between both the neural processing and behavioral consequences of errors and other kinds of salient event (such as deviant or novel stimuli; e.g., Notebaert et al., 2009; Ullsperger et al., 2010; Wessel, 2018). Erroneous choices are motivationally significant events because of their usually infrequent occurrence, their usefulness as learning signals, and their utility in triggering behavioral adaptation.

We suggest that the motivational salience of a preceding choice can be read out from the DV of a post-decisional accumulation process that accumulates evidence that that choice was incorrect – that is, precisely the process we propose to be reflected in the Pe. In other words, the accumulation process captured by the Pe furnishes a scalar quantity that can be directly leveraged to determine the desired magnitude of adjustments to future behavior. One possible course of adaptive action is to employ a more cautious decision policy after an error, instantiated by raising the decision boundary on the following trial (Dutilh et al., 2012; Purcell and Kiani, 2016b). This boundary raising will lead to slower decisions and, critically, will also increase the probability of being correct. According to our proposal, the magnitude of such post-error slowing (Rabbitt, 1966) should be predicted by the magnitude of the post-decisional DV on the preceding trial (possibly mixed with residual ‘orienting’ effects to the preceding error; Notebaert et al., 2009), which can be read out via the amplitude of the Pe. Consistent with this notion, some early studies showed a relation between Pe amplitude and post-error slowing through between-subject correlations (Hajcak et al., 2003; Nieuwenhuis et al., 2001). However, according to our framework such adaptive slowing should also manifest at the trial-by-trial level. Moreover, it should not be restricted to the categorical contrast of errors vs corrects, but rather should depend on the amount of accumulated post-decisional error evidence (i.e. Pe amplitude) in a graded manner. Consistent with this, Desender et al., 2019a, recently showed that Pe amplitude strongly and linearly predicts the trade-off between speed and accuracy on the next trial. These findings are in line with our proposal that the Pe furnishes a scalar quantity that can be adaptively used to alter subsequent decision policy.

While post-error slowing is perhaps the most commonly investigated form of adaptive behavior, other forms can be observed as well and these too may be determined by the outcome of a post-decisional accumulation process. For instance, post-decisional evidence accumulation might also underlie the decision to transition from an exploitative to an explorative mode, or vice versa, in foraging tasks (e.g. Kolling et al., 2012). Although such tasks usually involve veridical feedback about the reward that was just gained, thereby obviating the need for internal computations of choice accuracy, there is some evidence that confidence about the upcoming choice being the most rewarding modulates the trade-off between exploitation and exploration (Boldt et al., 2019). As another example, Desender et al., 2019b showed that Pe amplitude after an initial choice could be used to predict whether or not participants chose to sample more information from a noisy sensory evidence source before confirming or changing that choice. Thus, presumably via simple comparison to a boundary, the post-decisional DV reflected in the Pe can be used to guide choices about whether or not to seek additional information.


Open issues and directions of future enquiry

We have argued that the Pe reflects post-decisional evidence accumulation. Our proposal not only reconciles a variety of previous research findings; it also opens up exciting avenues of future research. In the remainder of this review, we discuss how our proposal relates to hierarchical accounts of performance monitoring and ‘metacognition’, possible neural origins of the Pe, and the implications of our proposal for the onset of awareness.


Post-decisional evidence-accumulation, second-order frameworks, and the source of error evidence

According to our proposal, performance monitoring arises from the same computational process that is responsible for the choice itself: the accumulation of evidence. In the literature on performance monitoring, other proposals have characterized metacognitive processes as ‘second-order’ decisions whereby a metacognitive monitor reads out the evidence from a ‘first-order’ decision system that deals with the primary choice (Bang et al., 2019; Fleming and Daw, 2016; Maniscalco and Lau, 2012; Pasquali et al., 2010). Empirical support for such a hierarchical structure of performance monitoring is that some manipulations selectively affect confidence judgments while leaving choice accuracy unaltered (Bang et al., 2019; Boldt et al., 2017; Koizumi et al., 2015; Maniscalco et al., 2016; Peters et al., 2017; Wokke et al., 2017; Zylberberg et al., 2012).

A detailed comparison of the current proposal with such hierarchical models is beyond the scope of this review, although we wish to emphasize that the existence of manipulations that selectively affect confidence is not inconsistent with our framework. Rather, such findings touch directly upon our earlier discussion of the various evidence sources that could be exploited by the post-decisional accumulation process. As noted above, one possible source of input is sensory evidence that is still in the processing pipeline at the time of choice initiation (Resulaj et al., 2009; van den Berg et al., 2016). However, such influences are expected to be rapid and transient, lasting for only the duration of transmission delays from sensory to decision circuits. Indeed, the CPP for initial decisions has been observed to peak significantly later than the onset of electromyographic (EMG) activity in the response-executing effector (Steinemann et al., 2018), which may reflect the influence of such residual ‘in-the-pipeline’ evidence. The Pe, by contrast, peaks several hundred milliseconds later still, and so is better positioned to incorporate other inputs such as conflict/error likelihood signals generated in medial frontal cortex around the time of initial choice (Fleming, 2016; Murphy et al., 2015). A significant open question is what factors determine the inputs that drive post-decisional accumulation processes in different contexts. Moreover, the supramodal character of the CPP/Pe family of signals suggests the intriguing possibility that the post-decisional accumulation process might be capable of multiplexing different sources of error evidence. If this is the case, how does the brain assign weights to the different evidence sources?

We hope that the framework proposed here will lay the foundation for new light to be shed on such questions. The Pe as a readout of the post-decisional accumulation process holds significant promise for delineating what computational quantities and associated brain signals might provide evidence for an error in a particular context – whether this be, for example, conflict signals generated in medial frontal cortex in challenging choice RT tasks (Murphy et al., 2015), or information held in hippocampal long-term memory circuits in more deliberative contexts (Nelson and Dunlosky, 1991). Linking variation in candidate neural signals with aspects of Pe morphology that are expected to scale with evidence strength (build-up rate, peak latency) is a clear first step. We believe that such pursuits will greatly illuminate the functional significance of the gamut of neural signals linked to performance monitoring at the outset of this article.


Neural origins of the Pe

As reviewed above, the Pe component is well characterized in terms of its morphology and relation to error detection and decision confidence. At the same time, the sources of this neural signal remain underspecified. Studies on error detection have often pointed toward an important role for the anterior insula (Ullsperger et al., 2010). For example, Harsay et al., 2018 observed that, while all errors were registered within the rostral cingulate zone, behavioral adaptation followed only when error processing also entailed engagement of the anterior insula, which then recruited autonomic arousal and balanced the activation and connectivity of task-positive networks vis-à-vis the default mode network. However, convincing evidence directly relating the Pe to a neural source is currently lacking. An important reason for this is that accurate source localization is difficult for broadly distributed signals of this nature, and the few studies that have attempted this for the Pe have suggested a quite diverse set of sources (e.g. anterior insula, Dhar et al., 2011; rostral ACC, Herrmann et al., 2004; posterior-cingulate/precuneus, O'Connell et al., 2007). Moreover, the Pe is remarkable in that a functionally equivalent signal has yet to be identified through invasive, single-unit electrophysiology. Indeed, choice-selective neurons that show ramp-like activity during initial decision formation tend to rapidly decrease in firing rate immediately after the decision-reporting action (Gold and Shadlen, 2007). This not only suggests that an exciting future direction lies in identifying the single-unit equivalents of the Pe, which is a vital step in unravelling how post-decisional accumulation is implemented in the brain. But it also highlights how, at least currently, the Pe should hold unique appeal for cognitive neuroscientists interested in performance monitoring and adaptive behavior. A study combining EEG and fMRI to further unravel the functional neuroanatomy of the Pe in human subjects would hold promise (Gherman and Philiastides, 2018; Pereira et al., 2020), as such an approach has already proven useful for identifying likely neural generators of the error-related negativity (Debener et al., 2005; Iannaccone et al., 2015). Such a study would also be able to shed light on the level of overlap in the neural sources generating the CPP and the Pe. This would be highly informative, not least with respect to the question of whether the Pe reflects a continuation of the initial evidence accumulation process in the same neural circuit, or whether it reflects a fundamentally distinct signal.


The onset of awareness

In this review, we proposed that the Pe reflects a process of post-decisional evidence accumulation that gives rise to metacognitive experiences such as error detection and confidence. This raises the intriguing question of whether processes such as error detection and confidence cannot take place before the peak latency of the Pe (see Di Gregorio et al., 2020). Of particular relevance here is that participants can provide meaningful confidence estimates when providing both choice and confidence simultaneously in a single response (Kiani et al., 2014; Zylberberg et al., 2016). This seems to suggest that confidence computations do not necessarily entirely take place post-decision. In more recent modelling work, however, it was shown that in such designs, qualitative signatures of confidence (such as an interaction between evidence strength and choice correctness; Sanders et al., 2016) can only be captured by an evidence accumulation framework when assuming a slight temporal delay between choices and confidence (Desender et al., 2021). Further work is needed to unravel the precise dynamics involved when reporting both choice and confidence simultaneously, and to shed light on the role of the Pe in this process.

Some recent work identified a neural signature of confidence occurring prior to both the choice and confidence report (Gherman and Philiastides, 2015, Gherman and Philiastides, 2018). However, findings such as these should be interpreted with caution, because pre-choice neural signals that dissociate high from low confidence do not imply pre-choice awareness. For example, it is known that errors can be reliably predicted from alpha band activity tens of seconds before the decision actually takes place (O'Connell et al., 2009). Part of the difficulty in assessing the onset of awareness seems to stem from reliance on paradigms in which participants first make a forced choice about a stimulus, and subsequently indicate their level of confidence in their decision. Recent advances in finger tracking might allow new light to be cast on the question of whether metacognitive experiences such as error awareness and confidence can emerge prior to choice commitment (Dotan et al., 2018; Dotan et al., 2019).


Limitations


Evidence accumulation models

The current review leverages evidence accumulation models to explain different expressions of performance monitoring. Therefore, potential limitations of these models should be considered when evaluating the current proposal. A common criticism of ‘vanilla’ evidence accumulation models (the DDM being the most popular example) is that they fail to reproduce certain behavioral effects – for example, the effects of fine-grained manipulations of speed/accuracy trade-off on the precise shapes of correct and error RT distributions (Rafiei and Rahnev, 2021). Another criticism is that certain classes of evidence accumulation model (e.g. those like the DDM that prescribe the diffusion of a single, one-dimensional decision variable) lack biological plausibility, and that alternative formulations (e.g. those prescribing a race between two or more distinct accumulators) are better candidates for realization in neural circuits. To the extent that such criticisms challenge evidence accumulation as the fundamental algorithmic basis for decision-making, they also pose a serious challenge for our account. However, we note in response that augmenting evidence accumulation models with additional features (ideally those supported by neurophysiological findings) has in several cases allowed these models to capture previously problematic features of behavioral data – one example being evidence-independent urgency signals in the case of the speed/accuracy trade-off (Hanks et al., 2014; Murphy et al., 2016; Steinemann et al., 2018). Moreover, one-dimensional diffusion processes like those prescribed by the DDM can be recast as competitive interactions between discrete accumulators (Bogacz et al., 2006; Usher and McClelland, 2001) which in turn can be well approximated by biologically plausible cortical circuit models (Murphy et al., 2021; Wang, 2002; Wimmer et al., 2015). On current balance, we view evidence accumulation as the dominant algorithmic account of how decisions are formed, which in turn provides a solid foundation for the proposal that post-decisional accumulation is responsible for the various aspects of performance monitoring that have been the focus here’.


A metacognitive decision variable

At the onset of this review, we argued that the Pe might track a selective ‘metacognitive’ decision variable reflecting post-decisional evidence accumulation. Although this idea is appealing, it is worthwhile to acknowledge that it can be challenged on at least two grounds. First, some doubt has been cast on whether a selective metacognitive DV is actually represented in the brain. For the initial decision process itself, it seems well accepted that the brain should have some internal representation of a DV (Gold and Shadlen, 2007; O'Connell et al., 2012). However, this is less clear for performance monitoring. For example, it has been argued that decision confidence can be explained without resorting to ‘metacognitive’ representations (Kepecs et al., 2008; Kiani and Shadlen, 2009). Second, even if such a DV is used by the brain, it should not be taken for granted that an ERP will provide a pure readout of it. It is well understood that ERPs can reflect the superimposition of different neurocognitive processes (Luck, 2014), and it is therefore possible that the Pe should not be interpreted in as straightforward a fashion as our proposal suggests. In this regard, it is imperative to design experimental paradigms that minimize the possibility of mixing of the Pe with other signals and coincident cognitive processes, an approach that was also central to recent studies identifying the CPP with perceptual decision formation (O'Connell et al., 2012). It will also be highly informative to build on the work reviewed above (Steinhauser and Yeung, 2010, Steinhauser and Yeung, 2012) to further examine whether manipulations that selectively influence post-decisional evidence accumulation affect the Pe component in specific ways predicted by our account.


Conclusion

In the current review, we have discussed the idea that neural signals of performance monitoring can be understood within the context of post-decisional evidence accumulation. Such an account can explain how error detection and decision confidence arise from the same algorithmic process and relate to adaptive behavior. Moreover, it opens up exciting avenues of research concerning the neural origin of post-decisional performance monitoring signals and how these neural signals integrate different sources of evidence for an error.


Appendix 1


Post-decision accumulation as a continuation of pre-decisional accumulation vs selective accumulation of error evidence

In the simulations reported below we demonstrate that the same behavioral expressions (i.e. error detection responses and confidence reports) can be generated, with comparable accuracy, when modeling post-decisional accumulation as a continuation of pre-decisional accumulation or when modeling it as a distinct post-decisional process driven only by error evidence – that is, only by evidence samples that conflict with the initial decision. In both cases, the magnitude of the decision variable (DV) after post-decisional accumulation is used to inform discrete error detection (via imposition of a single criterion) or graded confidence (via comparison against multiple criteria) judgments. For both models, we simulated 5000 trials of a bounded accumulation model with an unbiased starting point, with drift rate, decision boundary and within-trial noise all fixed to one and non-decision time fixed to 0.2. After boundary crossing, post-decisional accumulation took place for a fixed duration of 1 s. The code for these simulations is available online (https://github.com/kdesende/NeuralSignalsOfPerformanceMonitoring, Desender, 2021; copy archived at swh:1:rev:892bf43d65e1adec7a5872f4cb911eb9d28d8633).

In the ‘continuation of pre-decisional accumulation’ model, post-decisional accumulation was simply a continuation of precisely the same accumulation process that drove the initial decision. In this model, how the post-decisional DV informs confidence is determined by which bound is reached to trigger the initial decision: if the upper bound is initially reached, then a more positive post-decisional DV translates into higher confidence and a more negative DV to lower confidence; conversely, if the lower bound is initially reached, a more positive DV translates into lower confidence and a more negative DV to higher confidence. For this reason, we flipped the sign of the post-decisional DV on all trials where the initial decision was triggered by the upper bound being reached, ensuring that the DV could be used to inform confidence and error detection judgements in an identical fashion on all trials. The ‘selective error evidence’ model, by contrast, only accumulated the absolute of post-decisional evidence samples that conflicted with the initial choice (negatively/positively signed evidence if the upper/lower bound triggered the initial decision, respectively). In both models, discrete error detection was implemented by putting a single criterion at the 20% quantile; graded confidence was implemented by imposing multiple criteria which divided post-decisional evidence into six equal-sized bins.

As can be seen in, for both models the relation between confidence and initial choice accuracy and between error detection and initial choice accuracy was highly similar.

Next, we examined how well both of these models can explain three key findings in the field of confidence described in the main text. First, it is well known that confidence increases with evidence strength for correct trials but decreases with evidence strength for errors. To simulate this effect, in addition to the trials reported in Figure S1, we simulated an additional 5000 trials with an (increased) drift rate of 2. Second, the relation between confidence and accuracy is known to be stronger when participants take more time for their initial decision. To simulate this, in addition to the trials reported in Figure S1, we simulated an additional 5000 trials with an (increased) decision bound of 3. Third, the relation between confidence and accuracy is known to be stronger when participants are allowed more time following an initial decision to provide their confidence report. To simulate this, in addition to the trials reported in Figure S1, we simulated an additional 5000 trials with (decreased) post-decision accumulation time of 200 ms. As can be seen in, both the continuation of pre-decisional accumulation model (upper panel) and the model that selectively accumulates error evidence (lower panel) provide highly similar predictions concerning these three empirical findings.


Funding Statement

The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.


Contributor Information

Kobe Desender, Email: kobe.desender@gmail.com.

Valentin Wyart, École normale supérieure, PSL University, INSERM, France.

Floris P de Lange, Radboud University, Netherlands.


Funding Information

This paper was supported by the following grant:

KU Leuven PXF-D8830-Franqui start-up grant to Kobe Desender.


Toward integrative approaches to study the causal role of neural oscillations via transcranial electrical stimulation

Valeriia Beliaeva, Iurii Savvateev, Valerio Zerbi, Rafael Polania — Nature Communications, 2021. PMC8047004, CC BY 4.0.

Diverse transcranial electrical stimulation (tES) techniques have recently been developed to elucidate the role of neural oscillations, but critically, it remains questionable whether neural entrainment genuinely occurs and is causally related to the resulting behavior. Here, we provide a perspective on an emerging integrative research program across systems, species, theoretical and experimental frameworks to elucidate the potential of tES to induce neural entrainment. We argue that such an integrative agenda is a requirement to establish tES as a tool to test the causal role of neural oscillations and highlight critical issues that should be considered when adopting a translational approach.

Subject terms: Electrophysiology, Neural circuits


Introduction

For more than a century, researchers have observed and studied rhythmic patterns in the brains of humans and other animals. However, it remains unclear whether these rhythms are essential for neural computations and the resulting behavior to occur, or whether their presence has no functional role. While some researchers support the idea that neural oscillations play a fundamental role in supporting efficient communication in the brain, others suggest that information contained in such rhythmic patterns might be meaningless,. The latter group argue that signals recorded from a neural population aggregate the activity from various regions of the brain including the ones which are distant from the recording site. Considering that geometry of the cells also affects the recorded signal, oscillations might contain mass of information that is hard to link to a particular brain source and establish its relationship with the observed behavior.

To resolve this debate, experimenters require techniques that modulate oscillatory dynamics of the targeted brain region or network to provide evidence for the involvement of a particular neural oscillation in the hypothesized cognitive process. Such assessments can be performed invasively via intracranial electrical stimulation or optogenetic techniques,. However, these methods cannot be applied in a routine fashion in humans, and therefore non-invasive and safe neuromodulation methods are required. Over the last two decades, methods belonging to the family of transcranial electrical stimulation (tES) were introduced with the potential to study the causal relationship between neural oscillations and behavior in humans in relatively safe and painless manner.

One such approach, which was initially proposed to modulate neural oscillations, consists of the application of low-intensity alternating currents (tACS) to target brain structures in a frequency-specific manner. Theoretically speaking, tACS has the potential to establish a causal link between the oscillatory pattern (modulated or induced) at the targeted brain structure and the resulting behavior, this given the assumption that tACS genuinely affects neural entrainment. Examples of its application include testing the causal role of specific frequency bands on cognitive, sleep, and motor functions. Furthermore, tACS has been recently proposed as a tool to study how oscillatory coherence between spatially distinct nodes of functional networks contributes to behavior,. Some of these studies were criticized due to low degree of focality when using standard stimulation setup, but recent modeling work provides hints of how focality can be improved based on novel electrode montages,.

One issue with these approaches is that they cannot focally target areas in subcortical structures, thus limiting their potential applications. Recently developed methods based on multi-electrode tES protocols (such as temporal interference (TI) stimulation) are promising technologies proposed to induce oscillatory entrainment of neural activity in subcortical structures without recruiting neurons of the overlying cortex. While this method appears to overcome the constraint that only superficial structures may be focally affected, further studies are required to gain a more detailed understanding on the efficacy of these methods, their mechanism of action, and evaluate the relevance of this approach to study human cognition and behavior.

This line of research has led to controversial and heated discussions as to whether existing and emerging tES methodologies genuinely induce neural entrainment over targeted brain structures,. First, there is skepticism regarding the assumed direct effect of tES on target brain regions given that experimental evidence suggests that entrainment could occur via indirect stimulation of afferent nerves, including retinal stimulation. Second, current intensities conventionally applied in human studies might not be sufficient to genuinely induce neural entrainment,. Third, apparent neural entrainment might be the result of other neuromodulatory mechanisms such as excitability changes, or increased burstiness of neurons in addition to (or instead of) genuine modulation of neural dynamics. Alongside these controversies, with the sharp increase of tES studies in the last years, there is some evidence that the impact of this methodology might not be fully reliable, potentially due to high variability of the induced effects across studies,.

As the field continues its maturation process, tES research is starting to evolve from hypothesis testing solely based on behavioral observations in humans towards a translational and integrative approach in order to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms of action of the technique. This means that researchers should adopt a multilevel research program including: (i) a deep understanding of neurophysiological principles underlying tES, (ii) connecting the principles of tES action to mechanistic theories of neural oscillations, and (iii) establishing a link between these neuro-mechanistic principles and the observed behavior. While the study across these different levels of abstraction is a common approach in different subfields of neuroscience, it is just an emerging agenda in tES research. Some of these recent efforts include a multimethod and multidisciplinary approach that integrates computational modeling research with experiments in vitro, in vivo, and ex vivo (e.g., in rodents, and monkeys), as well as studies in clinical populations,. Here we argue that building links between the information gained at each of these different levels of abstraction is the natural next step in the maturation process of the tES technique.

While we consider this program to be essential in advancing our understanding of the effects induced by tES, these investigations must take into account the advantages and disadvantages that come with such a translational approach. For instance, translation of neuromodulatory interventions might be effective in a given system, species, or behavioral state but not in a different one. This challenge is not unique to brain stimulation research but is also present in other translational efforts, such as pharmacological interventions during drug discovery research. As we discuss in more detail below, these translational issues might be related to differences in neural circuits that are often assumed to underly the same behavioral function, a critical aspect often overseen in tES translational applications.

In this Perspective article, we advocate for these emerging and much needed joint translational efforts to elucidate whether existing and new tES methodologies can indeed be used to genuinely induce neural entrainment, and if so, whether these methods can be applied to test the causal role of neural oscillations in a routine fashion in humans. In order to discuss the potential advantages of this approach in more detail, this article is divided into three parts. First, we discuss critical aspects that need to be considered if one aims to translate knowledge of neuromodulation across species. In the following section, we propose that the effects induced by tES in any given system should be studied by evaluating the influences of the stimulation at different levels of information processing, and crucially establish paradigms that allow building mechanistic links across these levels. In the last part of the article, we illustrate how state-of-the-art computational models and individualized stimulation parameters may serve as methodologies for generating accurate predictions of the stimulation effects, thus improving the reliability of causal associations between neural oscillations and behavior.

Here, we focus on methods of the tES family that have the potential of modulating neural oscillations both in cortical and subcortical structures (e.g., tACS, TI, intersectional pulsed stimulation (ISP)), as recently, these methods have sparked heated debates about their efficacy for inducing neural entrainment. Nevertheless, the views and opinions shared in this article might be well applicable to other forms of neuromodulation such as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), a methodology that appears to effectively induce neural entrainment, and transcranial focused ultrasound stimulation (tFUS). The goal of this article is to provide a perspective and not a detailed review of the literature. The impact of tES on neurophysiology and cognition, as well as methodological and theoretical aspects of neural entrainment have been reviewed in more detail elsewhere,–.


Comparative application of tES across species

Given the preservation of brain rhythms across systems and species alongside their tagged functional roles, it is tempting to translate directly the knowledge gained about the mechanisms of action induced by tES from one species to another. However, we argue that this translation of knowledge across species requires careful considerations, in particular those related to differences in both anatomy and organization of functional networks. In this section, we attempt to bring awareness about some of the challenges that experimenters may need to consider when translating knowledge of targeted neuromodulatory interventions across species.

The ultimate goal of animal experiments is to have a meaningful predictive relevance for clinical applications, or predictive validity. For this purpose, animal studies with a translational goal in mind must be designed with consideration for their construct validity (the extent to which conclusions derived from the experiments in animals can be transferred to humans) and face validity (the degree to which an assessment or test subjectively appears to measure the variable or construct that it is supposed to measure). In tES studies, these concepts can be generalized in two major points. First, the delivery and distribution of electric fields/currents in animal models must correctly emulate those applied in human studies and have a similar interaction with the tissue micro-structure. Second, these electric fields should be designed to affect human-equivalent network-level targets, so that the responses/outcomes can be directly used to draw relevant inferences applied to humans both in health and disease. Each of these points requires further discussion.


Comparable strength of the induced electric field

The first consideration relates to the obvious differences in brain anatomy and geometry of animal models compared to humans, and how this affects the electric field distributions in the brain. Most tES protocols produce a complex pattern of current flows, which result in electric fields and current densities that vary significantly across brain regions. In initial studies, current densities used in animal experiments were usually determined from estimations of human modeling work and it was assumed that the distribution of electric fields generated in the brain is ‘quasi-uniform’ across an area of the brain or even the entire brain/tissue,. However, it would be imprudent to adapt the parameters from human studies (and vice versa) assuming a linear relationship between brain volume and the amount of current required. These considerations are especially important for those brains that lack cortical circumvolutions and are much smaller in size, for example in rodents (Fig.). In a recent study, investigators compared electric fields in head models of a mouse, non-human primate and human (Fig.), finding that in each translational combination, different stimulation parameters must be appropriately adjusted in order to match electric fields within a given target region of interest across species. Additionally, in the same study, they demonstrated that a primate model is better than a mouse model for the investigation of the mechanisms underlying electrical stimulation. Thus, differences across species of this kind change the effectiveness and variability of the results on physiology and behavior and limit direct translation to humans.

Another important aspect that complicates the direct comparison between human and animal studies is the interaction between electric field generated in the brain and the three-dimensional organization of neuronal compartments. Electrical currents affect (de)hyperpolarization of all neuron subtypes, but the tES-induced effect depends on the orientation between the applied field and the soma-dendritic axis,.

Human and animal brain models can have significant differences in density and geometry of the neurons, types and distribution of ion channels within them, position of dendrites and axons relative to the electric field, degree of axon myelination or glial density; all these factors can severely affect the peak values and distribution of electric fields generated by tES. The effectiveness of tES can be further complicated by the different contribution on current spread from skin, subcutaneous soft tissue, skull, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), as well as the behavioral state (in vivo, anesthetized, or ex vivo). For instance, studies in anesthetized rodents suggest that electric fields <1 V/m induced by tACS might not be sufficient to genuinely induce neural entrainment, and critically if it occurs, it could be driven indirectly via the activation of afferent nerves. In addition, evidence for inefficiency of low-intensity tACS came from a study with patients in awake and sleeping states, where oscillations recorded with intracranial EEG were not entrained during stimulation. However, a recent seminal work found that tACS can genuinely induce neural entrainment in awake monkeys, crucially with electric fields <0.5 V/m and ~0.5 mA current intensities, which can be safely applied in humans using conventional protocols (Fig.). These results are further supported by previous studies—also conducted in awake monkeys—that found neural entrainment in subcortical structures (however, this time applying higher current intensities). Crucially, a set of control experiments in these studies allowed to conclude that these results could not be caused by peripheral nerve stimulation. In general, these findings suggest that brains from fully awake organisms are more susceptible to neural entrainment based on exogenously induced electric fields in the sub-V/m and sub-mA ranges, though the full support for this conclusion is complicated by the aforementioned study which demonstrated the absence of entrainment in the awake patients. Thus, future investigations should study whether the susceptibility to tES is higher in awake states in comparison with the anaesthetized conditions. Furthermore, the possibility of tES-induced peripheral nerve and retina stimulation reported in previous studies, needs to be addressed whenever possible via additional control experiments.

Another aspect potentially contributing to the cross-species differences in tES experiments is the variation in morphology and electrical properties of the individual neurons in humans in comparison to mice and macaques. It was shown that human dendrites are longer and have higher branch complexity, leading to swifter attenuation of the external electrical inputs. Also, in vitro studies of human cortical synapses exhibit up to four times faster synaptic depression recovery, lower action potential thresholds and faster firing rates, leading to higher information bandwidth in comparison to rodents. These findings highlight not just various differences in the electrical properties of neurons between humans and other mammals, but also point to the different operational modes of the homologous circuits. Interestingly, variations in neuronal morphology in humans correlate with differences in performance in cognitive tests (e.g., IQ tests).

Whilst identification and effective control of all factors contributing to variability and mismatch between human and animal studies using tES are unlikely, our increased understanding on the underlying mechanisms of tES entrainment can guide researchers towards the best strategies that can drastically improve the reliability and validity of stimulation protocols. For example, considering the differences in experimental setup and current densities between animal models and human studies, it is important to match the electric fields in the brains of different species instead of using the same stimulation parameters. New strategies for modeling electric fields that are built on the specific morphology of the animal brain and are not a projection from human models could greatly improve this effort. In addition to the practical considerations outlined above, this choice should be made thinking about the final purpose of each experiment. The design, type and dose of the stimulation should be always critically chosen and openly discussed in light of the chosen research question and it can—and should—change depending on whether tES is used as a tool to test or manipulate brain circuits, or if the goal is to evaluate the clinical efficacy of a specific tES protocol in a preclinical study.


Comparable network effects

The mammalian brain can be parcellated into anatomically distinct areas, or modules, that are domain specific in function. In tES studies, it is usually one of these areas that is defined as “target” structure. However, complex behavior is rarely controlled by a single brain region. Instead it results from interactions between remote yet anatomically connected areas that form specialized circuits and networks. We have previously discussed how the magnitude of tES-induced effects on neuronal activity in a given region varies with the strength of the electric field. Yet, we argue that the consequences for behavior strongly depend on the effectiveness of tES to modulate local functional circuits and large-scale networks,. Given that disrupted information transfer across multiple brain regions (or networks) represents the basis for the theoretical description of several human brain disorders, understanding direct consequences of tES or any other neuromodulatory intervention on network activity is a compelling area of ongoing research in human and animal models.

One of the key concepts when studying network effects with tES is that exogenously induced polarization fluctuations of an entire population of neurons is capable of providing a substrate for signal amplification. It is important to note that the probability to react to an external electric field (i.e. the coupling constant) of a neuron embedded in a neural network can be different than that of an isolated neuron. Due to the intrinsic synchronization of the neural network, a given neuronal unit can be polarized both directly from the field and indirectly from afferent neurons. The net effect of the stimulation results from the convolution of these two processes. In general, stronger currents are required to obtain neural entrainment when the exogenous patterns compete with native brain rhythms of a neuronal network,. Strategies that facilitate this process exist, for example by tailoring the stimulation to specific and individualized brain frequencies and phase. However, perfectly in-phase synchronicity may not always lead to increased functional coupling and network entrainment due to phase lags and neural transmission delays.

Besides their use for testing the clinical feasibility of tES and exploring the mechanism of network entrainment, animal models could also become a tool to assess therapeutic usefulness of a given stimulation protocol. However, direct comparison of animal and human tES studies requires not only the proper calibration of stimulation parameters, but assumes the presence of homologous functional networks that govern the same behavioral processes across species. This assumption is studied in a novel neuroscientific field, comparative functional neuroanatomy, which examines the similarities and differences of the central nervous system from evolutionary perspective to dissect which neural networks underlie common behavioral patterns–. The results of recent investigations using this approach were able to define in which neural networks rodents and monkeys share a homologous organization as detected in humans, including the visual, the salience, the default-mode and the limbic networks. This information is extremely valuable and can assist the design of tES studies and the clinical interpretation of electrophysiological and functional magnetic resonance (fMRI) recordings on animals in the context of large-scale networks modulation and entrainment.

As an example applied to our previous argumentations, consider the following scenario: Imagine that a research team has optimized a tES protocol allowing to stimulate a deep cortical structure based on a method such as TI, for instance the basal ganglia (BG) (Fig.). Now assume that before rushing to directly apply this tES protocol in humans, the experimenters first test the neurophysiological plausibility of entrainment on a particular segment of the BG in an animal model, for instance in mice. Also, assume that the experimenters test the behavioral consequences of this protocol, finding that the intervention indeed induces the hypothesized behavioral change. Once the experimenters confirm that the protocol works in mice, the tES parameters are adapted for human application—presumably applied to the homologous brain area. Now the question is the following: In this scenario, should the investigators expect a reliable translation of the physiological and behavioral outcomes from mice to humans? Our answer is: It depends. A recent comparative functional neuroanatomy investigation found that while some subportions of the BG were consistently identified as a reliable target for translational neuroscience between mice, macaques, and humans (e.g., the nucleus accumbens (NAcc), Fig. b and), most of the striatal regions were unique and unassigned for the macaque and human brain, in particular the caudate body, which had a connectivity pattern that significantly differed across species. This suggests that apparent discrepancies in behavioral outcomes that might have been encountered in our hypothetical scenario might have been rooted on the fact that the tES intervention was actually targeting distinct functional networks across species.


Evaluating the effects of tES across different levels of abstraction

In tES research, a lot of attention has been payed to the influence of the experimental scale (micro, meso, or macro) and the type of the studied system (in vitro, in vivo, ex vivo) alongside their corresponding neurophysiological mechanisms,. However, we argue that the scale and type of the system under study are not the only critical parameters to consider, and certainly not in isolation. Investigators should also consider what hypothesized computations, which are governed by neural oscillations, are modulated by tES alongside their influence on behavior. Importantly, given that neural oscillatory patterns have been shown to be preserved across the species, one could argue that the reconstruction of functional networks studied in one species could be in principle translated to another one. In this case, translation can be achieved by partially circumventing the necessity of finding the homologous anatomy-based networks, because the decisive criteria is not purely the anatomy, but the rhythm and its underlying function.

In an attempt to encapsulate these aspects, we take an inspiration from the representation of the functional levels of information systems proposed by David Marr, which interestingly has also been instrumental to study other aspects of neuro-cognitive research:

Computational level: what type of function is computed, what is the final goal of the system under study?

Algorithmic level: how is the function computed, what algorithm is used for this computation?

Implementation level: how is the algorithm implemented that leads to the observed behavior?

Inspired by this scheme, we propose that tES studies can be viewed as both the action and interaction of different levels of abstraction, which might in turn be decomposed in different sublevels depending on the type of system or organism that is studied (Fig.). Here, we do not attempt to use the exact definitions of information processing systems proposed by Marr on each level, but rather use them as a template for tES research on different levels of abstraction. In order to lay out these ideas, we start by using a bottom-up approach, that is, from implementation to computation.


Implementation level: neural measurements

We define this level as the units of the system that the experimenter can measure at different temporal and spatial scales: microscopic (e.g., single/multiunit recordings of spiking activity), mesoscopic (e.g., local field potentials (LFPs)) and macroscopic (e.g., electroencephalography (EEG), fMRI). With the application of a given tES protocol, researchers can assess the potential influence of the stimulation on these neural readouts.

Rhythmic changes in neural activity induced by tES can be quantified by the measurements of individual spiking activity (e.g., single unit activity), the recording of an ensemble of single unit activities, or by the assessment of the neural population activity—via LFPs. At this level, periodic fluctuations of the electromagnetic field generated by the targeted neural population are assumed to be related to “functionally relevant brain rhythms”,. One of the potential action mechanisms of tES is the rhythmic alteration of the membrane potential of the neurons, causing the facilitation/inhibition of a specific neural oscillation in a target brain structure,. Crucially, the exact biophysical mechanisms governing the hypothesized neural entrainment induced by tES will depend not only on the parameters of the externally applied field (e.g., frequency, amplitude, direction of current flow, etc.), but also on the circuitry scale (e.g., slice, whole brain) and organism state (in vitro, in vivo, or ex vivo). For instance, evidence suggests that hippocampal–cortical interactions affect cortical endogenous activity that, crucially, depends on the status of an organism: sleep or awake. Therefore, when researchers study isolated cortical slices or different behavioral states of an organism (sleep or awake), such distinct scenarios will inevitably affect the fundamental mechanisms governing tES-induced effects, such as: stochastic resonance, rhythm resonance, temporal biasing, network entrainment, and imposed pattern.

Nevertheless, it is important to emphasize that the selection of the specific organism, state, and circuitry scale allows the researchers to study the broad spectrum of physiological effects of the applied tES protocol on neural oscillations (Fig.). For instance, in vitro slice studies, and in vivo research in rodents, macaques, and humans, offer the possibility to connect physiological effects (e.g., ephaptic coupling, neuronal excitability, neuronal entrainment, spike timing, synaptic plasticity, potential peripheral stimulation) caused by the applied stimulation protocol with the parameters of the applied field: amplitude, frequency, directionality. Once the physiological effects of the applied tES have been delineated, researchers can use this knowledge to reveal the influences of these modulations at the network level.


Algorithmic level: Hypothesized mechanisms

At this level, the experimenter proposes a formalized model of oscillatory network operations driving the observed behavior. Therefore, researchers have the opportunity to hypothesize what algorithm is implemented through neural oscillations that facilitates efficient communication mechanisms in neural networks (examples include communication through coherence and cross-frequency coupling). One group of methods assessing the interplay between neural oscillations include “connectivity-based” measures of statistical dependencies such as: phase-locking, coherence, correlations, etc.. An alternative approach comes from the application of information theoretical concepts, such as mutual information (MI) and transfer entropy (TE), which estimate the transfer of predictive information between two or more time series. Since transfer of predictive information reflects the actual computation conducted by the network (not its synchrony or coupling strength), relationships found via interactions between the neural oscillations from different brain regions are hypothesized to reflect a reciprocal information transfer caused by computations performed at different nodes of the brain. Therefore, the use of approaches based on MI or TE may serve to detect computation-related information transfer, potentially separating it from the information transfer driven solely by the anatomy and biophysics of the studied system. Specifically, TE together with active information storage and local information modification allows the researcher to assess the computational processes, whereas the metrics for causal interaction (e.g., causal information flow) reveal the set of all possible causal interactions of a system. Thus, the comparison of these two families of metrics potentially allows the scientists to distinguish between the computational and anatomy-driven information flows.

While testing whether a given tES protocol induces modulations in specific latent variables of the hypothesized mechanism, it results essential to test whether these algorithmic changes are reflected in corresponding modulations of behavior.


Computational level: functional changes

At this level, the experimenter quantifies what aspects of observed behavior in a given task (e.g., hit rates, decision accuracies, reaction times, etc.) or cognitive function (assessed via computational cognitive models) are related to the hypothesized mechanism at the algorithmic level. Here, tES provides the opportunity to interfere with the hypothesized mechanism, enabling to establish a causal relationship between the physiological mechanism and behavior. Unfortunately, given the difficulties of concurrent tES and electrophysiological measurements using non-invasive brain recordings methods, the classical approach is to directly assess the behavioral impact of the applied tES protocol (e.g., real stimulation vs. sham, or the relationship between a given tES-induced oscillation phase and behavior). However, we argue that the tES field of research requires parsimonious and accurate statistical inference methods for joint models of neural and behavioral measures. Typically, researchers adopt the so-called “two-stage” correlation approach where parameters of a fitted cognitive model are simply correlated with the neural measure of interest. However, these approaches do not enforce a constraint on the model parameters based on random variation in neural data. Here we argue that it is precisely this lack of constraint that makes it difficult to establish a connection between the computational and algorithmic level in our proposed scheme (Fig.).

Recent developments in statistical models of cognition and behavior propose a better integrative approach to study brain–behavior relations, the “joint modeling” approach. In brief, the joint modeling approach consists of two parts:

A behavioral model that is used to capture the behavioral observations. For example, in a perceptual detection task one could opt to use signal detection theory (SDT) models to quantify hit and false alarm rates. Another example could be the use of the popular drift diffusion model (DDM) to capture choices and reaction times in a decision-making task. The goal of the experimenter is usually to find the set of latent variables in each model that more closely predicts the observed behavioral data.

A neural model that relies on the physiological data to estimate a neural metric of interest associated to the current behavior. For instance, one could obtain trial-by-trial fluctuations of a given functional coupling metric based on EEG recordings.

Here, it is important to emphasize that on the one hand, the classical approach relies on two-step correlation analyses (i.e., brain data and behavioral data are treated as “independent” sources). This approach is not ideal given that non-invasive brain stimulation studies typically rely on rather limited sample sizes and second level correlations in small samples are likely to make type I errors. On the other hand, the joint modeling approach treats neural data as covariate of the behavioral data. This enforces a constraint on the behavioral model parameters based on the random variation in the neural data, where inference is based on the richness of trial-wise information. Thus, risk of type I errors is minimized. For the specific case of brain stimulation applications, one could then quantify how such relationships are modulated by a given stimulation condition on a trial-by-trial basis (e.g., sham vs. real). More detailed and technical information about the specification of joint models can be found in ref.. Taken together, we believe that adopting more precise quantitative models at the different levels of analyses (see “Models” in Fig.) could lead to deeper and more precise understanding about the feasibility of tES as a tool to study the causal role of neural oscillations on cognition and behavior.


Towards individualized tES interventions

The ultimate goal of tES experiments is to generate stable and foreseeable neurophysiological and behavioral effects in every volunteer or patient. However, to date, the effects of electrical stimulation are not reliably observed at the individual level,. Additionally, neurophysiological responses to both sensory processes and tES-induced modulations can be highly variable across individuals. These observations have generated an increasing interest in the development of realistic head models and methodological solutions that consider individual morphometry and neurophysiological responses. We argue that these approaches will play a fundamental role in the optimization of stimulation parameters and their underlying neurophysiological and resulting behavioral effects.


The importance of predictive models

The generation of individual head models starts with the assessment of the subject’s structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan that is segmented into several, typically six tissue types, including the scalp, skull, CSF, gray matter, white matter, and air. Afterwards, conductivity values associated with these tissues are assigned, then stimulation electrodes ascribed to the peak intensity of the current are placed on the head, and finally, the electric field distribution in the brain is calculated with the finite-element method (FEM). This procedure allows estimating the strength of the electric field, evaluating the dose of the stimulation delivered to the brain, and examining the spatial distribution of the electric field to estimate the focality of the stimulation.

Only recently, predictions of the electric field strength and distribution derived from individual head models were compared and validated with intracranial recordings in vivo in humans. The distribution of the electric field was found to be well predicted by head models, meaning that individual simulations can provide valuable information for the comparison of the impact of the brain stimulation on the region of interest and other brain areas,. Furthermore, based on the spatial distribution of the electric field researchers have an opportunity to compare different electrode configurations and to select target region of interest in the most efficient way. Nevertheless, it is still debated, whether results of individualized models can be used to predict current doses for each participant to reach the same strength of the electric fields across individuals. When model predictions were compared to the invasive recordings, the difference in the absolute field strength between these estimations reached 40%. Furthermore, the sign of this error cannot be reliably predicted given that the strength of the electric fields can be underestimated and overestimated by the models. Although this remains an unresolved issue, estimation of the absolute electric fields with individual models can be still considered as a useful tool for planning tES experiments, (we expand on this matter below). While the effect of stimulation depends on both structural and functional connectivity, introduction of the latter in standard pipelines for individual models may improve predictions of the electric fields.

In the last years, several studies have demonstrated that introduction of individualized head models can explain some of the variability in neurophysiological signal readouts,. Compelling evidence of this sort comes from a recent study, where researchers attempted to predict the impact of tACS on the power of alpha oscillation recorded with magnetoencephalography (MEG). The investigators built individual electric field models to estimate its strength and the spatial precision of stimulation, which corresponded to the correlation between the spatial distribution of the electric field and the alpha topography. Incorporation of these variables allowed the model to predict from 51% to 87% of variance of the individual alpha power modulations induced by tES, supporting the idea that individual modeling can predict the neurophysiological effect of the stimulation. In other studies, simulations of the electric fields at the individual level allowed to predict resting-state fMRI (rsfMRI) modulation of brain networks, and motor-evoked potentials, thus providing further evidence for the usefulness of individualized head models.


Other approaches for individualized interventions

One of the ultimate goals in tES research is to develop effective and reliable interventions for neuropathological conditions. However, it is essential to consider that in such conditions brain anatomy typically differs from those of healthy individuals. This problem could be partially solved with the incorporation of individualized head models that take into account between-subject variability in anatomy and therefore guide researchers to employ more effective stimulation parameters. The majority of efforts for individualizing tES interventions typically focus on applications for healthy brains, but fortunately this problem is starting to be addressed in the field for the case of neuropathological conditions,. Nevertheless, establishing first how to tackle inter-individual variability and the effectiveness of tES interventions in the healthy brain will be essential to inform and adjust predictive models and stimulation protocols in pathological conditions.

State-of-the-art models cannot be adjusted to the dynamic nature of oscillations that vary within participants over time. To resolve this problem, researchers are starting to develop closed-loop systems, which can be used to adjust the parameters of stimulation to the frequency and the phase of the individual neural oscillation. However, to date this technique is not fully reliable for conditions, when frequency of tES matches the neural oscillations that is investigated, due to the severe artifacts in the recordings elicited by the stimulation,. Considering that this is a common scenario, researchers explored several ways to overcome this limitation. One approach is to conduct MEG and EEG recordings before the stimulation session and then adjust tACS intervention frequencies to the correspondent individual’s frequency,. A second alternative is to match both the frequency and the phase of the stimulation to the brain oscillation with intermittent recordings that are collected during the intervals when the stimulation is switched off. A third alternative is based on simultaneous sensory and electrical stimulation. However, this methodology might be limited to low-level perceptual domains, where delays in the propagation of the percepts must be considered. Another alternative is to generate a non-conventional tACS current waveform, e.g., sawtooth, allowing the possibility of artifact removal from the EEG signals.

An additional source of variability is conductivity of the head tissues which changes within and between participants and is vital for the accurate estimation of stimulation currents delivered to the brain. More accurate conductivity values at the individual level can be acquired with the development of non-invasive imaging methods such as electrical impedance tomography (EIT), or MRI and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). A new emerging technique, MRI current density, could also be used to estimate both conductivities and the current flow on a personalized basis. Overall, we argue that further development of stimulation protocols that incorporate anatomical and physiological details between and within subjects will increase the efficacy of tES interventions for therapeutic purposes.


Conclusions

In the last five decades, a vast amount of research strongly points to the fact that in humans and other animals neural oscillations are an essential mechanism to efficiently transmit information in the brain for guiding behavioral and cognitive processes. However, causal manipulations in humans await approval. Critically, this limitation is particularly relevant in clinical settings given the observation that various neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders are linked to abnormal neural oscillatory dynamics. It is only in the last decade that tES methods have been proposed as indispensable tools for elucidating how behavior may causally depend on brain rhythms in the intact human brain. However, current controversies leave unclear whether tES methodologies can indeed be used to test the causal role of neural oscillations in a safe and effective manner in humans. Crucially, the amount of critical knowledge that has emerged in the last 5 years is the result of a much-needed paradigm shift into an integrative research agenda. While the research carried out at each level of description provides essential knowledge about the mechanisms and efficacy of tES methods to induce neural entrainment, we emphasize that care should be taken before jumping into conclusions on whether the presence or absence of effects observed in a given species or behavioral state can be safely translated to other domains. We also argue that combination of practical experimental data with theoretical modeling estimations may improve not only the translation of the results across species, but also reduce the variability in response to tES especially when combined with approaches that allow to adjust the stimulation parameters on the individual basis. We foresee that information provided from coordinated methodological efforts to optimize the conclusiveness of findings on relations between neural oscillations and behavior will become increasingly important for assessing the translation potential of tES protocols from animal models to humans. However, in order to predict more accurately the clinical outcome of these interventions in humans, a good agreement must exist in the mechanisms of action at the network and behavioral levels across species and behavioral states. These integrative efforts will be vital for successful translational applications of tES methodologies to improve mental health.


Contributor Information

Valeriia Beliaeva, Email: valeriia.beliaeva@hest.ethz.ch.

Rafael Polania, Email: rafael.polania@hest.ethz.ch.


A proteomics sample metadata representation for multiomics integration and big data analysis

Chengxin Dai, Anja Füllgrabe, Julianus Pfeuffer, Elizaveta M Solovyeva, Jingwen Deng, Pablo Moreno, Selvakumar Kamatchinathan, Deepti Jaiswal Kundu et al. — Nature Communications, 2021. PMC8494749, CC BY 4.0.

The amount of public proteomics data is rapidly increasing but there is no standardized format to describe the sample metadata and their relationship with the dataset files in a way that fully supports their understanding or reanalysis. Here we propose to develop the transcriptomics data format MAGE-TAB into a standard representation for proteomics sample metadata. We implement MAGE-TAB-Proteomics in a crowdsourcing project to manually curate over 200 public datasets. We also describe tools and libraries to validate and submit sample metadata-related information to the PRIDE repository. We expect that these developments will improve the reproducibility and facilitate the reanalysis and integration of public proteomics datasets.

Subject terms: Proteomics, Data publication and archiving, Proteome informatics, Standardization


Introduction

The amount of proteomics data in public repositories is growing at an unprecedented rate,. ProteomeXchange (PX) is a consortium of proteomics resources, including the PRIDE database, PASSEL and PeptideAtlas, MassIVE, jPOST, iProX, and Panorama Public. As of July 2021, over 27,000 datasets have been submitted to PX data repositories. PX datasets cover the whole spectrum of protein mass spectrometry (MS) analytical methods and experimental designs, which enable biologists and clinicians to study different aspects of the proteome. In parallel to the generalization of data deposition, reuse of public datasets is becoming increasingly popular. However, thus far, data reuse has largely been limited to benchmarking studies and applications related to peptide and protein identification, with resources such as PeptideAtlas and GPMDB systematically reanalyzing data from PX. Recently, new efforts like ProteomicsDB, MassiVE.Quant, and Expression Atlas have started to include reanalyzed quantitative public datasets to present baseline and differential protein expression. However, the scalability and broad reuse of public quantitative experiments have been limited by the lack of sample metadata annotation, which unambiguously associates the samples included in each dataset with the corresponding data files,.

Since 2012, PX resources have been capturing a general dataset description, including the dataset title, description, instrument, protein modifications included in the search, and submitters/principal investigators, among other data. The files included in each dataset are, on one hand, the output of the corresponding instrument (e.g., RAW files), and on the other hand, the processed results, which can be represented, e.g., in standard file formats such as mzIdentML or mzTab. Currently, all PX partners mandate two types of information for each dataset: a general dataset description and the files containing the different required data types. Unfortunately, the experimental design and sample-related information are frequently missing in the datasets or are stored in ad hoc ways and/or formats. Information about the biological samples such as the analyzed organ, tissue, disease, or cell line, and the links between the samples and the corresponding data files are often lacking.

Sample-related metadata and their relationship with the data files are well captured in two widespread file formats called ISA-TAB and MAGE-TAB (MicroArray Gene Expression Tabular), which are used in metabolomics and transcriptomics, respectively. As of May 2021, ArrayExpress has stored over 74,000 functional genomics datasets in the MAGE-TAB format,. In both formats, a tab-delimited file is used to annotate the sample metadata and link the metadata to the corresponding data files. While MAGE-TAB was originally designed for microarray experiments, it has been successfully adapted to high-throughput RNA-sequencing and single-cell RNA-Seq experiments.

Here we introduce an extension and implementation of the MAGE-TAB format for proteomics (MAGE-TAB-Proteomics). The format has been developed in collaboration with the Proteomics Standards Initiative (PSI), the organization in charge of developing open-standard formats in the field. We have also developed general guidelines about what information needs to be encoded in MAGE-TAB to improve the reproducibility and enable the reanalysis of proteomics datasets. In addition, we have crowdsourced the annotation of over 200 existing public datasets according to these guidelines, covering different analytical methods and experimental designs. Finally, we have developed an ecosystem of tools to validate MAGE-TAB-Proteomics files and integrate the metadata in the PRIDE database, the most popular PX resource. The full specification document describing all aspects of MAGE-TAB-Proteomics version 1.0, the current implementations, as well as application examples, is available at the PSI website (https://psidev.info/magetab).


Repurposing MAGE-TAB for proteomics

MAGE-TAB encodes the sample metadata annotations and the information linking the metadata to the corresponding data files in two different files: the Investigation Description Format (IDF) and the Sample and Data Relationship Format (SDRF). In the following, we describe how we adapted these formats to the specific needs of proteomics.


Providing study-description information in IDF

The IDF file contains information describing the study, including, e.g., authors/submitters, protocols, and publications (Supplementary Note). The IDF format contains a series of key/value pairs, where each key represents a different property. For example, “Experiment Description” should be followed by a free-text description of the experiment (which would be the value). Most of the fields can contain more than one value, so that multiple values (e.g., multiple-analysis software tools) can be defined in a single IDF file. Since 2012, PX dataset descriptions are provided using PX XML (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/schemas/proteomeXchange-1.4.0.html), an XML file format that captures equivalent information to the ones included in IDF, making both files easily exchangeable (Supplementary Note). Therefore, we developed the IDF component of MAGE-TAB based on the existing PX XML format.


Linking samples to data files with SDRF

SDRF is a tab-delimited file that describes the samples and allows their mapping to the data files. As shown in Fig., SDRF includes the annotation of (i) biological sample metadata; (ii) the relationships between samples and data files; (iii) (technical) metadata of RAW data files; and (iv) the variables under study (called factor values). Each row in an SDRF file corresponds to one relationship between a sample and a data file (an MS RAW file or a channel included in a given RAW file in the case of labeling-based proteomics). Each column corresponds to an attribute/property of the sample or the file, and the value in each cell is the specific value of the property (Fig.).

All the properties in the SDRF must be encoded as ontology terms, whereas the values of the properties can be encoded as ontology terms, numerical values, or free text. To facilitate the annotation, validation, and processing of SDRF files, a list of ontologies has been defined that can be used for encoding each property. For example, most of the sample properties are included in the Experimental Factor Ontology (EFO—https://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/), while most of the data-file properties are included in PSI-MS-controlled vocabulary (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/ms) and the PRIDE ontology (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/pride).

Each sample in an SDRF file has a unique identifier (source name), and every sample property is encoded using the prefix characteristics (e.g., characteristics [organism part]). Each data file also has a unique identifier (assay name), and every file property has the prefix comment (e.g., comment[instrument], comment[fraction identifier]). Finally, the variables under study must be specified with the prefix factor value (e.g., factor value[tissue]). The MAGE-TAB-Proteomics specification defines the minimum information that should be provided for every sample and data file (https://github.com/bigbio/proteomics-metadata-standard/raw/master/psi-document/HUPO-PSI-MAGETAB-Proteomics_latest.docx). For all proteomics experiments, the following properties must be provided: organism, organism part, and biological replicate accession. For every data file, the following properties are required: fraction identifier, technical replicate accession, label (in the case of labeling methods), and data-file name. Biological and technical replicates should be explicitly included using the terms characteristics[biological replicate] and comment[technical replicate], respectively (Fig.). The biological replicate field is considered a property of the samples, whereas the technical replicate is considered a property of the data files.

A second category of fields includes information that is not mandatory but recommended. Each PX repository can define which of the recommended fields must be provided in their resource, depending on the experiment types. The current PX templates request the submitters to provide the following properties for every data file: instrument model, cleavage agent, fragment-mass tolerance, precursor-mass tolerance, and mass modifications (e.g., post-translational modifications (PTMs) and artifactual modifications considered in the analysis). Most of the values of these properties can be encoded as a combination of multiple key/value pairs (e.g., methionine oxidation can be specified as AC = UNIMOD:35;NT = Oxidation;MT = Variable;TA = M). We believe that this represents the minimum set of information that is necessary for practical terms for understanding and re-using MS-based proteomics datasets. Furthermore, other properties such as labeling can be provided. Importantly, the set of mandatory properties can be readily expanded in case the PX community decides to extend its metadata requirements in the future. For now, we have defined additional templates (Supplementary Table), which form a set of recommended properties required per experiment type. Submitters can use the template corresponding to their experiment to streamline annotation. For example, the cell line (characteristics[cell line]) is a recommended metadata item for cell-line experiments; for every human dataset, the disease under study should be provided in the field characteristics[disease] and the control samples should be labeled with the value “normal”.


Multiplexing and fractionation

Transcriptomics datasets typically show a one-to-one relationship between each sample and data file. While this is also the case for some proteomics data, two popular experimental designs in proteomics—sample multiplexing and fractionation—follow different patterns (Fig.).

In multiplexed quantitative experiments (e.g., based on tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling), multiple samples can be related to the same data file (Fig.). In these cases, the data-file properties should be repeated for each sample including all the properties (e.g., instrument). The different samples included in the same data file can be encoded using the relevant property labels (e.g., comment[label] = TMT128N).

When fractionation is used, the sample information should be repeated for each data file. A property called fraction identifier is used to make clear which fractions correspond to a given data file (e.g., comment[fraction identifier] = 1).

These features make MAGE-TAB-Proteomics highly flexible and applicable to complex experimental designs involving both fractionation and multiplexing (Fig.). While the duplication of information can be perceived as redundant, it enables a streamlined data reanalysis because each row/line of the SDRF can be processed individually. In addition, it facilitates meta-analysis with simple operations such as merging different SDRFs coming from different datasets or splitting an SDRF for a given dataset by a specific property of the data file or the sample.


Crowdsourcing annotations of public proteomics datasets

Crowdsourcing has been successfully applied to address key problems in bioinformatics. The European Bioinformatics Community for Mass Spectrometry (EuBIC-MS, https://eubic-ms.org) set up a collective effort to annotate existing PX datasets using MAGE-TAB-Proteomics. Volunteers from multiple institutes joined the task of annotating, discussing, and improving the SDRF format, openly and collaboratively. Each annotator created an issue in GitHub about a project of interest, forked the main project repository (https://github.com/bigbio/proteomics-metadata-standard), and annotated the corresponding dataset locally in their computers. Then, a pull request was submitted to include the added annotations. Prior to approval, an independent group of reviewers checked that the proposed SDRF conformed to the guidelines. This collaborative peer-review system allowed the identification of potential issues in the file format, which is now compatible with the main MS experiment types. Additionally, a file validator was developed to automatically perform a semantic and structural validation of created SDRF files (see next section for details).

As of July 2021, over 200 public datasets have been annotated, covering a broad spectrum of organisms, enrichment/fractionation strategies, quantification approaches, and data-acquisition methods (Fig.). For most multiplexed experiments available on PX, the sample-to-label assignment was not specified by the authors since it was not possible to map the channel to the associated sample in a standardized format. The lack of such essential experimental design information precludes the reprocessing and reproduction of quantitative results. As a consequence, such datasets are underrepresented in the collection of annotated datasets. This highlights the urgent need for systematic and standardized metadata annotations. To support future annotation efforts, Table shows gold-standard annotated datasets from PX that can be utilized as examples when creating an SDRF file for various experimental designs (e.g., label-free quantification, multiplex TMT, stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), affinity purification–mass spectrometry (AP–MS), data-independent acquisition (DIA), and phosphopeptide enrichment).


The MAGE-TAB-proteomics toolbox

To facilitate automatic data analysis and reuse, we developed a set of software libraries that enable the validation and conversion from MAGE-TAB-Proteomics format to parameter files (Fig.). For transcriptomics data, the main library to validate a MAGE-TAB file is the Bio-MAGETAB Perl package (https://metacpan.org/release/Bio-MAGETAB). In principle, Bio-MAGETAB can also be used to validate MAGE-TAB-Proteomics files because they are valid MAGE-TAB files. However, Bio-MAGETAB cannot perform extra validations specific to proteomics data, especially the SDRF-Proteomics rules. To enable the validation of the SDRF-Proteomics of MAGE-TAB-Proteomics files, we implemented two libraries in Java and Python (see below). After validation, parameters such as cleavage agents, post-translational modifications, and mass tolerances (precursor and fragment) are translated into MaxQuant and OpenMS parameters in their corresponding configuration files.

The newly developed Python package, called sdrf-pipelines (https://github.com/bigbio/sdrf-pipelines), enables the validation of the structure and also of the semantic rules applied to SDRF. The sdrf-pipelines package can be installed from different package managers like BioConda or BioContainers. It validates the files according to the different experiments and data types, as defined in the templates. For example, if the template corresponds to a human dataset, the software validates that the sample metadata comply with the human template (organism, disease, ancestry, etc.). In addition, sdrf-pipelines allows users to convert SDRF files to configuration/input files of other popular proteomics analysis tools such as MaxQuant, OpenMS, and MSstats, to facilitate the automation of dataset reanalyses (https://github.com/bigbio/proteomics-metadata-standard/wiki).

The jSDRF Java library (https://github.com/bigbio/jsdrf) we developed also enables the validation of SDRF files. For example, the library can validate that the SDRF contains each sample and data-file relationship, labeling information, fraction identifiers, and the sample and data accessions. It also includes a generic data model that can be used by Java applications to validate and handle SDRF-Proteomics files.

While the PX resources have not yet developed any tool to create SDRF-Proteomics files, existing tools for transcriptomics MAGE-TAB and ISA-TAB can be used to facilitate the process. At the moment of writing, we recommend OntoMaton (https://github.com/bigbio/proteomics-metadata-standard/wiki/Annotating-Sample-terms-using-OntoMaton), which allows the annotation of Google spreadsheets using ontology terms coming from the Ontology Lookup Service (OLS). Submitters can search ontology terms in OLS and add them to the sample-property columns. The Google spreadsheets provide the functionalities to copy ontology terms across samples, and to add or remove columns and samples. New versions of the tool will include the possibility to add protein modifications, online validation, and loading existing templates among others.


Submitting annotated proteomics datasets to the PRIDE database

Datasets are standardly submitted to PRIDE using the PX submission tool, a desktop application that guides the users through a set of steps to construct the submission and finally performs the transfer of the data files (Fig.). The information annotated by the submitter is encoded into a submission.px file. As described above, this PX XML file is highly similar to the MAGE-TAB-Proteomics IDF file. Therefore, the PX XML file is now automatically converted to IDF using PRIDE internal pipelines, once the submission is received and processed.

Since May 2021, the PX submission tool accepts SDRF files. The SDRF file can be created externally as described in the previous section and submitted with the dataset. It is then recognized as an ‘EXPERIMENT DESIGN’ file type and validated using the jSDRF library (Fig.). The PRIDE internal pipelines create MAGE-TAB-Proteomics files containing the automatically generated IDF and the user-provided SDRF. Then, the metadata assigned to each sample is automatically submitted to the BioSamples database. A BioSample accession number is created for each sample in the experiment to enable the linking between samples included in multi-omics datasets. The PRIDE web interface presents for each dataset the associated sample metadata table. In addition, the sample metadata are indexed by PRIDE, allowing users to locate and link samples and experiments within the vast number of public datasets.


Conclusions and future perspectives

Resources such as MassIVE.Quant, ExpressionAtlas, and ProteomicsDB have recently started to systematically reanalyze proteomics public quantitative datasets,. However, the lack of sample metadata that allow associating sample properties with data files makes this task complex and unscalable. Capturing metadata is challenging, since this generic term ranges from concepts such as the title of the experiment to sample-related information, to technical details like the instrument-configuration parameters used for data acquisition. To represent these different levels of proteomics metadata, MAGE-TAB-Proteomics builds upon a popular and flexible data format adopted from transcriptomics that relies on IDF and SDRF files. The IDF-Proteomics format closely resembles the PX XML format that PX resources have long been used to capture dataset information. The SDRF-Proteomics format has a schema and data model that allows submitters to provide the minimum information about the samples as well as a more complete record of their sample and RAW file metadata. The SDRF templates define the minimum information PX partners have agreed upon, which should be provided for each submitted dataset. Additionally, the file format enables users and submitters to describe in much higher detail the sample, sample-processing steps, and the RAW files. Owing to this flexibility, MAGE-TAB is compatible with a wide range of experimental approaches (Table) and can be easily adapted to changing metadata requirements in the future. Importantly, the MAGE-TAB-Proteomics project is supported by the world-leading proteomics databases in PX. Due to the gradual and iterative implementation of MAGE-TAB-Proteomics into PX submission pipelines and related tools, the adoption of the standard will not create a major additional burden for users. To support new users, we have created a tutorial in GitHub (https://github.com/bigbio/proteomics-metadata-standard/wiki) and a video that introduces the file format (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TMDu_yTzYQM).

MAGE-TAB-Proteomics will facilitate the integration and annotation of proteomics studies, thereby enhancing their discoverability, reproducibility, and reusability. It holds great potential to facilitate the use of standardized workflows for the automated reanalysis of currently available and future annotated public proteomics datasets. This will increase the inherent value of proteomics datasets by making them more amenable for large-scale meta-analysis, systems biology, and multiomics projects that can take advantage of large hardware resources in cloud-based environments. The proposed standard metadata representation will also facilitate the development of common submission systems to streamline the deposition of multiomics datasets to resources for different types of omics data. It may even foster the creation of new multiomics resources, enabling submission, validation, and visualization of multi-omics data in one place,. As an initial step in this direction, the PRIDE group has started to reanalyze proteomics datasets represented in SDRF and integrates them into the multiomics resource Expression Atlas (e.g., https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/experiments/E-PROT-18/Results).

Expanding the MAGE-TAB-Proteomics format to additional use cases and more types of MS-based experiments, including metaproteomics and xenograft proteomics experimental designs, is currently under discussion (https://github.com/bigbio/proteomics-metadata-standard/blob/master/sdrf-proteomics/use-cases-under-development.adoc). Researchers interested in use cases that are currently not supported are encouraged to bring them to our attention by creating an issue in GitHub using the above hyperlink. Analogous to the implementation process of other PSI formats, we aim to engage software tools and developers to support the MAGE-TAB-Proteomics format as an input file for data processing and as output file for the dataset-submission process. Notably, the MAGE-TAB-Proteomics format has already triggered interest in the MS metabolomics field. First-metabolomics data have already been annotated using MAGE-TAB-Proteomics (Table) and more metabolomics datasets coming from the ReDU resource have been added to the annotation repository, underscoring the open, collaborative, and community-driven approach of this project. In this spirit, we invite all interested parties to join the MAGE-TAB-Proteomics initiative.


Code availability

General documentation and tutorials as well as a script to generate IDF files are provided in Github (https://github.com/bigbio/proteomics-metadata-standard); however, please note that IDF files are also automatically generated during the PRIDE submission process. The code of the sdrf-pipelines tool developed in this study is deposited in GitHub (https://github.com/bigbio/sdrf-pipelines). The jSDRF Java library is available at https://github.com/bigbio/jsdrf. The Bio-MAGETAB Perl package is available at https://metacpan.org/release/Bio-MAGETAB.


Contributor Information

Mingze Bai, Email: baimz@cqupt.edu.cn.

Timo Sachsenberg, Email: timo.sachsenberg@uni-tuebingen.de.

Lev I. Levitsky, Email: lev.levitsky@phystech.edu

Yasset Perez-Riverol, Email: yperez@ebi.ac.uk.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

The annotated datasets generated in this study are provided in GitHub (https://github.com/bigbio/proteomics-metadata-standard/tree/master/annotated-projects). The raw data corresponding to the example datasets shown in Table are available under the accession codes PXD008934, PXD006877, PXD006482, PXD010154, PXD018117, PXD017710, PXD004242, PXD003539, MSV000086206 [https://doi.org/doi:10.25345/C5HV0S]. The raw data of the TMT/CPTAC dataset are available at https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu/study-summary/S029.

General documentation and tutorials as well as a script to generate IDF files are provided in Github (https://github.com/bigbio/proteomics-metadata-standard); however, please note that IDF files are also automatically generated during the PRIDE submission process. The code of the sdrf-pipelines tool developed in this study is deposited in GitHub (https://github.com/bigbio/sdrf-pipelines). The jSDRF Java library is available at https://github.com/bigbio/jsdrf. The Bio-MAGETAB Perl package is available at https://metacpan.org/release/Bio-MAGETAB.


Imaging evolution of the primate brain: the next frontier?

Patrick Friedrich, Stephanie J Forkel, Céline Amiez, Joshua H Balsters, Olivier Coulon, Lingzhong Fan, Alexandros Goulas, Fadila Hadj-Bouziane et al. — NeuroImage, 2021. PMC7116589, CC BY 4.0.

Evolution, as we currently understand it, strikes a delicate balance between animals’ ancestral history and adaptations to their current niche. Similarities between species are generally considered inherited from a common ancestor whereas observed differences are considered as more recent evolution. Hence comparing species can provide insights into the evolutionary history. Comparative neuroimaging has recently emerged as a novel subdiscipline, which uses magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to identify similarities and differences in brain structure and function across species. Whereas invasive histological and molecular techniques are superior in spatial resolution, they are laborious, post-mortem, and oftentimes limited to specific species. Neuroimaging, by comparison, has the advantages of being applicable across species and allows for fast, whole-brain, repeatable, and multi-modal measurements of the structure and function in living brains and post-mortem tissue. In this review, we summarise the current state of the art in comparative anatomy and function of the brain and gather together the main scientific questions to be explored in the future of the fascinating new field of brain evolution derived from comparative neuroimaging.


Introduction

Our brain is the fruit of billions of years of evolution. Evolution, as we currently understand it, strikes a delicate balance between animals’ ancestral history and adaptations to their current niche. Within each generation, discreet changes can occur across phenotypes mostly through genetic recombination (Hirsch 1963). If disadvantageous, these changes are more likely eliminated by natural selection (i.e. survival and reproduction). Accordingly, it is generally assumed that similarities between species are inherited from a common ancestor whereas observed differences are more recent occurrences (Darwin 1859). Hence comparing species gives us insight into evolutionary history, and has been applied in multiple fields where precise quantitative measurements are easy to access in large numbers including, for example skeletal structure (e.g. Dutel et al., 2019, see also) or genetics (e.g. Boffelli et al., 2003; Clifen et al., 2003, see also)

Thus far, however, large numbers of observations and precise quantitative measurements are lacking for the brain across species due to its fragile, ephemeral and complex organisation. While we know a great deal about the evolution of species, the aforementioned difficulty to work with brain data has hampered progress in our understanding of the evolution of the brain. Better understanding evolution will allow for targeted studies with animal models matching the brain mechanisms in the human to its phylogenetic counterpart. Further, it may also help discover neuroprotective mechanisms allowing for resilience to disease in animals. Recent advancements in neuroimaging, with regard to both hardware and software as well as larger cohort datasets are now opening the door to embark on this new adventure of comparative brain evolution.

Brains differ in many respects across species (Haug, 1987; Stephan, 1975; Ariëns Kappers, 1909) and MRI can compare most of these levels digitally at moderate costs (Krubitzer and Kaas, 2005; Mars et al., 2018). With the advent of better hardware and higher-resolution magnetic resonance imaging sequences that allow researchers to characterise many different aspects of the same brain’s structure and function, it has become feasible to compare different species using a non-invasive repeatable multimodal method of investigation (Thiebaut de Schotten, Croxson and Mars, 2019). Another striking advantage of using magnetic resonance imaging for comparative studies is its feasibility to study large cohorts longitudinally as there is no need to sacrifice animals. Thereby, brains can be manipulated, and the effects of aging, training or lesions can be compared not only within but also between species. Finally, the non-invasive nature of the methods facilitates functional studies that better elucidate brain-behaviour interactions. Amongst the most commonly used MRI sequences to probe the structure of the brain are T1-weighted and T2-weighted scans to visualise different brain tissues (i.e. separate grey matter and white matter). Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) can be used to estimate microstructural properties within the white matter (Zhang et al., 2012) and to visualise the trajectory of white matter pathways (Basser, Mattiello & Le Bihan, 1994). Other sequences have been tuned to assess myelination (Glasser and Van Essen, 2011; Prasloski et al., 2012; for review see Heath et al., 2018). Using in-vivo recordings, the function of the brain can be assessed by measuring task-related blood oxygen level changes (BOLD; Ogawa et al., 1990; Logothetis et al., 2001) or modelling brain functional dynamics at rest (Fox and Raichle, 2007; Biswal, 2012). Compared to histology, MRI data gives access to a significantly greater number of specimens as it does not require the death (i.e. natural or sacrifice) of animals and allows to acquire complementary information on the structure and function of the brain within the same sample and can even be extended to measures of plasticity mechanisms using longitudinal designs. MRI is conveniently digital and shareable amongst researchers for easier replication of findings. MRI can also be mathematically modified (e.g. log transformation, Donahue et al., 2016) and reanalysed to address novel questions in already collected data (Balezeau et al., 2020). Finally, while acquiring and using MRI data in primates come with challenges with regards to collecting and harmonising data across species (see Milham et al., 2020 for a detailed discussion), MRI allows for the methodologically most similar cross-species comparisons (Thiebaut de Schotten and Zilles, 2019).

In this review, we summarise the emerging field of MRI-based neuroimaging of the primate brain evolution as well as gather the main scientific questions to be explored in the future.


Brain structure


Brain size

The arguably most apparent and seemingly systematic change that occurred over primate brain evolution is the increase in total brain size relative to body size. The effect of evolutionary expansion in relation to brain size is, however, not equally distributed across brain structures. This disproportional composition of the brain led to investigations of allometric rules of brain evolution. The size of one region can vary consistently with the size of another structure within the brain (Butler and Hodos, 2005). In this context, allometry refers to the study of the different pace of expansion of brain regions (Montgomery et al., 2016).

Allometric changes may provide a window for understanding the adaptations of specific neural systems in response to evolutionary pressure (Willemet, 2019; Finlay et al., 2001). In this regard, evolutionary psychology and neuroscience suggest that allometry arises from evolutionary developmental constraints, as a brain adjustment to optimise its functional organisation (Montgomery 2013; Willemet, 2015a, Montgomery et al., 2016). Along these lines, some authors have argued that similar patterns of allometric slopes across brain regions can be used to identify different grades of evolution. For instance, it has been argued that across different primate species, the prefrontal cortex shows allometric scaling with the visual cortex size. Importantly, this scaling factor is different in apes compared to monkeys (Passingham and Smaers, 2014). This finding suggests that the same developmental constraints happened across all primates, but that a major adaptive change separates monkeys from apes.

Due to the limited availability of tissue, comparative studies often rely on small samples and many studies still rely on antiquated datasets. These datasets often did not delineate different cortical territories with high accuracy, leading to fierce debates (e.g., Passingham and Smaers, 2014; Barton and Venditti, 2013). These limitations impede on our ability to assess within-species diversity accurately and might have biased our understanding of between-species differences. The ability of neuroimaging to acquire data from multiple individuals per species and imaging sequences might allow a more representative parcellation of the brain (Van Essen et al., 2011, Donahue et al., 2018). Such an approach will benefit allometric studies by providing better quantitative measurements and replicable findings as well as improve the granularity of investigations.


Gyrification

Typically, primates with smaller brains show a smoother, less convoluted brain surface than species with larger brains (see; Hofmann, 2012; Heuer et al., 2019). The level of convolution of the cortex, also called gyrification index, is easily quantifiable with surface-derived MRI measurements. A convoluted cortex allows for more surface area to be packed into the limited volume within the skull (i.e. linear scaling between surface area and brain volume; Prothero and Sundsten, 1984) providing more space for grey matter cell bodies, white matter connections, and glial cells (Namba and Huttner 2017). The convolution of the cortex (i.e. gyrification) would occur because of an imbalance in the expansion of cortical (i.e. outer layer) and subcortical layers (i.e. inner layer) of the brain (Richman, 1975; adapted by Lui et al., 2011). Computational modelling of an imbalance between inner and outer layer growth success-fully reproduced a folding pattern similar to the mammalian brain (i.e. buckling shell models, Toro and Burnod 2005; Toro 2012; Bayly et al., 2013; Tallinen et al., 2014, Foubet et al., 2019). Biologically, the cortico-subcortical imbalance would be due to the tangential migration (Lui et al., 2011; Reillo et al., 2011), and the radial intercalation of neurons during development (i.e. pushing of neighbouring neurons in the outer cortical plate aside, Striedter et al., 2015). With evolutionary expansion, a disproportional expression of these biological mechanisms could explain increased cortical folding (Mota and Herculano-Houzel 2015; Amiez et al., 2019). This latter hypothesis partially implies that the dynamic relationship between brain expansion and gyrification during early stages of brain development differ across species. However, investigating such relationships across the brain developmental stages is more likely achievable by means of comparative “longitudinal” imaging during brain development, which is typically be unthinkable with standard histological methods but is feasible with MRI (Rabiei et al., 2017). While models based on the ideas described above are successful in producing random folding patterns, they do not explain why folding patterns show similarities across the brains of the same or even different species.

Hypothetically, similarities in folding patterns could be related to preferences for neurons to migrate in cortical areas (i.e. proliferation hotspots; Retzius, 1896; Kriegstein et al., 2006) and genetically coded. If this assumption is correct, combining genetic measurements with cortical folding patterns derived from neuroimaging in the future should offer some novel insights. Recent evidence already demonstrates a significant relationship between brain surface and genetics in humans in a collaborative cross-laboratory dataset of more than 50,000 participants (Grasby et al., 2020) as well as its distribution over the brain (Valk et al., 2020). Extending genetic brain imaging MRI to other primates will not only validate this work but also shed light on the main brain surface evolutionary mechanisms.

While the placement of proliferation hotspots may as well be determined genetically, other authors pointed out that the mechanical formation of folding leads to a complex stress influencing the stiffness of the cortex (e.g., Foubet et al., 2019). The resulting differences in stiffness might potentially influence the migration of neurons during brain development (Franze, 2013). Therefore, initial folding as proposed by the buckling shell models might be sufficient to create the intricate folding pattern as seen in mammalian cortices, which in turn, may lead to the observed pattern of regional cell composition and neural connections (Heuer and Toro, 2019). Reversely, another hypothesis suggests that the stereotypical pattern of folding would come from the tension applied by the axons on the cortex (i.e. axonal tension hypothesis; Van Essen, 1997). In this theory, tangential forces that are created by the tension along obliquely oriented axonal trajectories induce folds at specific locations. As genetic molecular gradients drive axonal migration during brain development (Krubitzer, 2007; Renier et al., 2017), the future combination of cortical folding estimate, white matter diffusion imaging tractography and genetic measurements across species may reveal a tripartite relationship between these factors.


Sulcal anatomy

A prominent anatomical feature on the primate brain is the presence of folds, or sulci. Even though folding patterns may appear to vary greatly, even between individuals of the same species, sul-cal organisation is not at all random, and adheres strongly to a topographical organisation (Petrides, 2012). Anatomically, sulci often constitute borders between cytoarchitectonic areas (White et al., 1997). For instance, across human (Penfield and Boldrey, 1937) and non-human mammal brains (Ferrier, 1873), the central sulcus serves as the border between the motor cortex and the somatosensory cortex. Function-wise, a growing body of work has demonstrated precise relationships between an individual’s local sulcal morphology and the location of functional areas including the sensorimotor cortex (e.g. Zlatkina et al., 2016; Germann et al., 2020), prefrontal cortex (e.g. Loh et al., 2020; Lopez-Persem et al., 2019; Amiez and Petrides, 2018), cingulate cortex (Amiez and Petrides, 2014) and the temporal cortex (Bodin et al., 2018). This robust correspondences with the anatomical-functional organisation of the brain allows for the sulcal organisation to guide our interpretation of neuroimaging data. Especially since brain sulci are still often used as critical anatomical landmarks for navigating the brain during human and non-human primate brain surgeries. Also, most surface-based registration methods use sulci either explicitly (Auzias et al., 2013) or implicitly via geometrical maps such as curvature that are indicators of folding (Robinson et al., 2014).

In the primate brain, some brain sulci are conserved across species. These typically include primary sulci such as the central sulcus, superior temporal sulcus, cingulate sulcus, and the calcarine sulcus. The relationship between these primary sulci and the location of anatomical/functional regions appear to be conserved across species. For instance, the somatotopic organisation along the dorsal-ventral extent of the central sulcus, as well as along the rostro-caudal extent of the cin-gulate sulcus appears to be highly conserved across the primate lineage (Procyk et al., 2016; Loh et al., 2018). This indicates that we can potentially anchor the brains of various primate species on the basis of homologous sulcal landmarks, to perform interspecies comparisons on brain structure. In Amiez et al., 2019, this principle has been implemented to reveal the evolutionary trajectories of the medial frontal cortex across macaques, baboons, chimpanzees, and humans. This work demonstrated that, unlike previously thought the paracingulate sulcus is not a human specific feature and could be observed in chimpanzees (Amiez et al., 2019). The lateralisation of these sulci, however, is only observed in humans, which suggests further hemispheric specialisation in humans since the last common ancestors to humans and great apes (Croxson et al., 2018). As shown in, by aligning brains on the basis of common sulci landmarks, the evolutionary changes in the primate medial frontal cortex become apparent and quantifiable.

Inter-species sulcal-based brain alignment can be implemented and tested using model-driven cortical surface matching. For a given species, after building a model of relative positions, orientations, and alignment of sulci in a rectangular domain, any individual cortical surface can be registered to this rectangular model, which leads to an explicit matching of different cortical surfaces based on their sulci (Auzias et al., 2013). For two different species, two different rectangular models can be built, and inter-species sulcal correspondences can then be used to define a homology between the two models. This allows for a correspondence between inter-species cortical surfaces, which can be used to compare these species and warp information from one species to the other (Coulon et al., 2018).

A key challenge to this approach is the great inter-individual variability of sulci morphology. More work will be necessary to (1) characterise the morphological variability of the various sulci in the primate brain, (2) to determine the relationship between these variations and the localisation of anatomical and functional areas, and lastly, (3) to establish the sulcal homologies between the various species. Such work would only be achievable by means of comparative MRI and data sharing in order to gather enough data to model evolutionary trends (with a minimum of three species; e.g. Balezeau et al., 2020) and quantify variability appropriately (with a minimum of 10 sample per species; Croxson et al., 2018).


Brain connectivity

Brain areas interact in order to orchestrate cognition and behaviour. Short (local) and long (distant) connections link neighbouring and remote brain regions to facilitate these interactions. Importantly, exploring connections informs about the organisational principles of the information processing in the brain (Mars et al., 2018) and is one step closer to explaining the functioning of the brain (Takemura and Thiebaut de Schotten 2020). Therefore, studying the extent to which evolutionary changes in brain structure entail specific differences in brain connectivity is a current agenda in comparative neuroscience. Neuroimaging is ideal for this purpose, as there are many imaging techniques available to elucidate various aspects of connectivity. Hence, connectivity is one of the most developed areas of comparative neuroimaging (Goulas et al., 2014; Miranda-Dominguez et al., 2014; van den Heuvel et al. 2016).

Brain connectivity can be assessed either by reconstructing structural connections (i.e. tractography based on diffusion weighted imaging) or measuring the covariation of activity across brain regions (i.e. the synchronisation of activation derived from functional MRI).


Gross anatomy

Comparative neuroimaging has revealed gross connectivity differences between primate species (Ardesch et al., 2019; Balsters et al., 2020; Xia et al., 2019). For instance, the inferior fronto-occipital connections (Thiebaut de Schotten et al., 2012; Barrett et al., 2020) and the arcuate fasciculus (see, Rilling, 2008; Thiebaut de Schotten et al., 2012; Eichert et al., 2018; Barrett et al., 2020; Balezeau et al., 2020) are more prominent in humans than in monkeys. The arcuate fasciculus has sparked interest, in particular, because of its fundamental role in human language processing (Barbeau et al., 2020; Balezeau et al., 2020). In addition, the parietal lobe has been linked to uniquely human functions and the underlying white matter has some prominent structures in humans but also some unique connections in monkeys (Catani et al., 2017). The functional interactions between the frontal and parietal lobes are also more prominent in humans than in macaques (see, Patel et al., 2015; Mantini et al., 2013; Mars et al., 2011) and might reflect evolutionary trends within the attentional networks (Patel et al., 2015). However, structural connections and functional connectivity are usually examined separately. Comprehensive models of connectivity will require the combination of structural-functional methods to fully grasp the modus operandi of how evolutionary pressure and adaptation might have modified the wiring and the organisational principles of information processing in the brain.


Connectivity principles

Although species-specific features exist in connectivity, the tendency of two regions to be connected respects several organisational principles across (mammalian) species (Bullmore and Sporns, 2012; Ercsey-Ravasz et al., 2013, Horvat et al., 2016, Goulas et al., 2019, Vértes et al., 2012). In particular, two regions are more likely to display interconnections if they are adjacent to each other (Human: Betzel et al., 2016; Macaque: Kaiser and Hilgetag, 2006). They will also be more connected to each other if they share a similar microstructural composition (Pandya et al., 2015; Barbas, 2015) or connections with the same regions (Song et al., 2014). Recent efforts in human neuroimaging have revealed a seemingly overarching organisation principle (Huntenburg et al., 2018), providing a window of comparison into the features that underlie the spatial arrangement of cortical areas previously reported (Abbie 1940, Sanides 1962, Brockhaus 1940; Goulas et al., 2018). While classical studies have focused mainly on cross-species similarities in this overarching organisation scheme (Margulies et al., 2016; Goulas et al., 2019) preliminary evidence suggest these differences might be an evolutionary adaptation (Xu et al., 2019).

Since the neural system is costly in energy consumption, one core principle in the neural architecture has to be the minimisation of energy costs (Bullmore and Sporns, 2012). The brain wiring, therefore, can be expected to follow rules that minimise energy costs while maintaining a set of features that are indispensable for efficient brain functioning. The “rich-club organisation” (van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011) represents a shared feature of brain architecture that fits this description. Within the rich-club, few nodes act as hubs between otherwise segregated nodes and thus, facilitate efficient communication across the entire network (Sporns, 2013). Additionally, hubs tend to interconnect densely with each other. However, the unique properties of hubs come at a high price (van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011). Cortical regions that represent hubs of the rich-club tend to show high metabolic demand and are vulnerable targets for pathogenic agents (Bullmore and Sporns, 2012; Griffa and Van den Heuvel, 2018). From an evolutionary perspective, the advantages of a rich-club organisation appear to outweigh its drawbacks. Rich-club topology is a common feature amongst various species, ranging from invertebrates to primates (van den Heuvel, Bullmore and Sporns, 2016; Rubinov et al., 2016). Another example includes the comparison of the macroscale organisation of human and macaque connectivity (Goulas et al., 2014; Miranda-Dominguez 2014). However, these promising analyses should be extended to other primates in order to establish their approximate phy-logeny.


Brain function

Brain areas increase their activity when contributing to cognitive function, and this increase is detectable with task-related functional magnetic resonance imaging. The question about comparability between cognitive abilities is debated, for advanced functions such as communication (Mertz et al., 2019) or decision making (Tremblay et al., 2017; Fouragnan et al., 2019) as well as more primary functions such as episodic memory (Croxson et al., 2011; Pause et al., 2013) or even motor cognition (Borra and Luppino 2019). For instance, the superiority of chimpanzees over college students in a working memory task (Inoue and Matsuzawa 2007) is directly related to training (Cook and Wilson 2010) and indeed highlights the issue of comparability of functions across species. A recent alternative has been to compare functional activation related to the free viewing of video during fMRI measurements across primates (Mantini et al., 2012ab; Mantini et al., 2013; Russ and Leopold 2015; Sliwa and Freiwald 2017). However, species differences likely exist in the interpretation of the video limiting the interpretability of such interspecies differences. Therefore, more general features of brain function, such as brain lateralisation and brain integration measures, have been preferred in comparative neuroimaging paradigms.


Brain lateralisation

In order to conserve the speed of brain oscillations across species, a functional reorganisation might have occurred (Buzsaki, Logothetis & Singer, 2013) to compensate for interhemispheric delay related to brain size (Phillips et al., 2015). Accordingly, the inter-hemispheric independence theory suggests that during evolution, the increase in brain size led to increased functional lateralisation in order to avoid excessive conduction delays between the hemispheres (Ringo et al., 1994). Functional processing asymmetries have been derived from the neuroimaging-based study of the corpus callosum (Friedrich et al., 2017; Karolis et al., 2019; Horowitz et al., 2015) and hemispheric asymmetries (Hopkins 2015; Margiotoudi et al., 2019; Eichert et al., 2019; Marie, 2018; Thiebaut de Schotten, 2011; Amiez et al., 2019). Accordingly, an increase in functional lateralisation should be associated with a decrease of corpus callosum size or density as well as an increase in anatomical asymmetries. However, a comprehensive study of functional lateralisation across primate brains is still missing due to the scarcity of appropriate data. Lateralised patterns in tracing studies and cytoarchitectonic maps from macaques and marmosets, for instance, are rarely investigated for understandable ethical and financial reasons. As a consequence, both hemispheres are usually considered as equal limiting this line of research. An HCP-like multimodal neuroimaging approach would enable addressing brain lateralisations at the microarchitecture, connectomics, and functional levels as well as their interdependencies. For instance, in the orbitofrontal cortex, even when both hemispheres are similar at the cytoarchitectonic level (Mackey and Petrides, 2010), rs-fMRI analysis can reveal hemispheric differences in connectivity within the default-mode network (Lopez-Persem et al., 2020), in both humans and macaques. Studying the evolution of brain lateralisation in primate models would benefit from the reuse of MRI data progressively made available thanks to new open data initiatives (Milham et al., 2018). This will allow to compare larger numbers of species and to disentangle true species differences from individual noise.


Brain integration

The brain processes incoming sensory information (e.g. auditory and visual) along processing streams towards increasingly abstract and integrative, or associative, levels (Pandya and Yeterian 1990). Before comparative neuroimaging, post-mortem studies already suggested that cortical areas related to association processes are enlarged in humans compared to other primate species (Schoenemann, 2006; Van Essen and Dierker, 2007; Hrvoj-Mihic et al., 2013; Hofman, 2014). The pre-frontal lobe has been specifically explored, comparatively, with regards to expansion (Sherwood et al., 2005; Semendeferi et al., 2002, Petrides et al., 2012; Hofman 2014), cytoarchitecture (Palomero-Gallagher et al., 2013; 2019) and relative scaling of white matter (Smaers et al., 2010; Barrett et al., 2020). Bryant et al. (2019) extended this work to the visual and auditory systems. They investigated the connections of the primary and secondary processing areas of the visual and auditory cortex. In humans, chimpanzees and macaques, the connectivity of the primary visual cortex showed a retinotopic organisation with its association area. However, the primary visual cortex had additional connections to the temporal pole only in humans and chimpanzees. Quite similarly, the primary auditory cortex showed a gradual increase of connection with temporal associative cortex in chimpanzee and humans, but not in the macaque. These results suggest that a gradual expansion of the associative cortex between the auditory and visual cortices must have occurred along the chimp-human phylogenetic lineage. In line with these gradual changes, the advent of advanced MRI analyses has enabled the comparison of a variety of other properties such as the “principal gradient” of connective properties (Margulies et al., 2016; Buckner and Margulies, 2019), which summarise a specific functional connectivity signature distributed across the human brain (Huntenburg et al., 2018).

While the idea of organising the brain in terms of gradients is relatively new in neuroimaging, the concept itself has been evinced across modalities and species for more than 100 years (Vogt and Vogt, 1919; Flechsig 1920; Hopf, 1954a,b, 1968a, 1970b). In a broad perspective, comparative neuroimaging could provide a systematic assessment of the structural variation between cortical areas in multiple species. This could test whether this organisational principle is the basis of functional specialisation and evolution of brain areas, as recently suggested in rodents (Fulcher et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2012) and humans (Waymel et al., 2020).

Overall, these results are encouraging in our endeavour to understand the differences in the structure of the brain and its functions across species. However, it is important to stress that the same network in different species can have different dynamic properties and potentially different functions (Mantini et al., 2013). Consequently, similarities in brain organisation across species should not be considered as entirely equivalent brain functions.


Perspectives & future directions

Imaging the primate evolutionary tree would be a new stepping-stone for neuroscience. Access to more data across species will allow us to model the brains of common ancestors by extrapolating from the wealth of information on commonalities and divergences between species, families, orders, and classes. Having access to all levels of primate entities will allow us to create reference spaces, which in turn may grant better methods for inter- and intra-species comparisons. Ultimately, these developments can help us to form a true ‘neuroecology’ of different brains (Mars and Bryant, in press). In other words, we would be able to understand how a given brain is adapted to fit its environmental niche within the constraints of its evolutionary history.

The resources and methodologies outlined above not only allow for further investigation of primate evolution but can be extended to address crucial questions about similarities and differences in other mammalian species, including humans. The mouse is currently the most commonly used mammalian model in scientific research (Dietrich et al., 2014), and the species for which the most detailed mapping of a wide range of cellular and anatomical brain properties has been obtained. Yet, there is still limited consensus on how primates and rodents differ in terms of their brain structure and connectivity. Employing the MRI-based methodologies outlined above, Balsters et al. (2020) showed an 69-80% overlap in cortico-striatal connectivity fingerprints for humans and macaques compared to a meagre 15% overlap between humans and mice and a 31% overlap between mice and macaques. Given the prevalence of animal models in biomedical research, it is of paramount importance that neuroecology understand the differences between primates, both human and nonhuman, and other species such as rodents.

Whilst primates share some cognitive abilities such as visual perception and motor functions, as well as many emotional processes, their underlying neurobiology may differ. These similarities in function are typically investigated with the assumption that shared traits between primates (i.e. homology) are inherited from a common ancestor—divergent evolution. Most comparative neuroimaging studies investigate closely related species and hence examine divergent evolution. In more distant species, however, another process may have led to the onset of a similar function— “convergent evolution”. This so-called convergent evolution postulates that similar functions in distantly related species evolved independently from each other as a result of evolutionary pressure to adapt to similar environmental or ecological factors (i.e. homoplasy). As a consequence, both evolutionary principles, namely homology and homoplasy, can both lead to structural and/or functional similarities. Supporting evidence for homology and homoplasy is well documented in the field of genetics. For instance, many animal phyla share basic multifunctional regulatory genes such as Pax-6. This gene is involved in the development of light-sensitive cells and initiates eye formation in flies, but also frogs (Altmann et al., 1997; Halder et al., 1995). Despite the eyes of flies and frogs being homoplasies, the initiating gene is homologous. Hence, homology and homoplasy should be considered as complementary in our understanding of brain evolution and can be assessed using an extensive database of primate species only accessible through collaborative neuroimaging.

Another perspective would be to derive the brain of our phylogenetic ancestors (see Kaas, 2011; for discussion) by registering different species’ brains into a common space Although this might sound implausible, recent preliminary evidence already indicates that it is feasible (Heuer et al., 2020; https://katjaq.github.io/brainscapes). Using this possibility across proximal and more distantly related primate species may offer new insights into brain anatomy across taxonomic families, classes, and orders. Ideally, such endeavours will require the integration of multiple modalities of magnetic resonance imaging with several specimens for each primate species.

Finally, although there is much effort to identify the neural basis of species-defining cognitive functions, less research is devoted to the evolutionary processes through which those functions and their underlying neural adaptations have arisen. Questions about the evolutionary processes imply that an event, such as a genetic mutation or external evolutionary pressure, is responsible for the occurrence of adaptations. In this regard, many species share a common environment and live through competitive or collaborative interactions or in a predator-prey relationship. Therefore, the imaging of the evolutionary tree is accompanied by the intriguing opportunity to investigate the co-evolution of brain structures across interacting species and thus, investigate brain evolution from a novel neuro-ecological perspective.


Data and code availability

N/A


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

N/A


Functional localization and categorization of intentional decisions in humans: A meta-analysis of brain imaging studies

Ruoguang Si, James B Rowe, Jiaxiang Zhang — Neuroimage, 2021. PMC8463837, CC BY 4.0.

Brain-imaging research on intentional decision-making often employs a “free-choice” paradigm, in which participants choose among options with identical values or outcomes. Although the medial prefrontal cortex has commonly been associated with choices, there is no consensus on the wider network that underlies diverse intentional decisions and behaviours. Our systematic literature search identified 35 fMRI/PET experiments using various free-choice paradigms, with appropriate control conditions using external instructions. An Activation Likelihood Estimate (ALE) meta-analysis showed that, compared with external instructions, intentional decisions consistently activate the medial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the left insula and the inferior parietal lobule. We then categorized the studies into four different types according to their experimental designs: reactive motor intention, perceptual intention, inhibitory intention, and cognitive intention. We conducted conjunction and contrast meta-analyses to identify consistent and selective spatial convergence of brain activation within each specific category of intentional decision. Finally, we used meta-analytic decoding to probe cognitive processes underlying free choices. Our findings suggest that the neurocognitive process underlying intentional decision incorporates anatomically separated components subserving distinct cognitive and computational roles.


Introduction

To fulfil our goals or desires, we constantly interact with the external environment through our voluntary behaviour. In contrast to reflexes that are beyond volition (e.g., a knee-jerk reflex), voluntary behaviours are characterised by choice (Passingham, 1995). Volition characterises the intentional choice or decision between multiple options, where the choice is not sufficiently explained by differences in expected or explicit rewards. The concept of intentional decision refers to this fundamental ability of human cognition: acting voluntarily based on internal or endogenous intentions (Marken, 1982).

The role of intention in decision-making occupies a broad spectrum. At one extreme lies externally guided perceptual decision such as stopping at a red traffic light, for which the involvement of internal intention is low because learned rules can dictate a correct choice (even if one can voluntarily break such rules). At the other extreme lies improvisational behaviour in music, painting or dance, which can be strongly determined by moment-to-moment intention. In between lies the common scenario of intentional decision-making, where the external environment constrains only which options are available while internal intentions dictate which of those options to choose. The ability to choose actions, cognitive strategies and behaviours in this way plays a key role throughout the life span and is essential to our understanding of human cognition. In child development from birth to 12 months, actions such as grasping and its coordination with vision gradually emerge from simple reflexes (Piaget, 1976; Beilin and Fireman, 1999; Lewis, 2010). In patients with neurodegenerative disorders, the inability to engage appropriate intentional behaviour can manifest as apathy (Starkstein et al., 2001), impulsivity (Dalley et al., 2011) and perseveration (Hughes et al., 2013). In addition, intentional behaviour is a foundation of social interactions via cooperation and collaboration (Bratman, 2017).

Intentional actions have been characterised by three components in the what-when-whether (WWW) model: (1) what action to perform, (2) when to perform it, and (3) whether to perform the chosen act (Brass and Haggard, 2008). The WWW model is based on evidence from two interlinked lines of research. First, the when component has been investigated by examining neural signatures immediately prior to intentional actions. Libet's intentional action paradigm is a classic example of this type (Libet et al., 1983; Libet, 1985), which has been used to localize electrophysiological and BOLD activity in the medial-frontal cortex preceding the conscious awareness of subsequent voluntary actions (Lau et al., 2004a; Fried et al., 2011) (but see Trevena and Miller, 2002; Nachev and Hacker, 2014 for critical evaluations). Second, research on the what and whether components, the focus of the current study, commonly use variants of the “free-choice” paradigm to determine the neurocognitive mechanisms of voluntary decision processes. In the literature, several terms have been used to refer to the free-choice paradigm, such as “voluntary selection” (Forstmann et al., 2006), “willed action” (Lau et al., 2004b), “internal selection” (Van Oostende et al., 1997), “self-initiated” (Cunnington et al., 2002), and “chosen actions” (Zhang et al., 2012). The current study uses these terms interchangeably.

In a typical free-choice paradigm, participants make a voluntary choice from multiple alternatives on each trial. The available alternatives can either be similar to each other (e.g., responding with different fingers, Zhang et al., 2012) or distinct (e.g., to choose voluntarily between stopping and acting in the adapted Go/NoGo task, Karch et al., 2009). Importantly, participants are made aware that all available options are homogeneous in terms of their objective outcomes, and the tasks do not introduce or manipulate rewards of costs according to the choices made. In other words, the task is not to identify a correct response. Rather participants can choose any of the available options. The alternate options are equally appropriate, and one's decision must come from intention. The intention could be influenced by endogenous factors, including subtly differential effort, preferences (Zajkowski et al., 2020), habits (Graybiel, 2008), incorrectly inferred arbitrary rules for the task, and recent actions (Zhang and Rowe, 2015; Phillips et al., 2018).

In recent years, there has been a substantial number of brain imaging studies adopting free-choice paradigms, enabling a well-powered meta-analysis. The current study focused on the hemodynamic and metabolic contrasts of intentional choice vs. specified response, which is the most widely reported task-related effect across free-choice studies. Here, specified responses serve as a control condition, in which participants need to make specific responses determined by the experimenter, rather than choose voluntarily from the same set of options in the free-choice condition. Therefore, the contrast between the two conditions offers an imaging marker of brain activation associated with intentional behaviour, controlling for the common effects of stimulus encoding and response initiation.

The objectives of this study were three-fold. First, to identify brain regions consistently activated by intentional decision, we performed a systematic search of BOLD-fMRI or PET studies of intentional decision and conducted an activation likelihood estimation (ALE) meta-analysis. Increased BOLD-fMRI and PET responses during intentional choices are commonly reported in a frontoparietal network centred on the medial frontal cortex (Brass and Haggard, 2008). However, some studies also observed activations external to this network during intentional behaviour, in particular in the insula (Brass and Haggard, 2010; Thimm et al., 2012; Dall'Acqua et al., 2018) and the inferior frontal gyrus (Wisniewski et al., 2016). Because results from a coordinate-based ALE meta-analysis are pooled from a large number of participants in multiple studies, they usually have higher statistical power than a single experimental study (Walker et al., 2008). Using ALE analyses, we aim to test whether there are significant clusters of foci associated with intentional decision across a wide range of free-choice paradigms, and whether these clusters extend beyond the commonly reported medial prefrontal cortex.

Second, we conducted further contrast and conjunction meta-analyses, assessing the differential and common convergence of brain activations reported by studies investigating different types of intentional behaviour. As highlighted above, the nature of options in a free-choice paradigm can vary significantly between studies and hence involve different cognitive processes. We reviewed all studies to date that met our predefined inclusion criteria (see Study selection and inclusion criteria). Based on the experimental design and implementational details of individual studies, we proposed four categories of the free-choice paradigm (see Paradigm-specific meta-analysis for the definition of each paradigm): reactional intention (RI), perceptual intention (PI), inhibitory intention (II) and cognitive intention (CI). We hypothesize significant clusters of foci associated with each category of free-choice paradigms. Using ALE contrast analysis, we further tested the hypothesis that some brain regions are more likely to be activated in one free-choice paradigm over another.

Third, to undertake an exploratory data-driven analysis, testing whether consistent BOLD-fMRI/PET patterns of intentional behaviour correspond to specific cognitive processes. We quantified the similarity between the meta-analytical whole-brain activation pattern estimated from free-choice studies and brain activation patterns from 100 specific cognitive topics, extracted from a database of over 11,000 brain imaging studies (Yarkoni et al., 2011; Rubin et al., 2017). This “decoding” approach raises hypotheses about the putative cognitive processes underpinning intentional behaviour, where different cognitive processes are associated with specific networks of the human brain. Finally, we reviewed results from these meta-analyses in the context of current cognitive models of intentional choice.


Materials and methods


Study selection and inclusion criteria

We defined intentional choices as experimental paradigms involving self-initiated, voluntary selections of an action from two or more alternatives (Zhang et al., 2012). The experimental procedure would need to instruct participants that there are no correct or incorrect choices, and they are free to choose any option among available alternatives. This type of intentional choices differs from conventional goal-directed or externally cued behaviour, in which a correct or instructed response could be defined or identified. We focused on existing studies investigating the “what” (which action to choose) or “whether” (whether or not to execute an action) component of intentional behaviour (Brass and Haggard, 2008). Studies focusing on the “when” component (i.e., when to execute, as in Libet et al., 1983) is not considered here, but is briefly reviewed in Discussion.

We conducted a systematic literature search in accordance with the PRISMA guidelines (Moher et al., 2015) to identify brain imaging studies of intentional choice. The literature search was performed on both PubMed and PubMed Central (PMC) databases, because the two databases may contain different publications. The PubMed database was searched with specified keywords as following: ("volitional decision" OR "volitional choice" OR "voluntary decision" OR "intended decision" OR "intentional decision" OR "voluntary choice" OR "intended choice" OR "intentional choice" OR "free decision" OR "free choice" OR "volitional action" OR "voluntary action" OR "intended action" OR "intentional action" OR "free action" OR "volitional selection" OR "voluntary selection" OR "intended selection" OR "intentional selection" OR "free selection") AND ("fMRI" OR "functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging" OR "BOLD" OR "Blood Oxygen Level-Dependent" OR "Positron Emission Tomography"). For the PMC database, the same keywords were employed in the interrogation and a filter on the search field was set to “Body - Key Terms” to constrain search in a more concrete range. The search results from PubMed and PMC databases were combined with duplicated records removed, resulting in 332 publications as of October 2020.

We then inspected every publication from the literature search. The further inclusion criteria for our meta-analysis were applied as follows:Studies reported first hand data that comes from experiments rather than reviews or meta-analysis. 291 of the 332 publications met this criterion.Studies included results from healthy adult participants. 239 of the remaining 291 publications met this criterion.Studies employed an intentional choice paradigm(s) and reported a fMRI/PET contrast of intentional choice vs. specified response conditions. Here, in the specified response condition, participants responded with the same set of possible actions as in the intentional choice condition, but the identity of which action to respond (or whether to respond) was determined by the experimenter. 37 of the remaining 239 publications met this criterion.Studies reported whole-brain analysis with MNI or Talairach coordinates of the cluster peaks. 34 of the remaining 37 publications met this criterion.If more than one appropriate contrast with the same group of subjects were reported in a single study, only one contrast was included in the meta-analysis.


Activation likelihood estimation (ALE) meta-analysis of intentional decision

After the screening, 34 fMRI/PET studies met the selection criteria, which included 35 independent experiments for meta-analysis. 25 studies recruited only right-handed participants, 1 study recruited thirteen right-handed and one left-handed participants, and the other 8 studies did not specify participants’ handedness. These studies contained a total of 633 participants and reported 329 peak foci of increased fMRI/PET responses to the intentional choice vs. specified response contrast. Less than 3% foci (9 out of 329) were out of the brain mask in the GingerALE toolbox (Turkeltaub et al., 2002; Eickhoff et al., 2012), which was within the normal range due to spatial smoothing and potential registration errors (Eickhoff et al., 2012). Therefore, all foci were included in the study to maximize the usage of the original dataset. For activation foci reported in the Talairach space, we converted them to MNI coordinates using the Lancaster algorithm (Lancaster et al., 2007).

The coordinates-based activation likelihood estimation (ALE) meta-analysis was conducted over all the 35 experiments using the Ginger-ALE toolbox (www.brainmap.org, version 3.0.2) (Turkeltaub et al., 2002; Eickhoff et al., 2012). This analysis aimed to determine, across independent experiments, significant spatial convergence of fMRI/PET activation probabilities for the intentional choice vs. specified response contrast, under the null hypothesis that the activation foci are distributed randomly throughout the brain. First, for each experiment, the activation probabilities of all foci reported were modelled as 3D Gaussian probability distributions with their full-width half-maximum (FWHM) estimated from the between-subject variance of the experiment (Eickhoff et al., 2009). Second, an ALE activation map was then calculated by combining all experimental-level activation maps, yielding a voxel-wise ALE score to quantify the convergence of results across experiments at each voxel location. Third, an analytical approach was used to determine the null distribution of voxel-wise ALE scores. A non-parametric p-value map of ALE scores was then generated under the null distribution (Eickhoff et al., 2012). Finally, the p-value map was thresholded at p < 0.001 and corrected for multiple comparisons across voxels using a cluster-level family-wise error (FWE) correction from 5,000 permutations (p < 0.01, cluster-corrected).


Paradigm-specific meta-analysis

We categorized the 35 experiments into four intentional choice paradigms based on their experimental designs and procedures. The first category is referred to as reactional intention (RI), in which participants voluntarily choose cues that associate to specific motor actions. We considered this category as the simplest form of intentional choice because a cue in the RI paradigm is directly linked to a target action. The second category is referred to as perceptual intention (PI), in which participants voluntarily choose between perceptually distinct targets (e.g., icons or pictures). Compared to the RI paradigm, the PI paradigm involves an additional matching process: an option is associated with a perceptual target, and the target is then associated with a specific motor action. The third category is referred to as inhibitory intention (II), in which at least one option is not to act (i.e., withholding responses). A cue in the II paradigm is associated directly with a specific action or the inhibition of action. The final category is referred to as cognitive intention (CI). The free choice condition in the CI paradigm requires the participants to choose between options that involve higher-order cognitive processes such as doing arithmetic or generating words.

For studies employed each of the four paradigm categories, we performed the same ALE meta-analysis to identify the spatial convergence of fMRI/PET activation for the intentional choice vs. specified response contrast. The same procedure to correct for multiple comparisons was applied as in the meta-analysis across all studies.

Based on the thresholded ALE maps from individual paradigms, we then conducted further conjunction and contrast meta-analyses between the RI and PI paradigms as well as the RI and II paradigms, using the “contrast study” function implemented in GingerALE. This allowed us to localize voxels commonly (i.e., conjunction) or differentially (i.e., contrast) activated across intentional choice paradigms. The conjunction images were created using the voxel-wise minimum value of the input ALE images. To correct for study sizes (Eickhoff et al., 2011), the contrast analyses were conducted through permutation tests. First, the ALE differences image was created by directly subtracting one input image from the other. Second, the simulated data was created by pooling the foci datasets and randomly dividing them into two new groups with the same size as the original groups. Third, a new ALE difference image was created by directly subtracting of the two new datasets and then compared to the true data. Fourth, with multiple permutations, a voxel-wise p-value image was created to illustrate where the true data sit on the distribution of the ALE differences in each voxel. A lenient threshold (cluster threshold 200 mm3, uncorrected voxel-level threshold p < 0.01, permutation tests with 5,000 iterations) was applied to the contrast analyses between paradigm categories to avoid type II errors (Lieberman and Cunningham, 2009). No conjunction or contrast meta-analysis was conducted on experiments using the CI paradigm due to the limited number of studies available in that category.


Meta-analytic decoding of intentional decision

ALE activation maps indicate brain regions of consistent fMRI/PET activations between studies. We then used NeuroSynth (Yarkoni et al., 2011) to perform a “reverse-inference” type of meta-analysis. That is, we meta-analytically decoded which cognitive functions or processes are likely to give rise to the consistent brain activations observed in ALE activation maps. As highlighted previously, one should interpret results from reverse inference with caution (Poldrack, 2011). Most functional brain imaging results are correlational. The involvement of a brain region in a certain cognitive function does not directly support the notion that the region is exclusively associated with the cognitive process. Nevertheless, meta-analytic decoding against large, unbiased imaging databases did provide useful information about the engagement of cognitive processes (Poldrack, 2006). In the current study, we consider our meta-analytic decoding analysis to be contributory rather than confirmatory, which offers insights for future studies of intentional decision.

We considered a set of 100 cognitive topics that were previously generated from over 11,000 brain imaging studies. The 100 topics were extracted by fitting a generative statistical model of sematic topics (Blei et al., 2003) to the abstracts of over 11,000 brain imaging articles in the NeuroSynth database (for details see Poldrack et al., 2012). We ignored the topics related to general methods (e.g., fMRI) and focus only on the topics related to cognitive processes. For each cognitive topic, a whole-brain association-test map (also referred to as the reverse inference map) was generated from all the articles in the database. The value at each voxel of the association-test map quantifies the extent to which studies loaded highly on the current topic reported more consistent activation at this location than all the other studies (Yarkoni et al., 2011).

We estimated the similarity between each unthresholded ALE activation p-value map with respect to the association-test maps of the 100 cognitive topics by calculating their Pearson correlations across voxels. The resulting correlation coefficients were rank ordered to identify the cognitive topics that are most likely to be present during intentional decision and its specific paradigms.


Data availability statement

All data used in this meta-analysis study were obtained from original publications. We have made the aggregated data open access (https://osf.io/bhwj5), which include the imaging data entered meta-analyses and unthresholded statistical maps from meta-analyses.


Results


Meta-analysis of intentional decision

Thirty-four brain imaging studies were identified from our symmetric literature search, which included 35 independent experiments of intentional decision. The number of participants, experimental paradigms and other details were summarized in.

There is no correct answer among available options in free choice paradigms. Nevertheless, behavioural performance can be evaluated in other ways, for example using response time (normally referred to the latency between task cues and responses) and the proportion of valid response. The latter applies to experiments (e.g., Zhang et al., 2012) in which participants make a free choice from M available options when there is a total of N options (where M<N). If an unavailable option was chosen, the response is deemed to be invalid. Here, the proportion of valid response is akin to the conventional decision accuracy. Supplementary Table 3 summarized the behavioural responses from studies included in the meta-analysis. The general pattern of the high proportion of valid response and fast RT suggest that participants did actively perform tasks in those studies.

Across all the 35 experiments, a Ginger-ALE meta-analysis on the contrast between free choice and specified response yielded greater BOLD-fMRI/PET activations related to intentional behaviour in a frontoparietal network. The analysis identified 19 peaks in 7 clusters, including bilateral pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA), bilateral anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), bilateral dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), bilateral inferior parietal lobule (IPL), right premotor area and left anterior insula cortex (AIC) (p < 0.01, cluster-level corrected). At a more lenient threshold (p < 0.01 uncorrected), there was a cluster in the right AIC (peak coordinate: X = 34, Y = 24, Z = 8).

The medial prefrontal cluster from ALE meta-analysis extends from Y = 6 (posterior) to Y = 34 (anterior). Voxels in this cluster mainly intersect with one of the five ROIs in the HCP-MMP atlas (Glasser et al., 2016): a24pr (ventral ACC), p24 (ventral ACC), d32 (dorsal ACC), 8BM (pre-SMA) and SCEF (supplementary and cingulate eye fields) (C). The posterior boundary of the medial prefrontal cluster falls in the SCEF (Brodmann area 6).


Meta-analysis of contrasts between intentional decision paradigms

To investigate whether different types of intentional behaviour relate to selective brain responses, we assigned intentional decision studies into four categories, depending on their characteristics of experimental paradigms: reactive intention (RI), perceptual intention (PI), inhibitory intention (II) and other higher cognitive intention (CI).

Free choices in the RI paradigm were consistently associated with greater activations in 6 clusters with 13 peak foci, including bilateral pre-SMA and ACC, bilateral IPL, bilateral prefrontal area and right premotor area. For the PI paradigm, the analysis revealed 4 clusters with 8 peak foci located in bilateral prefrontal area, left ACC and pre-SMA cluster. For the II paradigm, there were 7 clusters with 14 peak foci located in bilateral IPL, right premotor area, bilateral prefrontal area and right PreSMA. No significant results were observed in the meta-analysis of the CI paradigm, possibly due to the limited number of studies in that category.

To quantify the differential and common convergence of brain activation in studies of different types of intentional behaviour, we conducted further contrast and conjunction meta-analyses, comparing both the PI paradigm (involving perceptual processing) and the II paradigm (involving inhibitory processing) with the most elementary paradigm (i.e., the RI paradigm). The contrast meta-analysis showed that the bilateral IPL is more likely to activate in the II than the RI paradigm (B). No significant difference was found between PI and RI paradigm. The conjunction meta-analysis showed that bilateral Pre-SMA/ACC complex and the left dlPFC are commonly activated in intentional behaviour across studies of PI and RI paradigms, and activations in the right IPL and right PreSMA are commonly observed in both II and RI paradigms (A).


Meta-analytic decoding of intentional decision

To probe cognitive processes underlying intentional decision, we assessed the spatial similarity (i.e., Pearson correlation across voxels) between the ALE activation maps from our meta-analysis and 100 association-test maps. Each of the association-test maps represents brain response selective to one of 100 psychological topics, generated from meta-analyses of >11,000 independent studies (Yarkoni et al., 2011). Therefore, a high correlation coefficient to an association-test map would imply the potential involvement of the corresponding cognitive process. The primary interest here is the relative ranking of the topics based on the similarity of their association-test maps to our results, not to perform null hypothesis significance testing on each correlation.

This exploratory analysis showed that the frontoparietal network identified in the meta-analysis of intentional decision across all studies was strongly associated with several psychological topics. The top three are working memory (R = 0.445), task rules (R = 0.392) and cognitive control (R = 0.366) (and see Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 for full results).

We also applied the same decoding procedure to paradigm-specific ALE-activation maps. The RI paradigm was associated with the topic of working memory (R = 0.393), conflict (R = 0.350) and task rules (R = 0.348). PI paradigm was associated with the topic of working memory (R = 0.450), task rules (R = 0.325) and cognitive control (R = 0.322). II paradigm was associated with the working memory (R = 0.307), cognitive control (R = 0.271), task rules (R = 0.260) and feedback (R = 0.227).


Discussion

Our meta-analysis considered the convergence of fMRI/PET responses reported in intentional decision studies. Across a large variety of free-choice paradigms, when contrasted against the same behavioural response prescribed exogenously, intentional decision is associated with a convergence of BOLD/PET activity in the medial prefrontal cortex (pre-SMA and caudal ACC), the lateral frontoparietal cortices (DLPFC and IPL) and the anterior insula cortex (AIC). Here, we specifically focused on the free-choice paradigm, in which participants were given the freedom to choose among multiple options, instead of seeking a correct answer as in perceptual or reward based decision-making tasks. Our study further delineates a broad spectrum of free-choice paradigms in the current literature, with category-specific ALE results.

Previous meta-analysis studies on similar topics have distinct research questions. For example, Rae et al. (2014) examined the overlapping activity between action selection and action inhibition, with the latter referring to the externally-instructed go/no-go task, different from intentional inhibition paradigms considered here. Using clustering analysis, Zapparoli et al. (2017) reported regions separately associated with the what, when and whether components of intentional action. Our specific focus on free choice paradigms resulted in more studies from the literature search than previous meta-analyses: 35 experiments vs. 17 studies on intentional decision in Rae et al. (2014) and 15 studies in Zapparoli et al. (2017). With the increased power, the current study confirmed that the cortical activation pattern reported here is generalizable across a rich set of free-choice paradigms. It further confirmed the involvement of the AIC that was not consistently observed in previous studies.

The meta-analytic decoding analysis suggested that the spatial convergence of fMRI/PET responses in intentional decision is similar to previous experiments investigating certain cognitive terms, e.g., cognitive control, working memory and conflict. This is an exploratory analysis, and the decoding results were not tested against a null hypothesis to confirm the involvement of a particular cognitive function. Rather than interpreting cognitive functions of a single brain region, the meta-analytic decoding analysis quantitatively related whole-brain ALE results of intentional decision to previous imaging results. The overlapping brain maps between intentional decision and other cognitive paradigms, as suggested by our exploratory analyses, may lead to the development of new hypotheses and predictions. For example, one may test the interplay between intentional choices and working memory, with the expectation that lesion or brain stimulation to a region associated with both processes would affect behaviour. Therefore, our results provide insight into the cognitive roles of brain networks that mediate intentional behaviour in humans, which we discuss below together with their potential computational processes.


Functional localization of intentional decision in the brain

The brain areas involved in intentional decision overlap closely with the multiple demand network (Duncan and Owen, 2000; Duncan, 2010), a “task-positive” co-activation pattern associated with diverse cognitive demands (Fox et al., 2005; Dosenbach et al., 2006). A closer inspection of the literature indicates that subcomponents of this network may serve different cognitive roles during intentional decisions, which is also supported by our meta-analytic decoding results.

A large body of evidence indicates the putative role of ACC in conflict monitoring (Botvinick et al., 2004). Conflicts in information processing arise from the presence of response competition. Greater ACC activation is consistently observed when (1) one or more prepotent responses need to be overridden, such as in the Stroop task (MacLeod and MacDonald, 2000; Barch, 2001) and the flanker task (Botvinick et al., 1999; Bunge et al., 2002), or (2) a voluntary choice is needed among multiple underdetermined options, like in all the free-choice paradigms discussed here. Although the existing literature of conflict monitoring is largely focused on the ACC, the adjacent pre-SMA is also sensitive to the presence of conflict, in particular the conflict in response selection, as lesions in this region lead to deficits in exerting voluntary control over immediate actions (Nachev et al., 2007). According to the conflict monitoring theory, as multiple options become available in the free-choice paradigm, increased ACC and pre-SMA activities may encode conflicts as an index of the need for greater cognitive demand, which in turn trigger voluntary choices to reduce or resolve the conflict (Botvinick et al., 2004; Botvinick, 2007). A direct prediction of this proposition is that the activity in the medial prefrontal cortex should increase proportionally, at least to some extent, to the number of available options in the free-choice paradigm, which has been validated in previous studies (e.g., Forstmann et al., 2006).

ACC, more specifically the dorsal ACC, is also involved in a diverse set of cognitive functions beyond conflict monitoring, including error detection and response selection (Bush et al., 2000; Paus, 2001). Using a modified flanker task with free choices, Lau et al. (2006) showed a disassociation between ACC and pre-SMA in conflict monitoring and response selection, respectively. However, there is a lack of studies to attribute a definitive functional role to the dorsal ACC across multiple free-choice paradigms.

Beyond the medial prefrontal cortex, the frontoparietal network on the lateral brain surface has a distinct functional connectivity pattern relating to cognitive control (Corbetta and Shulman, 2002) and executive task performance (Seeley et al., 2007). Two functions of this network are essential to intentional behaviour. First, intentional decisions in the free-choice paradigm are, by definition, rendered endogenously. Nevertheless, the brain may still establish a “task set” that incorporates transient and arbitrary rules in addition to relevant exogenous information, such as associations of stimuli and imagined outcomes as well as available options (Sakai, 2008). Both single-unit recording in non-human primates (Quintana and Fuster, 1999; Asaad et al., 2000; Wallis et al., 2001) and brain imaging in humans (Bunge et al., 2002; Sakai and Passingham, 2003) have identified neural representations of various task sets in the frontoparietal network. The encoding of a task set can be actively maintained in this network until its execution (Zhang et al., 2013), thereby facilitating the intentional decision process to unfold in time. Second, intentional behaviour is commonly accompanied by the subjective experience of volitional control (Haggard, 2008), which requires internal models that matches the consequences of the response against its initial intention (Wolpert et al., 1995). It has been proposed that the parietal cortex hosts such internal models (Desmurget and Grafton, 2000), as patients with parietal lesions exhibited altered behavioural and electrophysiological signatures of their intention to act (Sirigu et al., 2004).

Our meta-analysis across all free-choice experiments showed the consistent involvement of the AIC during intentional decision, in spite of the lack of significant insula activity in some studies (e.g., Van Eimeren et al., 2006). This supports an earlier account that the AIC is a key component of the integrated brain network involved in intentional behaviour (Brass and Haggard, 2010). Anatomically, the AIC connects directly to the ACC (Augustine, 1996; Moisset et al., 2010). Functionally, robust coactivation in the AIC and ACC was observed across multiple cognitive domains (Medford and Critchley, 2010) as well as in resting-state (Chang et al., 2013), and both regions are a part of the salience network (Chen et al., 2016). It may therefore be tempting to ascribe the AIC activity to conflict processing during intentional decision, similar to that of ACC. An alternative proposal originated from the AIC's unique function in signalling introspective awareness (Craig, 2009) or subjective salience (Menon and Uddin, 2010) of cognitive (Preuschoff et al., 2008), homeostatic (Craig et al., 2000; Farrer and Frith, 2002) and emotional (Jabbi et al., 2007) information, which is not shared with the ACC. According to this theory, AIC activity reflects the affective consequences of intentional decisions. In other words, the AIC may not directly associate with the formation of current intention; instead, it evaluates the outcome of the intentional act with respect to an internal model of one's long term goal (see Brass and Haggard, 2010 for a detailed review).


The which, when and whether components of intentional behaviour

The current study does not aim to support or challenge the conceptual Which-When-Weather (WWW) distinctions (Brass and Haggard, 2008). Instead, we focused on a common contrast in free-choice paradigms (i.e., choice vs. specified), which emphasizes the presence of an intentional choice among alternatives. Our literature review suggested that papers reporting this contrast examined the BOLD/PET response to decisions between actions (reactive intention), between perceptual targets (perceptual intention), between act and stop (inhibitory intention) and between more complex cognitive operations (cognitive intention). Main research questions in these paradigms naturally involve the which and whether components of the WWW model.

The timing of intentional behaviour, the when component of the WWW model, is initially and commonly investigated using electrophysiology (Libet, 1985), focusing on the time course of neural activity leading to an intentional act. This does not preclude the use of fMRI/PET to study the contrast of responses at intentional timing vs. responses at specified timing.

Imaging studies on the when component employed diverse designs and their primary contrasts includes: (1) subjective awareness of the timing of intention as in Libet's task (Libet et al., 1983) vs. subjective awareness of the timing of an action (Lau et al., 2004a); (2) free to act at any time vs. act after a response cue (Hoffstaedter et al., 2013); (3) free to act at one of several time points vs. act at a specified time point (Krieghoff et al., 2009; Zapparoli et al., 2018). As such, existing studies considering the when component cannot be readily formalized as a choice between one overt option versus another, different from other free-choice paradigms considered here. Also, previous meta-analysis has specifically summarized studies of the when component (Zapparoli et al., 2017). Hence, we did not include those papers in the current meta-analysis. We outlined below how the when component can be incorporated into a computational model of intentional decision.


Computational processes of intentional decision

With the identification of the consistent brain network for intentional decision-making, a new question arises: what is the computational process underlying intentional decision? Converging findings from behavioural modelling (Ratcliff, 2006), single-unit recoding (Kim and Shadlen, 1999; Shadlen and Newsome, 2001; Mazurek et al., 2003) and imaging (Heekeren et al., 2004; Ploran et al., 2007; Ho et al., 2009) experiments suggest that, when making choices based on external stimuli, an accumulation-to-threshold mechanism governs the decision-making process (Smith and Ratcliff, 2004; Gold and Shadlen, 2007; Heekeren et al., 2008): the evidence supporting one or multiple options are accumulated over time, and a choice is made when the accumulated evidence reached a decision threshold. For perceptual decisions with noisy sensory stimuli, this accumulation process reduces the momentary noise in information-processing and in turn results in more accurate decisions (Bogacz et al., 2006, Zhang and Bogacz, 2010).

For intentional decisions, it has been shown that a computational model implementing the accumulation-to-threshold mechanism can well describe the behavioural performance (i.e., response time distributions and choice probabilities) of both RI (Zhang et al., 2012) and PI paradigms (Zajkowski et al., 2020). Furthermore, the accumulated evidence predicted by the model is associated with the BOLD response in the ACC and pre-SMA on a trial-by-trial basis (Zhang et al., 2012). These results raise an intriguing possibility that, during intentional decision, the medial prefrontal cortex implements the accumulation-to-threshold process to integrate over time the transitory intention of choosing different options, until the accumulated intention for one choice reaches a decision threshold.

This hypothesis is supported by several electrophysiological studies, which characterised the accumulation process during intentional behaviour at a high temporal resolution. First, in Libet's paradigm of voluntary action, the readiness potential measured by scalp EEG precedes participants’ conscious awareness of their voluntary intention (i.e., the “urge to move”, Libet et al., 1983). An accumulator model can be fit to the time latency of participants’ urge to move, and the activity of the accumulator qualitatively reproduces the time course of the readiness potential prior to conscious intention (Schurger et al., 2012). Second, in a free-choice version of Libet's paradigm, when participants made intentional decisions between responding with their left or right hands, neural activity in the medial prefrontal cortex build up several hundred milliseconds before the onset of conscious intention (Fried et al., 2011). Further, medial prefrontal neurons contralateral to the acting hand exhibited larger activity than ipsilateral neurons (Fried et al., 2011). Therefore, the medial prefrontal cortex may host accumulated intentions of multiple responses as well as their mutual competition, from which voluntary acts are rendered via the accumulation-to-threshold mechanism.

The putative role of the medial prefrontal cortex in intention accumulation is not inconsistent with this region's function of conflict monitoring discussed above, because more free options would be associated with larger accumulated intention across alternatives as well as higher conflict. In this regard, intention accumulation can be interpreted as a computational implementation of detecting and resolving conflicts among underdetermined options. Therefore, we consider the accumulation process as a parsimonious computational framework for intentional behaviour outlined by the conceptual what-when-whether model (Brass and Haggard, 2008), because accumulator models can explain quantitatively both “what” (i.e., choice probabilities) and “when” (i.e., response time distributions) components. Interestingly, accumulator models can also be fitted to behavioural performance in externally-triggered stopping tasks (Gomez et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2016). Future research should investigate if accumulator models can incorporate the “whether” component, or voluntary stopping in the II paradigm.


Paradigm-specific activations during intentional decision

By categorizing free-choice studies into different types according to their experimental design, we identified brain regions associated with consistent and specific convergence between studies on sub-categories of intentional decision. The conjunction meta-analysis of the RI and PI paradigms showed that the pre-SMA/ACC and DLPFC are associated with both types of intentional decision. This is expected, as the RI and PI paradigms have a similar task structure, involving rapid voluntary choices among multiple action plans. However, the contrast analysis did not reveal any difference between the two paradigms.

The II paradigm includes a unique option of not to act or intentionally inhibit one's action (C). The conjunction meta-analysis of the II and RI paradigms showed that the right supramarginal gyrus in the IPL and right pre-SMA was associated with both types of intentional decisions, and the contrast meta-analysis showed that the bilateral supramarginal gyrus was more likely to be activated in the II than that in the RI paradigm. In both RI and II paradigms, participants need to reprogram their response model according to available options in each trial, which fits the critical role of the supramarginal gyrus in action reprogramming (Hartwigsen et al., 2012). The same region is also sensitive to the content of action plans and their similarity (Quandt et al., 2017). It could be argued that options in the II paradigm are more dissimilar (i.e., acting versus stopping) than that in the RI paradigm (i.e., multiple but similar actions), which leads to the additional recruitment of the supramarginal gyrus in the II paradigm.

It is worth noting that the results of conjunction and contrast meta-analyses should be interpreted with caution, because of the limited number of studies available in each category. Our discussion on the functional roles involved in individual paradigms was based on previous evidence and hence was circumstantial. Furthermore, one potential confound of the contrast meta-analysis is that different paradigm categories may vary in their task difficulty, and hence the contrast between categories may not directly support the involvement of distinct cognitive processes. This issue can be examined in future studies that explicitly manipulate both task difficulty and intentional decision paradigms.


Future directions and conclusion

This analysis leaves open some issues for future research on human intentional decision-making. First, our systematic review identified only five studies in the CI category: three studies included options with attention shifts or saccades (Taylor et al., 2008; Jarvstad and Gilchrist, 2019; Ort et al., 2019), one with verbal responses (Frith et al., 1991) and the other one with arithmetic rules (Wisniewski et al., 2016). The small number of CI studies did not yield any significant result in the paradigm-specific meta-analysis, but that may reflect type II error. We recommend future research to explore different types of CI studies and examine the robustness and consistency of existing results across a range of distinct cognitive processes.

Second, our meta-analysis of the II paradigm did not show conventional regions involved in inhibitory control (Swick et al., 2011). We propose that this is due to the fact that our analysis used the contrast of intentional choice vs. specified response, with the former including intentional stopping and the latter including externally triggered stopping - this contrast may therefore not detect differential response inhibition. Indeed, the BOLD response in the AIC was higher during intentional stopping than intentional action execution (Brass and Haggard, 2007), while the inferior frontal gyrus is consistently observed during instructed stopping (Aron et al., 2004). To examine how the brain switches effectively between intentional and instructed stopping in the II paradigm, one need to examine the effective connectivity between these two regions and the medial prefrontal cortex, which is involved in both types of stopping (Kühn and Brass, 2009; Sharp et al., 2010).

Third, the current imaging literature on intentional behaviour indicates that the main focus is to localize associated brain regions or their underlying computational processes. Less is known about why a participant would intentionally choose one option over others in a trial. The answer to this question is important because the sequence of intentional decisions over trials are not completely random (Zhang and Rowe, 2015) but dependent on executive control of working memory (Baddeley et al., 1998), the context of a given choice in a sequence (Rowe et al., 2010), and other sources of response biases (Zajkowski et al., 2020). We suggest that the free-choice paradigm provides an ideal testbed for future research to investigate the interplay between the intentional process during a single trial and modulatory effects that operate at a longer time span.

Fourth, brain regions unlikely act in isolation during intentional decision, and the functional connectivity between regions cannot be ignored. Among all studies included in the current meta-analysis, only two examined functional connectivity (Rowe et al., 2005; Thimm et al., 2012), insufficient to draw inferences on a meta-analytic level. Using structural equation modelling, Rowe et al. (2005) showed that the prefrontal cortex has greater coupling with the motor cortex during free choices of actions, and with the visual cortex during free choices of colours. Similarly, using psychophysiological interaction analyses, Thimm et al. (2012) reported greater connectivity between the parietal cortex and the visual cortex during free choice of coloured targets. These results imply task-dependent changes in the effective connectivity between brain regions during free choices.

In conclusion, our meta-analysis identifies a brain network consistently activated when humans have the freedom to make intentional choices among multiple options. Some components of this network are recruited specifically in subcategories of the free-choice paradigm. Multiple cognitive and computational processes are involved in intentional decision, which collectively serve essential roles in shaping and maintaining volitional control.


CRediT authorship contribution statement

Ruoguang Si: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. James B Rowe: Funding acquisition, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. Jiaxiang Zhang: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – review & editing.


Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare no competing financial interests.


Consciousness and complexity: a consilience of evidence

Simone Sarasso, Adenauer Girardi Casali, Silvia Casarotto, Mario Rosanova, Corrado Sinigaglia, Marcello Massimini — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC10941977, CC BY 4.0.

Over the last years, a surge of empirical studies converged on complexity-related measures as reliable markers of consciousness across many different conditions, such as sleep, anesthesia, hallucinatory states, coma, and related disorders. Most of these measures were independently proposed by researchers endorsing disparate frameworks and employing different methods and techniques. Since this body of evidence has not been systematically reviewed and coherently organized so far, this positive trend has remained somewhat below the radar. The aim of this paper is to make this consilience of evidence in the science of consciousness explicit. We start with a systematic assessment of the growing literature on complexity-related measures and identify their common denominator, tracing it back to core theoretical principles and predictions put forward more than 20 years ago. In doing this, we highlight a consistent trajectory spanning two decades of consciousness research and provide a provisional taxonomy of the present literature. Finally, we consider all of the above as a positive ground to approach new questions and devise future experiments that may help consolidate and further develop a promising field where empirical research on consciousness appears to have, so far, naturally converged.

Keywords: sleep, coma, anesthesia, information, integration


Introduction

Inferring the presence or the absence of consciousness from physical brain properties is a major challenge faced by scientists, with remarkable clinical and ethical implications. Decades of research on the physical substrate of consciousness did not ensure agreement on the topic, with theoretical proposals still diverging on fundamental assumptions and interpretations.

The aim of this review is to suggest that, despite this apparent disagreement, catching a glimpse of recent empirical data reveals a positive trend of convergence.

In the first section, we provide a systematic survey of the existing literature and document an emerging empirical consensus on a broad spectrum of complexity measures applied to brain signals as reliable indices of the presence/absence of consciousness across many different conditions, such as sleep, anesthesia, hallucinatory states, epilepsy, coma, and related disorders. In addition, we note that this host of studies were independently proposed by researchers employing different experimental approaches and endorsing disparate theoretical positions.

In the second section, we revisit early theoretical proposals linking consciousness to complexity. We show that the original principles were put forward more than 20 years ago with the definition of a specific form of complexity, arising from the coexistence of functional integration and differentiation in the brain. We then show that this rationale gave rise to novel measures and to original predictions.

In the third section, we argue that linking early principles and predictions to current complexity-related metrics can help interpret and conceptually organize the broad spectrum of current proposed methods and measures. Here, we highlight that they share a common denominator as they all tend to gauge the coexistence of functional integration and functional differentiation in the brain, albeit with different methods and assumptions. We thus provide a provisional taxonomy to organize existing complexity metrics and highlight their relationships and caveats.

In the last section, we use all the above as a solid foothold to approach new questions and devise future experiments. Among others, we consider the problems of understanding the neuronal mechanisms, the spatiotemporal grain, and the localization of complexity in the brain, as well as the difference between observational and perturbational approaches to estimating complexity. Finally, we argue that addressing these issues may help refine methods for assessing consciousness and foster constructive exchange among different theoretical frameworks on solid empirical grounds.


Current empirical convergence

An outstanding problem in the empirical science of consciousness is identifying the fundamental physical brain properties that reliably index the presence and the absence of consciousness. Here, the presence of consciousness is operationalized as the presence of immediate reports (e.g. those obtained from subjects during wakefulness) and delayed reports (e.g. those obtained from subjects waking up from unresponsive states such as dreaming and ketamine anesthesia), as well as minimal but reliable behavioral signs (such as those provided by patients in a minimally conscious state). By contrast, the absence of consciousness is operationally defined as the absence of all of the above.

In this context, consciousness is defined as the capacity for any kind of experience, a concept that is upstream to further distinctions, such as those between levels (Laureys 2005; Boly et al. 2013), those between global states of consciousness (Bayne et al. 2016; Mckilliam 2020) (e.g. the distinction between dreaming and wakeful consciousness), and those between local states of consciousness (Bayne et al. 2016) characterized in terms of specific conscious contents or phenomenal character.

Such primary distinctions between conscious and unconscious conditions is the focus of a substantial body of literature, a fundamental concern for clinicians, and arguably an important first step for understanding the relationship between consciousness and physical brain properties.

In this section, we unveil the emergence of a new class of empirical measures that have recently shown a remarkable performance in indexing the presence/absence of consciousness across a variety of conditions.


Pointing the radar on complexity measures

The existence of a large body of works on complexity measures has only been recently recognized (Arsiwalla and Verschure 2018) but has never been systematically reviewed nor taxonomized, thus remaining somewhat unnoticed. One way to appreciate the emerging consilience of evidence on such measures is to contrast them against the background of the disagreements and conflicting empirical results characterizing other empirical measures of consciousness. A first example is represented by markers of consciousness based on event-related potentials (ERPs). In this case, several studies (Bekinschtein et al. 2009; Faugeras et al. 2011) proposed a late, positive, fronto-parietal ERP evoked by visual or auditory stimuli (called P3b) as a reliable signature of consciousness. More recent studies (Pitts et al. 2014; Silverstein et al. 2015; Tzovara et al. 2015; Sergent et al. 2021), however, questioned this interpretation and opened a debate on the precise relationship of P3b to consciousness as opposed to task relevance, report, and decision processes that are associated with conscious access mechanisms. Most importantly in the present context, P3b was found to have a low sensitivity with respect to the presence of consciousness in clinical conditions (Faugeras et al. 2012; Sitt et al. 2014).

Another example of discrepancy is represented by indices based on global brain metabolic rates as they can be found decreased during loss of consciousness in deep sleep and anesthesia (Nofzinger et al. 2002; Kaisti et al. 2003), whereas they increase when consciousness is lost during generalized seizures (Bai et al. 2010). A similar problem applies to global spectral measures, such as alpha and delta electroencephalographic (EEG) power. Indeed, while the presence of a prominent alpha power typically provides a useful index of preserved brain function also in brain-injured patients, with the exception of postanoxic alpha-coma (Westmoreland et al. 1975), alpha is found consistently decreased in conscious conditions such as dreaming (Esposito et al. 2004), psychedelic-induced states (Timmermann et al. 2019), and in locked-in patients (Babiloni et al. 2010). On the other hand, while EEG delta power is typically found to negatively correlate with the presence of consciousness, important exceptions are found in the literature as EEG can show persistent large delta waves in conscious participants during the administration of the cholinergic antagonist atropine (Ostfeld et al. 1960) and of the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) reuptake inhibitor tiagabine (Darmani et al. 2021) and during some instances of status epilepticus (Gökyiǧit and Çalişkan 1995; Vuilleumier et al. 2000), as well as in rare cases of children with Angelman syndrome (Sidorov et al. 2017; den Bakker et al. 2018; Frohlich et al. 2020). Notably, these and other dissociations have been systematically addressed by a very recent review article (Frohlich et al. 2021) further questioning the notion that high-amplitude delta oscillations recorded in humans at the scalp level are a reliable indicator of unconsciousness.

Against this backdrop, it becomes easier to recognize the emergence of a complementary profile in the relevant literature. Overall, a large body of work supports the notion that the presence of consciousness is invariably associated with high brain complexity, which, vice versa, is found to be consistently decreased during physiological, pharmacological, or pathological-induced loss of consciousness.

Four examples of such measures, employing different experimental approaches, including both electrophysiology and functional brain imaging, and testing various conditions encompassing deep sleep, anesthesia, and disorders of consciousness are shown in. These examples, which are clearly interesting in their own merit, are especially important for two reasons. First, because they share a common conceptual denominator in that they all tend to gauge the joint presence of functional integration and functional differentiation in the brain. Second, because they represent the tip of an iceberg of a much broader consilience, as we demonstrate below.


A systematic literature analysis

In order to substantiate and characterize this emerging convergence, we performed a systematic search on the electronic database PubMed for original research studies published in journals and available online using the query: “consciousness” AND (complexity OR “entropy” OR “fractal” OR (“network” AND “graph”) OR “information transmission” OR “mutual information” OR “information flow” OR “information sharing” OR (“information” AND integration) OR “effective information” OR “effective connectivity” OR “criticality” OR “metastability”). These search criteria were defined in order to be specific for complexity-related metrics and to accommodate, at the same time, the variety of empirical research programmes (i.e. methods to estimate complexity and experimental approaches).

After excluding from the results of this automatic search studies that are unrelated to the subject of measuring consciousness (e.g. clinical studies aimed at testing brain-based measures for anesthesia monitoring or for the neurophysiological assessment of partial seizures not involving loss of consciousness), studies applying complexity measures on other biological signals (e.g. heart rate variability), and studies exclusively based on modeling work and animal models, as well as works exclusively employing proprietary software whose algorithms are not publicly disclosed (e.g. bispectral index), we identified 182 original studies.

When systematically analyzed, the results of our search highlight several interesting elements supporting the idea of a strong, rapidly growing empirical convergence in the literature.

First, the identified studies cover a temporal span of more than a decade (the first paper identified dates 2005). Second, confirming the initial impression drawn from the examples provided in, this large body of empirical evidence encompasses studies employing a wide range of neurophysiological and neuroimaging tools, including scalp and intracranial EEG [either electrocorticography (ECoG) or stereo-EEG (SEEG)] alone or in combination with direct cortical perturbation [either transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) or single pulse electrical stimulation (SPES)] and magnetoencephalography (MEG), as well as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Third, our search confirms that complexity-related measures have been successfully applied to index changes in the state of consciousness across a wide range of conditions, including sleep [both rapid eye movement (REM) and nonREM (NREM)], general anesthesia (employing various anesthetic agents with different mechanisms of action), meditation, and drug-induced altered states of consciousness, as well as neurological conditions, including epilepsy, coma, and disorders of consciousness. Remarkably, across this wide range of conditions and methodologies, the reliability of complexity-related measures was confirmed by all studies contrasting the presence versus the absence of consciousness. More specifically, consciousness was found invariably associated with high levels of brain complexity not only during wakefulness but also during REM sleep (Imperatori et al. 2020) and even in the extreme case of general anesthesia with ketamine (Sarasso et al. 2015). Conversely, brain complexity was found markedly reduced in all cases associated with the loss of consciousness whether during NREM sleep (Hahn et al. 2021), general anesthesia induced by the use of various compounds (Huang et al. 2016; Hashmi et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2020), or epileptic seizures (Mateos et al. 2018). Most importantly, in a number of studies involving the challenging conditions represented by the disorder of consciousness, the reliability of complexity-related measures in detecting consciousness was assessed explicitly by testing their specificity and sensitivity on large cohorts of patients. Notably, these experiments (Casali et al. 2013; Sitt et al. 2014; Casarotto et al. 2016; Engemann et al. 2018; Demertzi et al. 2019; Luppi et al. 2019) attained such a high accuracy in discriminating conscious from unconscious individuals that they were recently highlighted and formally recommended in a number of international practice guidelines (Giacino et al. 2018; Kondziella et al. 2020) and expert reviews (Bai et al. 2020; Comanducci et al. 2020) for the diagnosis of disorders of consciousness.

Last but not least, it is worth noting that, overall, this large body of empirical evidence was accumulated by clinicians and researchers from several independent research groups encompassing a wide spectrum of theoretical views.


Consciousness and complexity: rewinding 20 years

Prompted by the consistent results highlighted in the previous section, we here revisit the original rationale for explicitly linking consciousness to complexity. In doing so, we identify a set of principles and predictions that can help interpret and conceptually organize the broad spectrum of current methods and measures.


Early theoretical principles

The first clear landmark linking consciousness to complexity dates back to more than 20 years ago, when a paper explicitly titled “Consciousness and complexity” was published in Science (Giulio Tononi and Edelman 1998). Here, Tononi and Edelman defined the kind of complexity specifically relevant for consciousness as the coexistence of a high degree of functional differentiation and functional integration within a system, conceiving a testable proposal regarding the neural substrate of conscious experience called the dynamic core hypothesis (DCH).

Using phenomenology as a springboard, the DCH combined the two ingredients of integration and differentiation in a novel framework about the relationships between consciousness and the brain. As described at the outset of the original paper, a simple exercise of introspection indicates that each experience is both integrated (each conscious scene is unified) and highly differentiated (each experience is specific, differing from a huge number of different conscious states at any given time). Thus, the neural process underlying conscious experience must be functionally integrated and, at the same time, highly differentiated. Starting from this premise, the DCH postulated which basic anatomical and neurophysiological properties may be specifically relevant for consciousness.

The first necessary property is a pattern of structural connectivity characterized by the coexistence of functional segregation and functional integration. Besides the appropriate arrangement of structural connectivity, the DCH postulated that another necessary property is the presence of effective and rapid reentrant interactions, granting the formation of a tightly integrated cluster of neurons. Perhaps the most interesting (and defining) claim of Tononi and Edelman is that none of the above is a sufficient property for conscious experience and that only if the integrated cluster is capable of a large repertoire of different states, consciousness is possible.

In a nutshell, the backbone of the DCH consisted in the following two principles

A group of neurons can contribute directly to conscious experience only if it is part of a distributed functional cluster [i.e. a subset of a neural system with dynamics that display high statistical dependence internally and relatively lower dependence with elements outside the subset (Tononi et al. 1998)] that achieves high integration in hundreds of milliseconds.

To sustain conscious experience, it is essential that this functional cluster is capable of a large repertoire of different activity patterns or neural states, as indicated by high values of complexity.


Early theoretical measures

Even more importantly in the present context, Tononi and Edelman proposed a metric, called neural complexity (CN), to quantify the above-mentioned physiologically observable variables (balanced structural connectivity, integration through fast reentrant interactions, and the differentiation of neuronal activity) in thalamocortical networks. The fundamental insight offered by the DCH and by the related measure CN is that functional integration and functional differentiation need to be measured jointly. A basic concept, with key practical implications, is that measuring the spatial extent of large-scale synchronous dynamics would not suffice per se. Indeed, one would not take into account whether these integrated dynamics are differentiated or stereotypical (such as the ones recorded during unconscious seizures or NREM sleep). On the other hand, according to the DCH, simply measuring the algorithmic complexity or the entropy of ongoing time series would not do, which also has practical implications. In this case, in fact, one would not know whether these differentiated patterns are generated by one system of interacting elements or by a collection of independent elements.

Following the intuitions of the DCH and further specifying the concepts of integration and differentiation, Tononi and colleagues later introduced a novel measure called Փ (Tononi 2001; Tononi and Sporns 2003). A critical difference is that this measure is based on effective rather than mutual information (the core measure of CN), thus reflecting causal interactions rather than statistical dependencies. A first implication is that, through extensive perturbations of all the subsets of the system, Փ captures not only the states the system cycles through within the limited time of observation but all the potential states the system is capable of (i.e. its full repertoire of states). Perhaps more importantly, this perturbational approach bears practical consequences for the development of empirical metrics. Indeed, the strategy of measuring causal interactions instead of temporal correlations takes the problem of measuring integration (i.e. the unity of a system) very seriously, as it avoids confounds due to spurious sources of integration such as common drivers and correlated inputs.

Given the obvious computational burden of both CN and Փ, parallel attempts were made in order to develop more applicable measures. In this context, causal density (cd) was proposed by Seth and colleagues (Seth 2005) as a viable method to measure the coexistence of differentiation and integration, which they called the “relevant complexity” (Seth et al. 2006). By leveraging the econometric concept of Granger causality, a measure of causal influence based on time-series inference, cd measures the overall causal interactivity sustained by a system. Specifically, cd captures the dynamical heterogeneity among network elements (differentiation) as well as their global dynamical integration. Given that the number of parameters to be estimated is lower with respect to both CN and Փ, cd is, in principle, more tractable. Potential drawbacks of cd are that it estimates causal interaction only from an observational perspective and that its reliability can be significantly affected by time-series nonstationarity.

In the following years, these measures were further refined based on both theoretical and practical considerations (Barrett and Seth 2011; Toker and Sommer 2019). Yet, the original formulation of CN, Փ, and cd represents the first attempt at measuring a new kind of complexity and a valid reference for our analysis of the empirical metrics that were subsequently applied.


Early theoretical predictions

Besides delineating a novel trajectory from phenomenology to a new class of measures, as described above, the DCH framework also laid specific predictions on the relationship between consciousness and brain complexity. Specifically

The structural architecture (high density of connections, strong local connectivity, patchiness in the connectivity among neuronal groups, and large numbers of short reentrant circuits) of certain brain regions will be much more effective in generating high complexity than that of other regions. It follows that at least some regions of the thalamocortical system are endowed with the specific anatomical requirements supporting conscious experience, while others, such as the cerebellum or the basal ganglia, are not.

Altering these anatomical requirements, as in the case of brain lesions involving thalamocortical networks leading to disorders of consciousness, will result in a decrease in complexity.

Anatomical requirements being equal, changes in functional neuronal properties that affect reentry, integration, and differentiation will result in the loss of complexity and, in turn, of consciousness in conditions such as NREM sleep, general anesthesia, and generalized seizures.

High complexity and conscious experience can be supported by intrinsic brain interactions even in the absence of sensory inputs and motor outputs. As such, complexity will be high during REM sleep (a state of sleep in which subjects almost always dream) and in other disconnected states.

The empirical test of this set of predictions was initially hampered by limitations inherent to human recording/imaging techniques and by a lower computational power at the time. However, as soon as the appropriate equipment and analysis tools became available, the accumulation of relevant empirical data accelerated and complexity measures were endorsed by an increasing number of scholars (Alkire et al. 2008; Sitt et al. 2013; Ruffini 2017; Aru et al. 2020) in conjunction with an obvious increase of original works in the last decade. Due to a considerable gap between the time of the original predictions and the moment a critical amount of relevant data became available (almost 20 years, as shown in), it is understandable that the two events are not always connected explicitly. This gap, however, represents an interesting opportunity, in at least two respects. On the one hand, recent experiments can be almost considered as an independent set of validation tests for early predictions. On the other, the original core concept of integration and differentiation can be employed as an objective principle to analyze current empirical approaches to measuring brain complexity.


Consciousness and complexity: a provisional taxonomy

In the previous section, we reappraised the original rationale for linking consciousness to complexity. According to this proposal, the complexity that is relevant for consciousness seems to be a matter of balance, a balance between diversity and unity, or, more technically, the amount/repertoire of differentiated states (diversity) that can be generated by a set of interacting elements (unity). At least in principle, in order to quantify complexity, one should know the exact structure of the interactions within a system. This becomes obviously impossible when it comes to real brains, and empirical approximations are warranted. Our survey of the literature reveals that current empirical complexity-related measures have addressed this problem according to different strategies.

Recognizing that other schemes of classifications might be possible, we here provide a provisional taxonomy of this large body of literature along two main dimensions that we think are conceptually and practically useful.

The first dimension relates to the problem of estimating the repertoire of differentiated states available to a system. Here, we identify two main approaches adopted by different studies, which mainly differ in the way they treat brain activity time series. We then report their relevant empirical intuitions, define their rationale, and highlight their operational aspects. Finally, we identify a number of works proposing interesting mixed approaches.

The second dimension addresses the problem of constraining the repertoire of states only to those generated by interactions within the system, i.e. the problem of properly assessing the integration or the unity of the system by evaluating its internal interactions from a causal perspective.


Estimating the repertoire of states. A first strategy: topological differentiation

Let us start with the first dimension of the problem, i.e. the estimation of the repertoire of states. A first strategy adopted for estimating this repertoire makes use of time series in order to extract the topological properties of the underlying network, the complexity of which is then captured by measures of segregation and integration. We identify the core ingredients (see below) of this strategy in 102 publications included in our literature search (Supplementary Table S1).

The underlying rationale is that the ability of a system to generate a large repertoire of states should correspond to topological features characterized by functionally segregated and densely connected modules that are at the same time integrated through longer-range, sparse connections.

Operationally, this first strategy entails a two-step procedure: (i) the extraction of a network of interacting elements from empirical data and (ii) the estimation of the balance between segregation and integration within this network.

Network extraction: network elements or nodes are defined at different temporal resolutions (from milliseconds to seconds) and at different spatial scales (from groups of neurons to macroareas and functional subnetworks) depending on the adopted investigational techniques (from invasive to noninvasive M/EEG techniques and fMRI). Network edges (i.e. the relationships between interacting nodes) are identified by employing different metrics, such as temporal correlations, coherence, phase synchronization, and measures of information flow (Barnett et al. 2020; Nadin et al. 2020).

Complexity estimation: the majority of studies estimate the balance between segregation and integration by employing metrics of graph theory, such as measures of network modularity, density, node centrality, clustering coefficient, local and global efficiency, and small-worldness (Chennu et al. 2017; Luppi et al. 2021). Others use functional connectivity techniques that allow for the quantification of connections both within and between different functional subnetworks (Schrouff et al. 2011). Finally, the spatial complexity of connections between elements, as measured by entropic, algorithmic, and fractal indices, can also be employed to gauge the balance of local segregation and global integration within the reconstructed network (Viol et al. 2019).

Notably, some studies only perform the first step and characterize the connectivity between distributed neuronal groups without explicitly accounting for the balance between the segregation and integration of the underlying network (Liang et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2018). Although valuable from a descriptive point of view, these approaches are less explicitly related to brain complexity.


Estimating the repertoire of states. A second strategy: temporal differentiation

An alternative strategy (adopted by 86 publications derived from our literature search; Supplementary Table S1) is to directly estimate complexity based on the amount of information (or differentiation) encoded in the temporal dynamics of brain activations.

The underlying rationale is that the size of the repertoire of available states is a function of the number of nonredundant patterns generated during the temporal evolution of the system.

Operationally, this second strategy entails a two-step procedure: (i) the extraction of temporal patterns of activity that result from the interactions among neuronal groups and (ii) the estimation of the complexity or information content of the resulting time series.

Pattern extraction: different studies define patterns or states of brain activation in a variety of ways and at multiple spatiotemporal scales depending on the employed techniques. Patterns can be identified as absolute signal fluctuations (Tagliazucchi et al. 2013) or by applying methods such as signal binarization or symbolization, signal transformations (e.g. principal components and surface Laplacian), embedding, or cluster analysis (Demertzi et al. 2019; Wenzel et al. 2019).

Complexity estimation: once activation patterns have been identified, a variety of metrics can be used to quantify temporal complexity, such as entropies, fractal measures, indexes of algorithmic complexity, number and distribution of microstates, methods based on recurrence quantification analysis, and empirical approximations of integrated information (Փ). Examples of such applications can be found in Andrillon et al. (2016), Mateos et al. (2018), and Liu et al. (2019). Measures of information sharing, such as mutual information or transfer entropy (which are more typically used to construct the edges between nodes in a graph, as in the first strategy), can also be employed as indexes of the amount of information exchanged by interacting brain regions (King et al. 2013).

It is worth noting that, also in this case, a small subset of studies (see, e.g. Massimini et al. 2005; Usami et al. 2015) only performed the first step explicitly, thus quantifying the differentiation only in a qualitative manner (i.e. without formally applying quantitative measures to estimate complexity).


Estimating the repertoire of states. A mixed strategy and its relationships to metastability and criticality

A small number of studies (23 in our literature search) adopted a combination of the above-mentioned strategies in that they make use of time series in order to construct the topological properties of the underlying network (as in the first strategy) and then quantify their differentiation over time (as in the second strategy). Operationally, this approach generally works by employing relatively short temporal sliding windows in order to construct a time series of quasi-stable network configurations, which is then used to estimate the repertoire of states available to the system. Examples of such mixed strategy can be found in Golkowski et al. (2019) and Cai et al. (2020a).

It is interesting to note that the high variability of such quasi-stable configurations or quasi-stationary states is also considered a mark of metastable regimes, where the system is out of equilibrium and is driven to visit different states by intrinsic or extrinsic events (Tognoli and Kelso 2014; Deco et al. 2017; Cavanna et al. 2018). Some of the studies in our literature search make explicit use of such concepts and estimate complexity by the level of integration of different neuronal assemblies during events such as rapid transition periods (Fingelkurts et al. 2013) or intrinsic ignitions across brain areas (Deco et al. 2017; Escrichs et al. 2019; Hahn et al. 2021). Metastability is, in turn, related to the phenomena of criticality and phase transition in dynamical systems: the variability of states or network configurations is generally maximized at critical values of specific parameters controlling the dynamics of the system. In subcritical regimes, interactions among the elements become dominant and the system tends toward complete order. At the other extreme, in supercritical regimes, external sources and local fluctuations dominate the dynamics and the system fragments into a multitude of independent clusters. The balance between order (integration) and disorder (segregation) can thus also be estimated by markers of criticality, such as measures of scale-free behaviors (Allegrini et al. 2015; Bocaccio et al. 2019; Colombo et al. 2019; Dürschmid et al. 2020), hysteresis (Kim et al. 2018a), and dynamical instability (Alonso et al. 2014).


Estimating integration: observation vs perturbation

Irrespective of the strategy adopted to estimate the repertoire of states, one key aspect relates to the methods adopted to assess integration, i.e. to constrain such repertoire to those states that are generated by genuine interactions among neuronal groups.

This is important as it tackles the problem of distinguishing between a unitary system made of tightly interacting elements and an aggregate of largely independent generators of activity. Adopting a causal perspective is a viable way to approach this issue and best approximate the structure of the interactions within a system, which, as discussed above, represents a key prerequisite to quantify the relevant complexity. In practical terms, measuring causal relationships as opposed to statistical dependencies contrasts the influence of spurious sources of integration, such as common drivers and correlated inputs, and minimizes the influence of noise, which can artificially affect complexity estimations (e.g. in the presence of random patterns).

The ideal way to do so is to perturb the system in a controlled manner in order to reliably establish causes and effects (Paus 2005; Pearl 2009; Pearl and Mackenzie 2018). However, the vast majority of studies (159 in our literature search; see Supplementary Table S1) adopted an observational strategy, often assisted by specific methods to mitigate the risk of confusing correlation with causation (Friston 2011). Some of these are aimed at diminishing activities and patterns originating from sources other than interacting neuronal elements. Examples of such applications are methods of signal decomposition, surface Laplacian, and source reconstruction to reduce spurious, non-neural correlations (Schartner et al. 2017b); symbolic and multiscale strategies to reduce the impact of noise and random fluctuations (Lee et al. 2018); and the use of measures such as weighted symbolic mutual information, which is based on disregarding co-occurrences of identical or opposite-sign patterns in order to reduce the effects of common drivers (King et al. 2013). Statistical measures of directed connectivity, such as transfer entropy and Granger causality, both in time and frequency domain, are frequently used as probabilistic accounts of actual causation (Barrett et al. 2012). Correlating temporal complexity with structural connectivity or with the activity of known integrated functional networks is another way to substantiate the causal origin of the observed information (Tagliazucchi et al. 2013; Tagliazucchi 2016). Finally, dynamic causal modeling was also applied to the problem of consciousness, although this approach is more commonly used to characterize the type and strength of interactions across a small number of brain areas rather than estimating complexity (Vaudano et al. 2009; Preller et al. 2019).

On the other hand, only a small number of studies (23 in our literature search, see Supplementary Table S1) assessed the causal structure of a system by analyzing its responses to direct cortical perturbations, which enable extracting only the patterns of activity that are generated through effective interactions. Operationally, these studies employed a “perturb and measure” approach based on the use of noninvasive techniques, such as navigated TMS and high-density electroencephalography (hd-EEG), as well as invasive intracranial electrical stimulations and recordings (Massimini et al. 2005; Ragazzoni et al. 2013; Pigorini et al. 2015; Usami et al. 2019; Sinitsyn et al. 2020). In particular, a subset of these studies, explicitly inspired by theoretical principles (Tononi 2004), combined this perturbational approach with strategies such as nonparametric statistical analysis and algorithmic complexity at the sources level (Casali et al. 2013) or principal component decomposition and recurrence quantification analysis at the sensors level (Comolatti et al. 2019), yielding indices of “perturbational complexity” (or PCI—Perturbational Complexity index).

Far from being definitive, this taxonomic attempt illustrates the wide range of approaches that have been adopted to estimating brain complexity, highlights their relationship, and identifies some of their caveats. In this latter respect, our analysis identified instances in which measures of differentiation were applied to signals obtained from single brain regions or recording channels. These metrics, albeit practically useful, necessarily rely on the strong assumption that the degree of differentiation they quantify reflects properties of the system as a whole (i.e. they take integration for granted). Clearly, in these cases, the estimation of the relevant complexity can be confounded by patterns produced by independent neural generators or noise. On the other hand of the spectrum, we found measures that were solely based on global spatiotemporal correlations. These measures, which do not explicitly account for differentiation, can provide high values for patterns that are highly correlated but stereotypical and not complex. In between these two extremes, the vast majority of the identified works (133 out of 182) employed methods to estimate both integration and differentiation. This recent trend provides strong evidence for a shared commitment to develop practical indices of consciousness that gauge the balance between diversity and unity in the brain in noticeable agreement with early theoretical proposals.


Consciousness and complexity: the next 20 years

In the previous sections, we have highlighted an interesting trajectory traversing the science of consciousness over the last two decades. The emerging consilience is that measures of complexity, all designed to capture the joint presence of integration and differentiation in the brain, represent reliable indices of the state of consciousness. Starting from this common empirical background, we now consider open issues of both practical and theoretical relevance that should be addressed in the years to come in order to further advance this promising front.


Complexity and the capacity for consciousness

Assessing sensitivity and specificity across different conditions is the ultimate practical guide to judge how a given marker approximates neuronal processes that are relevant to the presence or absence of consciousness. While some studies assessed the performance of complexity-related metrics only at the group level and others provided a precise quantification of their accuracy in a clinical setting, they all concurred on the same conclusion: complexity is higher in conditions in which consciousness is present and lower in conditions where this is lost. Such a high degree of consistency across different conditions, including challenging cases, such as disconnected consciousness in dreaming and ketamine anesthesia, hallucinatory states, and patients with severe brain injuries, is remarkable when compared to the discrepancies characterizing other classes of measures.

For example, when directly compared, complexity measures largely outperform ERPs, such as the P3b, in the detection of minimally conscious patients, the latter being characterized by lower sensitivity (Sitt et al. 2014). Also, complexity remains high in conscious subjects during REM sleep or ketamine hallucinations (Casarotto et al. 2016; Farnes et al. 2020), whereas ERPs to global deviant stimuli typically disappear (Strauss et al. 2015; Bravermanová et al. 2018). Likewise, complexity measures consistently show high values and dissociate from EEG alpha power, which is known to decrease in conditions of disconnected consciousness, such as during dreaming, hallucinations, and in the locked-in syndrome (Esposito et al. 2004; Babiloni et al. 2010; Timmermann et al. 2019). Measuring brain complexity also overcomes some of the limitations of indices quantifying scalp EEG delta power; indeed, wakefulness-like complexity values can be detected even when high-amplitude slow waves dominate the spontaneous scalp EEG in some minimally conscious patients (Casarotto et al. 2016) as well as in conscious children with Angelman syndrome (Frohlich et al. 2020) and in healthy conscious subjects administered with the GABA reuptake inhibitor tiagabine (Darmani et al. 2021). On the other hand, gamma band synchrony [an early proposed neural correlate of consciousness (Crick and Koch 1990)] and brain metabolism can persist or even increase during epileptic seizures (Pockett and Holmes 2009; Bai et al. 2010), whereas complexity is found invariably reduced (see, e.g. Song et al. 2011; Mateos et al. 2018), consistent with the loss of consciousness characterizing this condition. Overall, it seems that complexity is more reliable than other metrics, arguably offering not only better diagnostic accuracy but also a potential guide to identify, among the many facets of brain activity, core properties that are more relevant to consciousness.

Clearly, discrepancies will be found also in the case of complexity-related measures. As we will discuss later, this is to be expected if only one considers the number of different methods and spatiotemporal scales at which complexity is estimated. The taxonomy described in the previous section is meant to provide a framework to help interpret potentially emerging conflicting results and to select the most promising set of measurement strategies. Toward this aim, it will be critical for future studies to precisely identify how they define and quantify complexity and to explicitly report each measure’s performance in terms of sensitivity and specificity whenever a ground-truth about the state of consciousness of individual subjects is available (Demertzi et al. 2017).

Practically, to the extent that they have been extensively validated in benchmark conditions, indices of brain complexity can be effectively employed analogously to other scalar measures that are normally employed in medicine. Just like measuring the ejection fraction provides a rough but useful index of the heart’s capacity to sustain hemodynamic functions, measuring complexity may provide a rough but useful index to infer the brain’s ability to sustain consciousness. For example, detecting wakefulness-like complexity levels in the brain of a patient who is behaviorally unresponsive and inaccessible through ERPs indicates that this patient is disconnected on the output and/or input side rather than unconscious (Casarotto et al. 2016; Rohaut et al. 2017; Bayne et al. 2020a). Whether more subtle, monotonically varying changes in brain complexity are meaningful with respect to graded changes in conscious states is an open question (Cecconi et al. 2020; Bayne et al. 2020b). Answering this question would require not only performing measurements at the optimal spatiotemporal scale (see more about this below) but also a shared notion of levels of consciousness (Bayne et al. 2016; Mckilliam 2020). In this concern, early proposals have provisionally defined empirical measures of the coexistence of integration and differentiation as indices of the “capacity for” rather than of the “level of” consciousness (Massimini et al. 2009). As already noted above, this notion entails the general capacity for any kind of experience that is not necessarily associated with the cognitive operations typical of wakefulness. Indeed, high brain complexity can be detected in conscious conditions where the functional requirements of wakefulness are relaxed or absent, such as during dreaming and ketamine anesthesia (Sarasso et al. 2015; Casarotto et al. 2016).


Mechanisms of loss and recovery of complexity

As loss and recovery of consciousness can be reliably tracked by shifts in brain complexity in humans, it is crucial to explore the mechanisms of these changes at the neuronal level. For example, one may ask why, as multiple studies have demonstrated, complexity collapses when consciousness fades during sleep and anesthesia, structural connections remaining equal. Interestingly, recent studies have drawn connections between specific changes in postsynaptic properties of single neurons and the brain capacity for engaging in complex patterns of interactions. A first candidate mechanism, called neuronal bistability, is the tendency of cortical neurons to plunge into a silent, hyperpolarized state (OFF-period) upon receiving an input (Steriade et al. 1993). This tendency is due to adaptation mechanisms, which become prominent when activity-dependent potassium currents are stronger (Sanchez-Vives and McCormick 2000) or when the excitation/inhibition balance is shifted toward the latter (Funk et al. 2017). A wealth of animal studies has shown the occurrence of neuronal OFF-periods during sleep and anesthesia, where they are associated with the appearance of EEG slow waves (Steriade et al. 1993; Sanchez-Vives et al. 2017). Crucially, converging noninvasive and intracranial works in humans, rodents, and cortical slices (D’Andola et al. 2018; Comolatti et al. 2019; Dasilva et al. 2021) have recently demonstrated that neuronal OFF-periods determine a dramatic collapse of brain complexity (loss of both integration and differentiation), as measured by PCI, during NREM sleep and anesthesia. Perhaps even more relevant in the present context, a direct link between bistability and loss of complexity has also been demonstrated in brain-injured humans (Rosanova et al. 2018); not only the buildup of causal interactions and complexity is blocked by OFF-periods in unconscious patients but also both global brain complexity and consciousness recover when OFF-periods disappear.

In light of the above, it is not surprising that conditions characterized by low brain complexity tend to be associated with the presence of slow waves, as both are linked to neuronal bistability. However, interesting dissociations are also possible. For example, EEG macroscale recordings can be at once characterized by a predominant delta spectral power and preserved complexity (Frohlich et al. 2020; Darmani et al. 2021). This apparent paradox might be explained by a mixed pattern at the mesoscale level where focal but powerful cortical sources of slow waves emerge in a brain that is otherwise in a state of wake-like complexity (Frohlich et al. 2021). On the other hand, low brain complexity can be found in the absence of slow waves in the ongoing brain activity even when measured at a finer spatial scale. For example, pharmacologically increasing excitation without blocking bistability results in wake-like spectral features associated with low perturbational complexity assessed by means of electrical stimulation in cortical slices (D’Andola et al. 2018). This finding can be understood if one considers that bistability, due to its intrinsic activity-dependent nature, is a latent neuronal property that prevents the emergence of large-scale cause-effect chains supporting brain complexity even when slow waves are not present in the ongoing prestimulus activity.

Another candidate postsynaptic mechanism that may account for the disruption of brain complexity is the decoupling between the apical and basal dendritic compartment of Layer 5 pyramidal neurons (Takahashi et al. 2016; Aru et al. 2020). Experiments in rodents have shown that this gating occurs under different anesthetics and that it may be controlled by higher-order thalamic nuclei (Suzuki and Larkum 2020; Takahashi et al. 2020). Crucially, the apical compartment receives feedbacks from corticocortical and thalamocortical loops, whereas the basal compartment mainly receives the feedforward stream from specific areas lower in the processing hierarchy. This dendritic decoupling is, at least in principle, in a key position to break down recurrent interactions across distributed areas, thus impairing functional integration in the brain. To the extent that this effect can be demonstrated at the whole-brain level and generalized to other conditions (e.g. sleep and coma), it may point to a fundamental neuronal determinant of the changes in complexity that are observed upon loss and recovery of consciousness. It will be important for future studies to explore whether and how neuronal decoupling and bistability, which are nonmutually exclusive, interact during physiological, pharmacological, and pathological loss of consciousness.

The examples discussed above suggest that we may soon develop a multiscale understanding, from single neurons to global brain measures, of the mechanisms of loss and recovery of brain complexity during different states of consciousness. Such optimistic predictions are justified for at least two reasons. The first reason is the availability of animal models in which clinically relevant complexity indices, such as PCI (Arena et al. 2021; Dasilva et al. 2021; Barbero-Castillo et al. 2021) or the repertoire of fMRI dynamics (Barttfeld et al. 2015), can already be measured and manipulated. Lesioning and optogenetic interventions in these models may e.g. reveal whether there are specific groups of neurons that are more important than others in sustaining complexity and whether we can directly act upon these nodes. Importantly, animal models grant direct access to subcortical structures that may play a key role, such as the thalamus (Redinbaugh et al. 2020). The second reason for optimism is the parallel development of whole-brain, data-driven computer simulations in which changes in complexity across different brain states are explicitly modeled at multiple scales (Deco et al. 2015; Zamora-López et al. 2016; Goldman et al. 2019). This computational neuroscience approach aims at offering a mechanistic framework for characterizing brain states in terms of the underlying causal mechanisms and the resulting complexity. Although discussing the role of computer simulations is clearly beyond the scope of the present paper, it is perhaps important to highlight that this kind of modeling effort, specifically pursued within the Human Brain Project, also aims at predicting the effects of pharmacological and electromagnetic perturbations needed to force transitions between brain states (Zamora-López et al. 2016; Kringelbach and Deco 2020). In a long-term perspective, employing this multiscale approach encompassing animal and in silico models holds the promise that we might learn, one day, how to act on cellular targets in order to restore complexity and possibly consciousness in injured human brains.


Spatiotemporal scales of complexity

In humans, animal models, and computer simulations, complexity can be assessed at different spatiotemporal scales. As we have seen in the taxonomy section, neuroimaging studies of functional or effective connectivity in the brain examine interactions at the spatial level of voxels and at the temporal level of blood-oxygen fluctuations on the order of seconds. On the other hand, EEG-based measures of complexity explore a coarser spatial scale, but with much finer temporal sampling, on the order of milliseconds. These differences are expected to dramatically affect the estimation of brain complexity. For example, considering cortical areas at the time scale of seconds would necessarily minimize the estimates of differentiation by reducing the repertoire of possible states. At the other end of the spectrum, recordings of single neurons on a time window of a few milliseconds are likely to underestimate causal interactions, and thus integration, due to synaptic failures (Galarreta and Hestrin 1998), noise, and conduction delays (hundreds of milliseconds) characterizing large-scale communication. Where is the tradeoff? What is the optimal spatiotemporal grain at which measurements should be performed? Although recent advances in the mathematical analysis of multiscale systems have made progress in addressing the problem (Hoel et al. 2013, Rosas et al. 2020), determining in a principled way what counts as the “most appropriate” grain is of course very challenging.

Following the same logic that led to the identification of complexity as a relevant physical brain property, phenomenology may also guide the search for the optimal spatiotemporal scale. In this perspective, the appropriate grain at which complexity should be measured is the same spatiotemporal grain that is relevant for experience. For example, regarding time, there is a general agreement that an “instant” of experience is on the order of tens to hundreds of milliseconds rather than a few milliseconds or tens of seconds (Libet et al. 1991; Bachmann 2000; Holcombe 2009). Regarding space, experiments employing direct cortical stimulation in humans suggest that the minimal activated volume required to elicit phosphenes of different colors roughly corresponds to the size of a cortical minicolumn (Schmidt et al. 1996), whereas such color discrimination is lost when the activated volume is increased to the size of an hypercolumn (Tehovnik and Slocum 2007). Whether single neuron stimulation further increases perceptual differentiation or rather results in no perceptual effects at all is an important open question to be addressed in order to define the spatial grain at which neuronal interactions become relevant for consciousness. For the moment, taking into account minicolumns on a time window of hundreds of milliseconds may represent a reasonable starting point for measuring integration and differentiation in the brain. If we could work at such a scale, absolute complexity values would certainly skyrocket with respect to current readouts, making some justice to the actual complexity of the brain and allowing for more meaningful comparisons across experimental models, perhaps even between human and animal experiments.


Localization of complexity

Another key question is whether the relevant complexity is generated in specific parts of the brain. It is indeed very likely that while some structural and functional arrangements are well suited for optimizing the coexistence of integration and differentiation, others may not. An extreme example is offered by the cerebellum. In this structure, myriads of microzones process inputs and produce outputs that are only feedforward (with no excitatory reverberant activity) and largely independent. In spite of the richness of the inputs (vestibular, visual, somatosensory, auditory, motor etc.) that various modules receive and process at an extraordinary pace, the strictly modular structure of the cerebellum is inherently incompatible with integration and high levels of complexity. In essence, considering its internal architecture, it is very likely that the cerebellum is not a single entity capable of high complexity but just an aggregate of small independent modules each traversed by a different data stream. This may explain why lesions of the cerebellum, which has four times more neurons than the cerebral cortex (Herculano-Houzel 2012), do not seem to affect consciousness (Lemon and Edgley 2010). Future imaging and electrophysiological studies are warranted to empirically confirm the difference between cerebellar and neocortical circuits with respect to their capacity to generate the relevant complexity.

Whether significant differences in the capacity for complexity can also be found within the cerebral cortex is an open question. Indeed, the cytoarchitectonics and the intrinsic arrangement of connections varies largely also across cortical areas. Especially in the posterior cortex, connections within each area are organized in a grid-like manner and across areas in a pyramid-like, convergent-divergent manner (Salin and Bullier 1995). This kind of architecture leads to a high level of systematic overlap in the connections among neurons, giving rise to a core network that “hangs together” tightly—in other words, it is functionally highly integrated (Haun and Tononi 2019; Deco et al. 2021). By contrast, cortical areas in which neurons are organized into more segregated modules (akin to the cerebellum), or in which the connections are organized more randomly, with less overlap, may be much less integrated. Available empirical evidence from macroscopic EEG and fMRI recordings in humans and monkeys suggest that posterior cortical areas are more relevant than others. Overall, these studies performed in sleep, propofol anesthesia (Luppi et al. 2019; Hahn et al. 2021) and post-comatose patients (King et al. 2013; Sitt et al. 2014; Luppi et al. 2019) converge in showing that loss and recovery of consciousness corresponds to changes in complexity located in posterior cortical regions.

The question of whether these regions are privileged by virtue of their particular grid-like structure (characterized by high density of connections, strong local connectivity, patchiness in the connectivity, and large numbers of short reentrant circuits) has also theoretical relevance. This in view of the recent debate highlighting the apparent paradox that grid-like structures, such as artificial expander graphs, that are easy to build due to their low algorithmic structural complexity, can give rise to high levels of integrated information (Aaronson 2014). The fact that similar structures can be found within the human brain and that they are more represented in some regions than in others, offers a unique opportunity to tackle this problem empirically. Arguably, starting from us humans, in whom phenomenology and physics can be compared directly, represents a first, mandatory step to understand the relationship between circuit architecture, the relevant complexity, and consciousness. For example, testing experimentally in humans whether neural circuits connected in a grid-like manner are hot spots for complexity and whether they are fundamental for sustaining the presence of consciousness and account for phenomenal properties, such as the experience of extended space (Haun and Tononi 2019), would provide valuable data to inform theoretical debates.

Given the likelihood that complexity is generated in some part of the brain but not in others, an additional problem will be defining the borders of the relevant subset of elements and whether these boundaries can shift in physiological or pathological states of consciousness. The relevance of this problem was already clear in the original formulation of the DCH, which defined a strategy to identify, based on statistical dependence (see above), the functional cluster (Tononi et al. 1998) generating the relevant complexity. This has been further qualified by a causal perspective in the latest formulation of Integrated Information Theory (IIT) (Oizumi et al. 2014). In a nutshell, the problem boils down to finding the borders that include the subset of elements that generate more complexity than any other, smaller or larger, subset. Although we can safely assume that some structures such as the retina and the cerebellum with their intrinsic lack of integration would rest outside of these borders, in practice, it will be very difficult to identify sharp edges within the brain. In fact, the possibility that these may even cut across cortical layers or neuronal populations makes an exhaustive search a daunting proposition.


Dynamic and causal complexity

As already noted above, the example of the cerebellum is noteworthy as it suggests that some brain structures that are well suited for supporting important functions, and from which we can decode neural activity relevant to behavior (Jiang et al. 2015a; Friston and Herreros 2016), may not be necessary for consciousness because they do not have the appropriate internal causal structure. Although, to an external observer, the dynamics of cerebellar activity may seem complex, a causal approach by perturbing single microzones and by recording from the rest of the cerebellum is expected to reveal minimal interactions across modules and minimal complexity. In general, the possibility of a dissociation between complexity measures derived from the observation of ongoing brain dynamics and those based on the assessment of the underlying causal structure has interesting implications. Indeed, besides the intuitable case of the cerebellum, one can also conceive and test cases in which the opposite dissociation might occur, i.e. low dynamical complexity in ongoing activity with a concomitant high complexity of the underlying causal structure. For example, while measures of ongoing complexity tend to decrease when conscious subjects close their eyes and alpha rhythm becomes dominant (Stam et al. 1993), the perturbational complexity index does not change and remains high whether eyes are opened or closed (Casali et al. 2013). Perhaps more interestingly, one could even consider experiments investigating states of “pure consciousness” (Sullivan 1995), also known as “naked awareness” or “pure presence.” These conditions, whose phenomenology is well described by the century-old tradition of meditation practices, are characterized by a vividly present awareness yet devoid of any perceptual object and occur without monitoring the environment or self or attending to any particular content, as well as in the absence of reasoning and behaviors. How would these states, in which consciousness is vividly present while little function is performed and little information is being processed look like in terms of complexity measures? The limited literature currently available during meditation provide evidence of a reduction of complexity in the stream of observable ongoing brain dynamics (Aftanas and Golocheikine 2002; Irrmischer et al. 2018; Escrichs et al. 2019), whereas perturbation measures with TMS-EEG suggest the presence of a preserved underlying causal structure (Bodart et al. 2018a). Future studies, systematically performing these kinds of comparisons within the same individual will be very important to further define the practical implications inherent to the different approaches (e.g. observational vs perturbational) highlighted in the taxonomy section.


Conclusion

To conclude, we would like to suggest how the body of convergent results highlighted by the present review may easily coalesce in a front where the field has a tangible opportunity to advance. For example, refining methods for measuring complexity, comparing their accuracy, and identifying their neuronal determinants at the appropriate spatiotemporal scale are practical steps within reach. These will be key to improve the way we assess consciousness and to gain the mechanistic insight needed to promote its recovery in pathological conditions.

Besides practical implications, connecting the dots of an interesting trajectory spanning a few decades of consciousness research bears conceptual relevance. In this respect, the early principles linking consciousness to complexity (Tononi and Edelman 1998) not only did provide a useful reference to provisionally taxonomize current empirical metrics but may also represent an interesting basis for future exchanges among different theoretical frameworks. For example, besides the Integrated Information Theory (Tononi 2004), which represents the direct evolution of the DCH, other frameworks, such as the Global Neuronal Workspace, the Kolmogorov Complexity Theory of Consciousness, and the Free Energy Principle, have more recently embraced, albeit starting from different premises, an explicit complexity-related framework (Dehaene et al. 2014; Ruffini 2017; Friston et al. 2020). Hence, while the focus on functional integration and differentiation seems to now constitute a common ground, other elements discussed in the present review may offer a concrete opportunity to explore interesting differences.

In this vein, one may ask a few specific questions. How do the different frameworks operationally define the boundaries of the subset of neurons generating the relevant complexity? The localization and extent of the physical substrate of consciousness is likely to differ depending on the way one answers this question. Also, why do some theories focus on the complexity of ongoing observable neuronal dynamics, whereas others emphasize the complexity of the underlying causal structure? It will be key to clarify this aspect, as it entails a substantially different understanding of the kind of information that matters for consciousness, extrinsic in the first case, intrinsic in the latter (Searle 2013; Koch and Tononi 2013). Finally, how do current theories consider the possibility that phenomenology-inspired principles related to complexity may be useful also in the search for content-specific neural correlates of consciousness? Asking this may sound premature now, but attempts have been made in this direction (Haun and Tononi 2019), and major initiatives, such as the Templeton Foundation’s Structured Adversarial Collaboration project, are in place to judge their merit.

Altogether, by considering the past positive trend highlighted in this review, we should all feel encouraged to face these kinds of questions head-on and to put forward specific principles and predictions, even if perceived as counterintuitive and hard to test at present. To the extent that these are both precise and daring, there are reasons to believe that they will likely be useful in 20 years from now.


Contributor Information

Simone Sarasso, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences ‘L. Sacco’, University of Milan, Milan 20157, Italy.

Adenauer Girardi Casali, Instituto de Ciência e Tecnologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Sao Jose dos Campos, 12247-014, Brazil.

Silvia Casarotto, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences ‘L. Sacco’, University of Milan, Milan 20157, Italy; IRCCS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi ONLUS, Milan 20148, Italy.

Mario Rosanova, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences ‘L. Sacco’, University of Milan, Milan 20157, Italy.

Corrado Sinigaglia, Department of Philosophy, University of Milan, Milan 20122, Italy.

Marcello Massimini, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences ‘L. Sacco’, University of Milan, Milan 20157, Italy; IRCCS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi ONLUS, Milan 20148, Italy.


Conflict of interest statement

None declared.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

There is no data associated with this manuscript.


Time consciousness: the missing link in theories of consciousness

Lachlan Kent, Marc Wittmann — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8042366, CC BY 4.0.

There are plenty of issues to be solved in order for researchers to agree on a neural model of consciousness. Here we emphasize an often under-represented aspect in the debate: time consciousness. Consciousness and the present moment both extend in time. Experience flows through a succession of moments and progresses from future predictions, to present experiences, to past memories. However, a brief review finds that many dominant theories of consciousness only refer to brief, static, and discrete “functional moments” of time. Very few refer to more extended, dynamic, and continuous time, which is associated with conscious experience (cf. the “experienced moment”). This confusion between short and discrete versus long and continuous is, we argue, one of the core issues in theories of consciousness. Given the lack of work dedicated to time consciousness, its study could test novel predictions of rival theories of consciousness. It may be that different theories of consciousness are compatible/complementary if the different aspects of time are taken into account. Or, if it turns out that no existing theory can fully accommodate time consciousness, then perhaps it has something new to add. Regardless of outcome, the crucial step is to make subjective time a central object of study.

Keywords: time consciousness, time passage, experienced present, consciousness theories


Introduction

The recent ascent of theories of consciousness has undoubtedly raised the stakes regarding fundamental aspects of experience and reality. Within this high-stakes environment, where competing or even adversarial perspectives are vying for ascendancy, the fundamentals in questions have to be clear, concise, and consistent. One prime example is time or, in its context-specific form, time consciousness. While there is a prevailing consensus in the field that consciousness is extended in time (Northoff and Lamme 2020), in our opinion as dedicated time researchers, it is not yet extended enough. Decades of timing research supports a “minimally sufficient” duration for time consciousness somewhere in the seconds’ range (Fraisse 1984; Pöppel 1989, Varela 1999; Wittmann 2011; Kent 2019), but most theories and methodologies in consciousness science only focus on the hundreds-of-milliseconds’ range (Northoff and Lamme 2020). As such, we claim that current theories do not adequately address time as a fundamental aspect of conscious experience. The discrete “timing” of brief neural, perceptual, and behavioral functioning cannot hope to explain time consciousness when, from a prevailing phenomenological viewpoint, it is neither discrete nor brief (Wittmann 2016; Dorato and Wittmann 2020).

One possible misconception at the root of this problem is that time consciousness is synonymous with the timing of behavior, perception, and other stimulus-based responses or event-based experiences. Timing and other nonconscious aspects of time perception should not be confused or conflated with time consciousness itself, which can be defined as the conscious experience of time, as opposed to events (e.g. a perceptual stimulus) that merely happen at specific times (Kent 2019). This distinction is about the general feeling we have of time passing from the future to the past (sometimes as the impression of time passing slowly or fast), on the one hand, and the sensorimotor timing of behavior in relation to the duration of specific events, on the other hand. The former is concerned with the phenomenal impression of subjective passage of time, the latter with the comparison between subjective duration and objective clock time, i.e. the accuracy of estimating the duration of an event.

Taking a neuroscientific approach as well, there are in fact three separable but interdependent “times” at play in the study of time consciousness—neural temporal dynamics, functional timing of perception/thought/behavior, etc., and the phenomenal experience of time—all of which must be addressed in any general neuroscientific theory of consciousness. The goal must be to arrive at a theory that simultaneously explains how underlying neural dynamics in time generate a conscious experience of time, how the experience of time affects how people perceive, think or act at specific times, and how those perceptions, thoughts, and actions feedback to shape (or a complementary to) the underlying neural (temporal) dynamics and conscious experience. Neural, functional, and phenomenal aspects of time need to be triangulated in order to understand the key features of time consciousness, two of which we focus on below—namely, extension/duration and continuity/flow.


Time Consciousness Is Grounded in Phenomenology

William James’ (1890) “stream of consciousness” and Edmund Husserl’s (1928) “inner time consciousness” attempt to explicate phenomenologically that all experience happens within an extended present, a unified temporal and spatial whole of experience, within which the unfolding of events, time passage, happens. The experienced present is extended as it carries an event’s history and possible future within the implicit temporal structure of consciousness (Lloyd 2012). Edmund Husserl (1928, 32) writes about the duration of the temporal field, “which is manifestly limited, precisely as in perception’s case. Indeed, on the whole, one might dare to assert that the temporal field always has the same extensions.” As empirical researchers we may ask what the extension of this field of consciousness is, e.g. in units of clock time. Some contemporary theorists deny that consciousness extends over a relatively fixed “specious present” on either empirical (White 2017) or philosophical (Arstila 2018) grounds. It is by no means a settled question, but the early phenomenological and experimental studies of Husserl (1928) and James (1890) are supported by contemporary theory and research (Zahavi 2005; Lloyd 2012; Berkovich-Ohana and Glicksohn 2014; Northoff 2016). If consciousness is extended in time and possesses the experiential quality of time passage, we have to probe neural and functional theories of consciousness concerning their answers to this issue.

Building on Husserl’s and others’ phenomenological conception, three temporal aspects of conscious experience can be discerned, two of which we will address in our article, namely the extended present, time passage or flow, and one which we will not address in detail, namely the tripartite structure concerning past, present, and future. These aspects have been related to neuronal and psychological properties in empirical science. First, an experienced present has been operationalized to account for the feeling of an extended now and sensorimotor integration with perception and behavior (Pöppel 1997; Wittmann 2011; Tschacher et al. 2013; Kent 2019). As Edelman (1991, 92) argues, the constant flux and variation of incoming sensory signals necessitate a temporal organization, a “cohesion in a given period of time” potentially afforded through reentrant processing, for primary consciousness to arise. Second, experimental paradigms have been set up to account for the feeling of time passage in healthy individuals and the corresponding experiential and functional breakdown in patients with schizophrenia (Lalanne et al. 2010; Martin et al. 2014). Unconscious processes may enable us to follow information over time with high temporal accuracy and at the same time contribute to our feeling of time passage (Elliott and Giersch 2016). Third, human experience can be categorized into the temporal domains of past, present, and future which on a sensorimotor-processing level correspond to the cognitive functions of working memory, interference control, and preparatory set, respectively (Fuster 2003), and arguably to Husserl’s phenomenological notion of retention, impression, and protention (Vogeley and Kupke 2006).


Duration: Time Consciousness Is Extended

The orthodox view in the cognitive neurosciences is that time consciousness extends over a duration between a few hundred milliseconds and a few seconds over what is otherwise called the “experienced moment” or “subjective present” (Pöppel 1997; Wittmann 2011; Kent 2019). Experimental findings discussed in the above reviews indicate that the perception of external events is automatically segmented into units with a duration of a few seconds such as when listening to sequences of beats, when viewing ambiguous figures, or when viewing distorted naturalistic visual sequences (Nakajima et al. 1980; Fairhall et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2016; Kornmeier et al. 2019). These special stimulations are supposed to be limit cases of general processing mechanisms which temporally structure all of our perception and action (Pöppel 1997). Sensorimotor synchronization to external events is effortless and most accurate when one has to time movements to regular events with intervals not exceeding three seconds (Mates et al. 1994; McAuley et al. 2006). There is a debate concerning the question whether several independent mechanisms with variable duration underlie all these different experimental paradigms (White 2017), they nevertheless point to a similar time range and could be related to what Husserl termed the “temporal field” of an experienced present. Humphrey (1992) similarly advocates the idea of present moment-ness. According to him, repeated feedback processes of neural sensory-motor loops induce perceptual content, which is extended over time. Consciousness thereafter is “thick,” i.e. an extended perception of what is out there.

Empirical evidence stemming from behavior analysis and using brain imaging technology has identified neural integration processes on different time scales. These temporal integration processes define how long a given event proactively influences moment-to-moment neural activity stimulated by continuous visual and acoustic input (Hasson et al. 2008; Lerner et al. 2011). However, one has to be careful in identifying subjective experience with neural integration processes, as the latter might represent functional properties of the brain unrelated to the experienced present (Lockwood 2005). This principle applies at all timescales of human experience, too. We have (conscious) experiences that span hours, days, and even decades, but this should not be identified solely with temporal integration processes given that there are memory and other higher-order processes involved (Kent et al. 2019). This is the decisive goal for forthcoming research: if possible, to identify the exact neural correlates of present moment experience. Importantly, the neural mechanisms underlying consciousness are not stimulus bound but act in a top-down anticipatory fashion. “When in a conscious state, experience will unfold regardless of specific stimulation, because stimulation is no strict requirement for conscious experience given the predictive inferential machinery” (Fekete et al. 2018, 7).

Notwithstanding recent neuro-phenomenal work in time consciousness that seeks to explain the “width of present” in terms of the continuous, singular nature of conscious experience (Northoff 2016), we argue in this article that all other theories of consciousness are generally confined to the functional moment because they are derived from methods that restrict activity within that short timescale range. In their review article on eight different neural theories of consciousness, Northoff and Lamme (2020) show that only Northoff’s (2016, Northoff and Huang 2017) Temporo-spatial theory of consciousness (TTC) explicitly incorporates temporal integration mechanisms on longer time scales of seconds to minutes duration. The other theories only address short temporal integration on the millisecond level, i.e. between 100 and 300 ms. We argue that this confinement leads to intractable problems within and between theories of consciousness, citing the recent controversy surrounding the “unfolding argument” as a prime example (Kleiner 2019; Doerig et al. 2019b; Ganesh 2020; Negro 2020; Tsuchiya et al. 2020).


Flow: Time Consciousness Is Continuous

Whatever the actual extent of the experienced moment and its underlying neural mechanisms, the original and principal distinction captured in the concept of time consciousness is between punctate, point-like present moments (plural) on the one hand, and the integration of those moments into an extended, field-like present moment (singular) on the other hand (Montemayor and Wittmann 2014). Perception and action evolve as discontinuous processing of discrete momentary units (Pöppel et al. 1990; Dehaene 1993; VanRullen and Koch 2003). These moments are characterized by the idea of co-temporality, events within such a time unit have no before–after relation (Ruhnau 1995). Speech recognition, e.g. is enabled through the 3–6 Hz segmentation of the continuous speech stream into temporal units for perceptual and linguistic analyses (Teng et al. 2019). Neural microstates as recorded by electroencephalogram of around 125 ms duration have, e.g. been discussed as potential critical time windows, as “atoms of thought” which functionally integrate neural events across the cortex (Lehmann et al. 1998; Milz et al. 2016). These nonconscious, discrete “functional moments” are ascribed by their dynamic range over a few hundred milliseconds, as opposed to the latter conscious and continuous “experienced moment” that ranges over a few seconds (Stern 1897; Fraisse 1984; Pöppel 1997; Varela 1999).

In short, continuity entails temporal flow between discrete temporal units. Discrete time refers only to a minimally extended present that can be thought of as a basic temporal “unit” (cf. a functional moment). Discreteness does not apply to a maximally extended present that requires passage or flow between discrete time units. Such maximal extension is continuous by definition, in that it could not possibly be otherwise because it entails the co-consciousness of percepts that are not simultaneous (cf. co-temporal, as above). That is, extended experiences exhibit temporally ordered structure but are nevertheless perceived as a unified whole (Kiverstein and Arstila 2013; Dorato and Wittmann 2020). An example often cited is how people hear the musical phrase “Hey Jude” within a separable but unified perceptual whole that holds both discrete units, “Hey” and “Jude,” within the same continuous experience of the full “Hey Jude” phrase (Lloyd 2012).

Any theory of consciousness that aims to include time consciousness must therefore explain how the brain achieves this feat at a neural level. Our analysis below suggests that, with only one or two exceptions (Northoff and Lamme 2020), many of the leading candidate theories cannot explain continuity or flow because they are methodologically (and thus theoretically) constrained to short, discrete, nonconscious functional moments.


Consciousness, Time, and Self: The Importance of No-Stimulus Paradigms

Theories of consciousness have been constrained methodologically. Prevailing research methods almost exclusively use stimulus-based paradigms when searching for the neural correlates of consciousness (NCCs; Koch 2004) but time itself is not consistently controlled in the vast majority of experiments and not in-keeping with current notions regarding the actual extension (cf. duration) of conscious experience. Temporal processing of stimuli can be probed in specific tests (i.e. gap detection, temporal order judgements, stimulus duration perception), typically in the order of milliseconds to a few seconds, but “no-stimulus” paradigms can be devised to judge empty intervals of much longer duration (Thönes and Stocker 2019). Such experimental setups, e.g. are those where one has to wait through a period of time for something to happen or to end. Temporal judgments and prediction in these studies can range from the sub-second (Martin et al. 2017), to the multiple second (Röhricht et al. 2018), and several minutes’ range (Pfeifer and Wittmann 2020).

It is therefore possible to close the gap between theories of consciousness and time consciousness by using “no-stimulus” paradigms which strike at the common heart of time, self, and conscious experience. “No-stimulus” paradigms are central to the study of time consciousness because research has demonstrated that time perception, especially of longer duration, is intimately linked to the perception of self as unfolding over time, such that an increased awareness of self corresponds to an increased awareness of time, and vice versa (Wittmann 2015). Whether this is tied to the basic, immediate, embodied sense of self-hood akin to interoceptive cues over short timescales from a few-hundred milliseconds up to several seconds (Craig 2009a, b; van Wassenhove et al. 2011), or the narrative, autobiographical sense of self-hood spanning longer timescales of months, years, and decades (Conway et al. 2004; Bird and Reese 2006), both types of self-awareness are central, if not necessary, to any definition of consciousness as “what it is like to be something” (Nagel 1974). A disturbed sense of self is typically associated with a disturbed sense of time (Fuchs 2013; Martin et al. 2014).


Summary of Time Consciousness

Time is a complex topic, especially for the uninitiated who specialize in general theories of consciousness. Before discussing time in theories of consciousness, it may help to review the key aspects of time consciousness:

Time consciousness should not be: (i) confused with timing of cognitive functions; or (ii) identified with all timescales of temporal integration.

Time consciousness extends over multiple seconds, not just a few-hundred milliseconds.

Time consciousness is not discrete or point-like (i.e. it does not “happen” at a particular time) but rather field-like (i.e. it contains multiple points that happen at different times but are nevertheless experienced together).

Short and discrete “functional moments” that are nonconscious are integrated into longer and continuous “experienced moments” that are conscious.

This continuous integration results in the phenomenal sense of temporal flow in conscious experience.

Neuroscientific approaches to consciousness do not apply these established principles of time consciousness consistently and so theories of consciousness and time consciousness are potentially incommensurate.


Short, Discrete, and Static: The Current Status of Time in Theories of Consciousness

After a proliferation of alternative theories of consciousness in recent decades, the current trend is toward parsimony through synthesis (Waade et al. 2020), standardization (Graziano et al. 2020), or direct competition (Reardon 2019). In this vein, Northoff and Lamme (2020) reviewed the convergence between eight theories of consciousness (i.e. integrated information theory [IIT], global neuronal workspace theory [GNWT], predictive coding theory [PCT], recurrent processing theory [RPT], embodied theory [ET], synchrony theory [ST], higher-order thought theory [HOT], and temporospatial theory [TTC]) and included details about the “timing of consciousness”. While TTC, ET, PCT, and HOT were less constrained, their review found that major theories such as IIT, GNWT, RPT, and ST were concerned only with narrow timescales between approximately 100 and 300 ms. They noted that GNWT deals with comparatively “late” processing that is beyond 300 ms but, as discussed below, in reality, this late processing does not extend sufficiently far beyond 300 ms into the seconds’ range.

Their analysis further hints at the possibility that GNWT, RPT, and ST may be methodologically constrained by a shared reliance on stimulus-based paradigms such as masking, binocular rivalry, change/inattentional blindness, attentional blink, and so on (Northoff and Lamme 2020). The reason why IIT is limited to particular timescales under 100 ms is less clear but, regardless of the reasons why, the fact remains that several of the most prominent theories of consciousness do not currently allow enough time for extended and continuous time consciousness to occur. On the plus side, some theories seem compatible with time consciousness (i.e. ET, PCT, and HOT) and TTC (Northoff and Huang 2017) is firmly dedicated to more expansive timescales of consciousness, including infra-slow (0.0001–0.1 Hz) and slow (0.1–1 Hz) neural oscillations. But there is still scope for improvement, especially for prominent theories like IIT and GNWT. These two theories will now be explored in detail in relation to controversies surrounding the “unfolding argument” and discrete versus continuous perception (Doerig et al. 2019a,b; Drissi-Daoudi et al. 2019).


Time Consciousness in IIT and GNWT

IIT posits a mathematical framework for the quality and quantity of consciousness from a phenomenological starting point that details properties of conscious experience (cf. intrinsicality, composition, information, integration, and exclusion; Tononi et al. 2016). The last of these properties, exclusion (cf. experience is definite in its content and spatiotemporal grain), grapples with phenomenal aspects of time consciousness in terms of duration and flow. In recent formulations of the theory, Tononi and Koch (2015, 6) state clearly that “experience flows at a particular speed—each experience encompassing a hundred milliseconds or so—but I am not having experience that encompasses just a few milliseconds or instead minutes or hours.” This particular estimate of a hundred milliseconds is shorter than most estimates from time consciousness research (Kent 2019; Dorato and Wittmann 2020) and so we would question whether time as operationalized in IIT is indeed a phenomenologically extended present (cf. experienced moment). Tononi et al. (2016) later expanded this estimate to state that the “duration of the instant of consciousness is also definite, ranging from a few tens of milliseconds to a few hundred milliseconds, rather than lasting a few microseconds or a few minutes” (p. 452), but even this timescale remains within only the lower proposed ranges of the experienced moment (Kent 2019) and is still framed as a discrete, duration-less “instant” of time. IIT falls short of the standard operational definition of time consciousness ranging between durations of a few hundred milliseconds up to a few seconds.

Interestingly, this constraint was not as evident in earlier formulations of IIT. Tononi (2004) was fully aware of the need to specify “the time requirements on neural interactions that support consciousness” if, according to the theory, “each particular conscious experience is specified by the value, at any given time, of the variables mediating informational interactions among the elements of a complex” (cf. the value of Φ or “phi”, p. 1, emphasis added). Tononi (2004, 3) acknowledged the difference in duration between functional moments and the experienced moment, and also the issue of discrete versus continuous experience:

Studies of how a percept is progressively specified and stabilized – a process called microgenesis – indicate that it takes up to 100–200 milliseconds to develop a fully formed sensory experience, and that the surfacing of a conscious thought may take even longer… Other evidence indicates that a single conscious moment does not extend beyond 2–3 seconds…While it is arguable whether conscious experience unfolds more akin to a series of discrete snapshots or to a continuous flow, its time scale is certainly comprised between these lower and upper limits. Thus, a phenomenological analysis indicates that consciousness has to do with the ability to integrate a large amount of information, and that such integration occurs at a characteristic spatio-temporal scale.

The question, then, is why there has been a shift in emphasis between earlier and later versions of IIT. Consistent with Tononi et al. (2016), the review by Northoff and Lamme (2020) concluded that IIT concerned only early processing after stimulus onset (100–300 ms). The key is “after stimulus onset,” meaning that the methodological application of IIT has constrained the theory due to the reliance on stimulus-based paradigms. It is not within the scope of this article to explore the temporal characteristics of these methodologies in detail, and so we take it on face value (i.e. the authors’ words and reviewers’ findings) that IIT deals almost exclusively with short, discrete functional moments, despite Tononi (2004) acknowledging that a “single conscious moment” can extend up to a few seconds. As Fekete et al. (2016) point out, IIT needs to show how the property of exclusion is dynamic and continuous over a typical spatiotemporal grain of experience across spatial and temporal scales.

The impact of this issue for IIT may extend beyond mere methodology, too. In order to calculate a value of Φ and the quantity of consciousness “at any given time,” IIT relies on a synchronic, summative approach that assumes a point-like value at time t. This can then be compared with another time t' and a conclusion can be made about the amount of consciousness based on comparison between the two timepoints. This is a problem for time consciousness that is field-like as opposed to point-like, because a temporal field contains multiple points, and so multiple Φ’s, meaning that the value of Φ “at any given time” is not a single value that can be compared veridically. Using an alternative non-synchronic (i.e. diachronic), nonsummative approach to calculating Φ requires a notion of dynamic change or spread of values. In TTC, Northoff and Huang (2017) use a measure of intrinsic temporal autocorrelation of neural activity spanning across multiple timescales from milliseconds, to seconds, to minutes to describe a “repertoire” of “scale-free dynamics” that is not bound to the onset of a paradigmatic stimulus. This approach has already been applied to explain the breakdown of consciousness in general anesthesia (Zhang et al. 2018), and isolated studies have examined resting-state functional temporal dynamics during sleep in relation to IIT and GNWT (Tagliazucchi et al. 2013). Perhaps IIT (and GNWT and other theories of consciousness) could better utilize this kind of temporal scale-free approach to calculating Φ and, in doing so, return to the expanded timescales of conscious experience cited in early formulations of the theory (Tononi 2004). The important feature is that dynamics need to be construed over a continuous range of hierarchically nested timescales with a particular spatiotemporal grain (Fekete et al. 2016; Kent et al. 2019).

Such an approach could also help to clarify or resolve controversies such as the recent “unfolding argument” proposed by Doerig et al. (2019b), which criticized IIT and other causal structure theories of consciousness on the grounds that recurrent feedback neural networks could be “unfolded” (i.e. either partly or wholly replaced) by nonrecursive feedforward neural networks, undermining the central claim of IIT that recurrent networks are a necessary feature of consciousness. It is important to note that the authors use “unfolding” in a spatial sense, rather than temporal. A system is unfolded into n + m layers if it functions the same as a recurrent system with only n layers. So the unfolding only adds spatial layers to the configuration. Temporally, this unfolding still happens within discrete moments of time such that the system receives an input (I) at time t and then later gives an output (O) at time t'. Both recurrent and feedforward systems can do this (for every I and O), so the difference is in how they do it (cf. internal spatial organization), not when.

While not a major theme within the many responses to the unfolding argument to-date (Kleiner 2019; Ganesh 2020; Negro 2020; Tsuchiya et al. 2020), we believe that discrete time (i.e. time t and t') is at the core of this controversy. Doerig et al., the authors of the unfolding argument, are also proponents of discrete over continuous perception (Doerig et al. 2019a; Drissi-Daoudi et al. 2019; Herzog et al. 2020), a position which seems to align with their views on consciousness. They recently proposed hard criteria for theories of consciousness, and evaluated existing theories against these criteria, without addressing the distinction between discrete perception versus continuous experience (cf. perception and action, as above) (Doerig et al. 2020). The problem is not that the issue is unresolved, the mechanisms behind continuous perception remain opaque, but that the authors maintain both positions (cf. unfolding in space and discreteness in time) from a common philosophical standpoint that explicitly denies phenomenological grounding:

(T)emporal features, such as motion, are not consciously perceived while they occur. They are not even perceived over an extended period of time, but are encoded as any other feature, such as colour or shape, by a static label. For example, motion is not represented by a signal that moves in time but by the output of a motion detector. (Doerig et al. 2019a, 2; emphasis in original)

Time in their view is static, discrete, and restricted to short timescales (depending perhaps upon unconscious, quasidynamic processes which are integrated into discrete moments with duration up to 450 ms; Herzog et al. 2016) but, as above, this is at odds with time consciousness or would necessitate an additional mechanisms to account for functional and phenomenal temporal integration over several seconds. Like IIT, discrete perception here is equivalent to functional moments, which are short, discrete, preconscious building blocks that define simultaneity. Doerig et al. (2019a) make their opposition to phenomenal continuity explicit by denying that any experience of motion is extended in time:

The question about the time course of perception directly relates to the question of qualia. As mentioned, motion detection does not need to be coded by a dynamically changing representation. What about motion experiences? In our model, the experience of motion does not extend in time, it only seems to. (Doerig et al. 2019a, 3; emphasis in original)

From a phenomenological standpoint of time consciousness, the very fact that motion “seems to” extend in time is the very thing that needs to be explained (subjective experience). Ultimately, the authors concede their position is based on philosophical underpinnings that approximate the illusionist position of Dennett (2016) and Frankish (2016).

Proponents of IIT could counter these claims by abandoning the synchronic calculation of Φ in favor of a more dynamic, diachronic definition of integrated information. This empirical shift could bridge the ideological divide and seeming philosophical impasse between qualia realism and illusionism, as well as those who deny or affirm a phenomenology-first approach. If IIT predictions do not accord with the integration of information and conscious states over timescales of the experienced present, which is extended, then those predictions and some of the theory could be considered falsified. In response to the unfolding argument, Negro (2020, 7) proposes that IIT would be at least partially falsified if “the informational structure did not change at the same temporal scale of the stimulus and the phenomenal experience, or, even worse, if it did not change at all.” This is because causal structure theories like IIT require strict isomorphism between phenomenal and physical structures (Tsuchiya et al. 2020). Taking the stimulus out of the picture, the phenomenology of time consciousness also requires that the informational structure be extended and made continuous in order to achieve that strict isomorphism.

The GNWT proposes that a high-level unified space, where information is shared and broadcast back to lower processing levels, providing global access to a range of nonconscious perceptual, memory, attentional, motor, and evaluative aspects of conscious experience (Dehaene and Changeux 2011). The authors characterize the top-down integrative process as “slow and late” (Dehaene and Changeux 2011, 215), but not slow or late enough to be considered within the timescale of the experienced moment:

A strong statement of the proposed theoretical synthesis is that early bottom-up sensory events, prior to global ignition (< 200–300 ms), contribute solely to nonconscious percept construction and do not systematically distinguish consciously seen from unseen stimuli […] Whether it takes 200 ms, 300 ms, or even more, the slow and integrative nature of conscious perception is confirmed behaviorally by observations such as the ‘‘rabbit illusion’’ and its variants […], where the way in which a stimulus is ultimately perceived is influenced by poststimulus events arising several hundreds of milliseconds after the original stimulus. Psychophysical paradigms that rely on quickly alternating stimuli confirm that conscious perception integrates over ∼100 ms or more, while nonconscious perception is comparatively much faster […]. Thus, whether externally induced or internally generated, the ‘‘stream of consciousness’’ may consist in a series of slow, global, and transiently stable cortical states.” (Dehaene and Changeux 2011, 215)

Besides being brief, the visual masking, attentional blink, inattentional blindness and other paradigms used to test GNWT focus primarily on stimulus-related neural processing (P300 or P3b) associated with the “global ignition” of a conscious percept (Northoff and Lamme 2020), which imposes only a discrete functional “cut-off” point. While the authors of GNWT refer to the “stream of consciousness” as a series of cortical states, the fact that it is only a series confirms that global ignition refers to discrete (functional) moments and does not propose a basis for the continuity of time consciousness. More recent experimental work in the GNWT tradition continues this trend by locating discrete all-or-none temporal sampling of visual information at around the 350-ms timescale range (Marti and Dehaene 2017). Again, this emphasis on discreteness is probably related to the short timescale range of the durations involved that span the upper limit of functional moments (Kent 2019).

It is clear that both IIT and GNWT are not currently amenable to the notion of an extended or continuous time consciousness as outlined above. The functional moment as captured by these two theories is too instantaneous, short, and discrete to capture the phenomenology of time (Dorato and Wittmann 2020). That is a strong claim but to take phenomenology seriously in consciousness research means grounding experimental findings in first-person accounts of their own (cf. our own) experience (Negro 2020). Do you/I/we experience discrete or continuous temporal flow? Is the stream of consciousness static and merely sequential, like a frame-by-frame cinematic film that “creates” motion above a certain frame rate, or is it dynamic and continuously unfolding in time?

Phenomenological research in time consciousness holds that discrete conscious perception at shorter millisecond timescales is complemented by continuous conscious experience (cf. both perception and action) at supra-second timescales (Dorato and Wittmann, 2020), but the latter is not properly addressed in current theories of consciousness like IIT and GNWT. illustrates the current state of theories of theories of consciousness like IIT and GNWT in relation to time consciousness research, showing how discrete events (cf. functional moments) create a stream of consciousness that flows from right to left, and also how consciousness (cf. the experienced moment) extends across multiple events in order to create time consciousness that is long, continuous, and dynamic.


Long, Continuous, and Dynamic: Time Consciousness Can Remedy (Literal) Shortcomings in Theories of Consciousness

Even researchers who deny (or more implicitly ignore) meaningful phenomenological analyses nevertheless still rely on subjective experience when interpreting experimental results (e.g. “seeing” a target, or not). To accommodate this epistemological fact, and in sympathy with the complementary notion regarding consciousness by Velmans (2009), we propose a triadic approach to time that simultaneously explains phenomenal, behavioral, and neural dimensionality in cognitive neuroscience, in general, and in consciousness research, in particular. Other recent proposals share this 3-fold emphasis and come to similar conclusions regarding the issues IIT faces around discrete versus continuous time (Winters 2020). A pertinent example of this type of approach is in how Schmidt et al. (2016) parse out the neural, phenomenological, and behavioral/psychological aspects of the Libet paradigm to conclude that slow cortical potentials represent dynamic changes in “readiness” to act and not, as some argue, a discrete “moment” of conscious decision-making.

Such a triadic approach could serve as a stage for some of the adversarial exchanges that are taking place between theories like IIT and GNWT (Reardon 2019). This is especially true given that both IIT and GNWT have thus far concentrated on functional moments. If, e.g. GNWT was able to explain what IIT could not, given that it is not prone to the same isomorphic requirements (Negro 2020; Tsuchiya et al. 2020), then an experimental result could clearly favor one theory over the other.

Time consciousness could thus help to resolve the phenomenological disconnect in consciousness science. The main advantage of studies into time consciousness over other methodological approaches is that, whereas qualia are not at all instantiated in neural activity (e.g. neurons need not recreate the color red in a Cartesian theatre), time is. It is therefore possible to describe, not just a neural correlate, but also a neural basis or a neural mechanism of time consciousness. This could be an important stepping-stone toward more general neural mechanisms or bases for phenomenal consciousness itself, so long as the neural activity is sufficiently extended. Time consciousness could be operationalized as an empirical subject of enquiry without falling into the trap, highlighted above, of qualia realism versus illusionism. Borrowing the language of Doerig et al. (2019a) above, it simply cannot be that time consciousness only “seems” to extend in time, unless one would also like to deny that time exists, which is a position that seems untenable. The experience of time is not a quale in the strict sense of the word, and experienced moments are not qualia. Time is more abstract like space, number, size, and other magnitudes that one can derive from or apply to qualia (Bueti and Walsh 2009) and so time forms part of the perceptual field within which qualia contents are experienced (Dorato and Wittmann 2020).

We have discussed the experienced moment a lot in this article but there is a longer form of phenomenal experience called “mental presence” that maintains cognitive operations and emotional feelings through working memory activity over approximately 30 s, as it is related to working-memory span (Wittmann 2011; Dorato and Wittmann 2015). “Working memory provides a temporal bridge between events—both those that are internally generated and environmentally presented—thereby conferring a sense of unity and continuity to conscious experience” (Goldman-Rakic, 1997, 559). Northoff and Huang (2017) propose that the TTC extends conscious activity over even longer timeframes, perhaps up to hours in duration, which suggests possible parallels between long-term and lifelong memory abilities and long-term and lifelong modes of experience (Kent et al. 2019). Whatever the upper limit, what is clear is that synchronic, discrete time represents the lower temporal limit and as such is only the entry point for time consciousness. There is much more to explore in terms of duration, dynamics, and emotional content.


Conclusion

In their review paper on eight different theories of consciousness, Northoff and Lamme (2020) show how the TCC (Northoff 2016; Northoff and Huang 2017) is most explicit about a temporo-spatial nestedness of spontaneous brain activity spanning several time scales. Northoff makes explicit reference to phenomenological analyses of time consciousness as one starting point for his consciousness theory. Even though definite neural processing mechanisms for the experience of presence and time passage have not been conclusively identified, the search for an answer will be essential for the understanding of consciousness.

In addition to the spatiotemporal dynamics of the brain, the continuous input from the body as part of an embodied system are discussed by Northoff and Lamme (2020) as necessary prerequisites of self-consciousness. Bodily signals, visceral, and somatosensory input from the peripheral nervous system not only enact subjective feelings from the body but also underpin emotional feelings and self-consciousness (Damasio 1999). We did not delve into the embodiment issue of self-consciousness too deeply because we wanted to concentrate on the issue of extended time consciousness. Recent conceptualizations build a direct link between bodily signals, self-consciousness, and subjective time (Wittmann 2013). Craig (2009a, 2009b), e.g. suggests that the experiences of self and time are constituted through emotional and bodily processes stemming from the same neural system, the interoceptive system including the insular cortex. Successive moments of self-realization and time consciousness thus would be formed by information originating within the body. Picard and Craig (2009) proposed that the continuous bodily signals advance with a frame rate of ∼8 Hz, which amounts to temporal building blocks (functional moments) of around 125 ms. In line with our idea of an extended present moment we would argue that these individual processing units have to be furthermore integrated over time to form a present moment of conscious experience (Wittmann 2014).

There are plenty of issues to be solved in order for researchers to agree on a neural model of consciousness. Here we wanted to emphasize an often under-represented aspect in the debate: time consciousness. The notion of an extended present as prerequisite for the experience of time passage is essential for a theoretical understanding of consciousness which, in the not-too-distant future, could become a very real and practical problem given the potential for artificial consciousness. Doerig et al. (2019b) concede that naturally occurring unfolded systems are biologically implausible given physical constraints (e.g. size) that evolution solved by implementing recursive networks like the human brain. But such constraint may not apply to artificially unfolded systems and so the danger for a science of artificial consciousness is that the debate concerning whether or how machines could be conscious could fall on ideological lines.

There is some evidence that this ideological divide already exists. From a combined GNWT and HOT theoretical perspective, Dehaene et al. (2017) give a functional definition that machines would “behave as if they were conscious” (p. 7) if they were simultaneously capable of broadcasting stimuli for global availability (i.e. ignition) and self-monitoring their own mental activity (i.e. metacognition). Proponents of IIT and PCT responded that this definition of consciousness lacks phenomenological grounding (Carter et al. 2018) but they did so without challenging any of the substantive claims about ignition or metacognition. Instead, they left the debate with an open question: “What would constitute successful demonstration of artificial consciousness?” (Carter et al. 2018, 400).

We propose that any plausible demonstration of artificial consciousness must include an agreeable definition and operationalization of time consciousness. The key is to triangulate strict isomorphisms between the duration of presented stimuli, their neural representation, and their subjective experience. All three need to be explained by a single theory of consciousness in order to satisfy our criteria for time consciousness that is long, continuous, and dynamic. Thankfully, the potential for such triangulation is embedded within the substantive claims of Dehaene et al. (2017): the bottom right-hand corner of Figure 2 (p. 3) shows averaged neural activity from a masking activity in response to stimulus recognition that lasts for another 1500 ms after an initial spike (i.e. ignition) between 300 and 500 ms. While not at all discounting HOT, self-monitoring, or metacognitive approaches, what can this sustained activity tell us about the long, continuous, and dynamic conscious experience of that stimulus? What else does the individual experience during that time when, according to theories of time consciousness, the recognized object remains conscious? What is their emotional response to the recognized object? How does it change what they expect to see next? Answers to questions like these would paint a more extended, continuous, and dynamic picture of (time) consciousness as experienced by biological organisms such as ourselves, and could therefore provide a more plausible demonstration of artificial consciousness than any offered by current theories of consciousness.


Contributor Information

Lachlan Kent, Centre for Youth Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, 35 Poplar Rd, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Orygen, 35 Poplar Rd, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.

Marc Wittmann, Institute for Frontier Areas of Psychology and Mental Health, Wilhelmstraße 3a, 79098 Freiburg i.Br., Germany.


Metacognitive asymmetries in visual perception

Matan Mazor, Rani Moran, Stephen M Fleming — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8216202, CC BY 4.0.

People have better metacognitive sensitivity for decisions about the presence compared to the absence of objects. However, it is not only objects themselves that can be present or absent, but also parts of objects and other visual features. Asymmetries in visual search indicate that a disadvantage for representing absence may operate at these levels as well. Furthermore, a processing advantage for surprising signals suggests that a presence/absence asymmetry may be explained by absence being passively represented as a default state, and presence as a default-violating surprise. It is unknown whether the metacognitive asymmetry for judgments about presence and absence extends to these different levels of representation (object, feature, and default violation). To address this question and test for a link between the representation of absence and default reasoning more generally, here we measure metacognitive sensitivity for discrimination judgments between stimuli that are identical except for the presence or absence of a distinguishing feature, and for stimuli that differ in their compliance with an expected default state.

Keywords: absence, presence, metacognition


Introduction

At any given moment, there are many more things that are not there than things that are there. As a result, and in order to efficiently represent the environment, perceptual and cognitive systems have evolved to represent presences, and absence is implicitly represented as a default state (Oaksford and Chater 2001; Oaksford 2002). One corollary of this is that presence can be inferred from bottom-up sensory signals, but absence is never explicitly represented in sensory channels and must instead be inferred based on top-down expectations about the likelihood of detecting a hypothetical signal, had it been present. Experiments on human subjects accordingly suggest that representing absence is more cognitively demanding than representing presence, even in simple perceptual tasks, as is evident in slower reactions to stimulus absence than stimulus presence in near-threshold visual detection (Mazor et al. 2020), in a general difficulty to form associations with absence (Newman et al. 1980), and in the late acquisition of explicit representations of absence in development (e.g., Sainsbury 1971; Coldren and Haaf 2000; for a review on the representation of nothing see Hearst 1991).

An overarching difficulty in representing absence may reflect the metacognitive nature of absence representations; to represent something as absent, one must assume that they would have detected it had it been present. In philosophical writings, this form of higher order, metacognitive inference-about-absence is known as argument from epistemic closure, or argument from self-knowledge (If it was true, I would have known it; De Cornulier 1988; Walton 1992). Strikingly, quantitative measures of metacognitive insight are consistently found to be lower for decisions about absence than for decisions about presence. When asked to rate their subjective confidence following near-threshold detection decisions, subjective confidence ratings following “target absent” judgments are commonly lower, and less aligned with objective accuracy, than following “target present” judgments (Kanai et al. 2010; Meuwese et al. 2014; Kellij et al. 2018; Mazor et al. 2020).

Metacognitive asymmetries have not only been observed for judgments about the presence or absence of whole physical objects and stimuli, but also for the presence or absence of cognitive variables such as memory traces. For instance, in recognition memory, subjects typically show poor metacognitive sensitivity for judgments about the absence of memories (such as when judging that they have not seen a study item before; Higham et al. 2009). Unlike the absence of a visual stimulus, the absence of a memory is not localized in space and does not correspond with a specific representation of “nothing”.

One way of conceptualizing these findings is that absence asymmetries emerge as a function of default reasoning—absences are considered the “default”, and information about perceptual or mnemonic presence is accumulated and tested against this default. For instance, an asymmetry may emerge in recognition memory because the presence of memories is actively represented, and the absence of memories is assumed as the default unless evidence is available for the contrary. In the same way, other visual features that are not typically treated as presences or absences may still be coded relative to a default—assuming one state unless evidence is available for the contrary (e.g., assuming that a cookie is sweet rather than salty). However, whether a metacognitive asymmetry in processing presence and absence generalizes to these more abstract violations of default expectations remains unknown. Here we set out to map out the structure of absence representations by testing for metacognitive asymmetries in the presence and absence of attributes at different levels of representation—from concrete objects, to visual features, to violations of default expectations.

Our choice of stimuli draws inspiration from visual search—a field where asymmetries are observed for a variety of stimulus types and features. In visual search, participants typically take longer to search for a target that is marked by the presence of a distinguishing feature, as compared to searching for a target that is marked by the absence of a feature relative to distractors (Treisman and Souther 1985; Treisman and Gormican 1988). Interestingly, search asymmetries have been demonstrated not only for the absence or presence of concrete physical features, but also for the presence or absence of deviations from a more abstract default state, which can be based on experience, culture, and contextual expectations (see Methods; Frith 1974; Von Grünau and Dubé 1994; Wang et al. 1994; Gandolfo and Downing 2020). Of special interest for our study are these latter asymmetries due to expectation violations, and their relation with asymmetries induced by the presence or absence of local and global features. Observing a metacognitive asymmetry for expectation violations as well as for the presence and absence of objects features would support a strong link between the representation of absence and default reasoning, where differences in metacognitive sensitivity reflect differences in the processing of information that agrees or contrasts with the expected default state.

While traditional accounts interpreted visual search asymmetries as reflecting a qualitative advantage for the cognitive representation of presence (affording a parallel search in the case of feature-present search only; Treisman and Gormican 1988), other models attribute the asymmetry to differences in the distributions of perceptual signals already at the sensory level (Dosher et al. 2004; Vincent 2011). Similarly, in the case of metacognitive asymmetries, the idea that decisions about absence are qualitatively different from decisions about presence has been challenged by an excellent fit of simple models that assume unequal variance for the signal-present and signal-absent sensory distributions, a model that does not assume any qualitative difference between the two decisions (Kellij et al. 2018). Deciding between these model families is beyond the scope of this project. However, identifying metacognitive asymmetries for abstract cognitive variables such as familiarity could help refine these models, for instance by revealing that representing deviations from a default state is an overarching principle of cognitive organization, one that goes beyond specific features of visual perception.


Materials and Methods

We report how we determined our sample size, all data exclusions (if any), all manipulations, and all measures in the study.

We will run six experiments, that will be identical except for the identity of the two stimuli and. Our choice of stimuli for this study is based on the visual search literature. For some stimulus pairs and, searching for one among multiple s is more efficient than searching for one among multiple s. Such search asymmetries have been reported for stimulus pairs that are identical except for the presence and absence of a distinguishing feature. Importantly, distinguishing features vary in their level of abstraction, from concrete local features (finding a Q among Os is easier than the inverse search; Treisman and Souther 1985), through global features (finding a curved line among straight lines is easier than the inverse search; Treisman and Gormican 1988), and up to the presence or absence of abstract expectation violations (searching for an upward-tilted cube among downward-tilted cubes is easier than the inverse search, in line with a general expectation to see objects on the ground rather than floating in space; Von Grünau and Dubé 1994). We treat these three types of asymmetries as reflecting a default-reasoning mode of representation, where the absence of features and/or the adherence of objects to prior expectations is tentatively accepted as a default by the visual system, unless evidence is available for the contrary (Treisman and Souther 1985; Treisman and Gormican 1988). In this study, we will test for metacognitive asymmetries for two stimulus features in each category, in six separate experiments with different participants. For each of the following stimulus pairs, searching for among multiple instances of has been found to be more efficient than the inverse search:

Local feature: Addition of a stimulus part. Q and O will be used as and, respectively (Treisman and Souther 1985).

Local feature: Open ends. C and O will be used as and, respectively (Treisman and Souther 1985; Treisman and Gormican 1988; Takeda and Yagi 2000).

Global feature: Curvature. Curved and straight lines will be used as and, respectively (Treisman and Gormican 1988).

Global feature: Orientation. Tilted and vertical lines will be used and, respectively (Treisman and Gormican 1988).

Expectation violation: Letter inversion. Reversed and normal Ns will be used as and, respectively (Frith 1974; Wang et al. 1994).

Expectation violation: Viewing angle. Upward and Downward tilted cubes will be used as and, respectively (Von Grünau and Dubé 1994).

The experiments will quantify participants’ metacognitive sensitivity for discrimination judgments between and.


Participants

The research complies with all relevant ethical regulations, and was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of University College London (study ID number 1260/003). Participants will be recruited via prolific, and will give informed consent prior to their participation. They will be selected based on their acceptance rate (>95%) and for being native English speakers. For each of the six experiments, we will collect data until we reach 106 included participants (after applying our pre-registered exclusion criteria). The entire experiment will take 15 min to complete. Participants will be paid £2 for their participation, equivalent to an hourly wage of £8.


Procedure

Experiments were programmed using the jsPsych and P5 JavaScript packages (De Leeuw 2015; McCarthy 2015), and will be hosted on a JATOS server (Lange et al. 2015).

After instructions, a practice phase and a multiple-choice comprehension check, the main part of the experiment will start. It will comprise 96 trials separated into 6 blocks. Only the last five blocks will be analyzed.

On each trial, participants will make discrimination judgments on masked stimuli, and rate their subjective decision confidence on a continuous scale. After a fixation cross (500 ms), the target stimulus (or) will be presented in the center of the screen for 50 ms, followed by a mask (100 ms). Stimulus onset asynchrony will be calibrated online in a 1-up-2-down procedure (Levitt 1971), with a multiplicative step factor of 0.9, and starting at 30 ms. Participants will then use their keyboard to make a discrimination judgment. Stimulus-key mapping will be counterbalanced between participants. Following response, subjective confidence ratings will be given on an analog scale by controlling the size of a colored circle with the computer mouse. High confidence will be mapped to a big, blue circle, and low confidence to a small, red circle. We chose a continuous (rather than a more typical discrete) confidence scale in order to ensure sufficient variation in confidence ratings within the dynamic range of individual participants. This variation is useful for the extraction of response conditional ROC curves. The confidence rating phase will terminate once participants click their mouse, but not before 2000 ms. No trial-specific feedback will be delivered about accuracy. In order to keep participants motivated and engaged, block-wise feedback will be delivered between experimental blocks about overall accuracy, mean confidence in correct responses, and mean confidence in incorrect responses.


Randomization

The order and timing of experimental events will be determined pseudo-randomly by the Mersenne Twister pseudorandom number generator, initialized in a way that ensures registration time-locking (Mazor et al. 2019).


Data Analysis

We will use R (Version 3.6.0; R Core Team 2019) and the R-packages BayesFactor (Version 0.9.12.4.2; Morey and Rouder 2018), broom (Version 0.5.6; Robinson and Hayes 2020), cowplot (Version 1.0.0; Wilke 2019), dplyr (Version 1.0.0; Wickham et al. 2020), ggplot2 (Version 3.3.1; Wickham 2016), lsr (Version 0.5; Navarro 2015), MESS (Version 0.5.6; Ekstrøm 2019), papaja (Version 0.1.0.9942; Aust and Barth 2020), pracma (Version 2.2.9; Borchers 2019), pwr (Version 1.3.0; Champely 2020), and tidyr (Version 1.1.0; Wickham and Henry 2020) for all our analyses.

For each of the six stimulus pairs, we will test the following hypotheses:

Hypothesis 1: Subjective confidence is higher for responses than for responses. For each of the six stimulus pairs, we will test the null hypothesis that subjective confidence for responses is equal to or lower than subjective confidence for the feature-absent stimulus.

Hypothesis 2: Metacognitive sensitivity, measured as the area under the response conditional ROC curves, is higher for responses than for responses. For each of the six stimulus pairs, we will test the null hypothesis that metacognitive sensitivity for responses is equal to or lower than metacognitive sensitivity for responses.

Hypothesis 3: Metacognitive sensitivity, measured as the area under the response conditional ROC curves, is higher for responses than for responses, to a greater extent than expected from an equivalent equal-variance SDT model. For each of the six stimulus pairs, we will test the null hypothesis that difference between metacognitive sensitivities for and responses is lower than the difference expected from an equal-variance SDT model with matched confidenec distributions, response bias, and sensitivity.

Hypothesis 4: responses are faster on average than responses. For each of the six stimulus pairs, we will test the null hypothesis that log-transformed response times for responses are equal to or higher than log-transformed response times for responses.

Hypotheses 1 and 2 correspond to the effects of stimulus type on metacognitive bias and metacognitive sensitivity, respectively. Although these two measures are theoretically independent, both bias and sensitivity are found to vary between detection “yes” and “no” responses.

Based on pilot data and previous experiments examining near-threshold perceptual detection and discrimination, we do not expect a response bias (such that the probability of responding is significantly different from 0.5 across participants). However, such a response bias, if found, may bias our metacognitive asymmetry estimates as measured with response-conditional ROC curves. Hypothesis 3 is designed to confirm that metacognitive asymmetry is higher than that expected from an equivalent equal-variance SDT model with the same response bias, sensitivity, and distribution of confidence ratings in incorrect responses as in the actual data. We will interpret conflicting results for Hypotheses 2 and 3 as evidence for a metacognitive asymmetry that is driven or masked by a response bias.

Hypothesis 4 is motivated by two observations from previous studies. First, detection “yes” responses are faster than detection “no” responses (Mazor et al. 2020). And second, when participants are not under strict time pressure, reaction time inversely scales with confidence (Henmon 1911; Pleskac and Busemeyer 2010; Calder-Travis et al. 2020). Based on these findings, if and responses are similar to detection “yes” and “no” responses not only in explicit confidence judgments, but also in response times, we should also expect a response time difference for these stimulus pairs.


Dependent variables and analysis plan

Response conditional ROC curves will be extracted by plotting the empirical cumulative distribution of confidence ratings for correct responses against the same cumulative distribution for incorrect responses. This will be done separately for the two responses and, resulting in two curves. The area under the response-conditional ROC curve is a measure of metacognitive sensitivity (Fleming and Lau 2014). The difference between the areas for the two responses is a measure of metacognitive asymmetry (Meuwese et al. 2014). This difference will be used to test Hypothesis 2.

In order to test hypothesis 3, SDT-derived response-conditional ROC curves will be plotted in the following way. For each response, we will plot the empirical cumulative distribution for incorrect responses on the x axis against the cumulative distribution for correct responses that would be expected in an equal-variance SDT model with matching sensitivity and response bias on the y axis. The difference between the areas of these theoretically derived response-conditional ROC curves will be compared against the difference between the true response-conditional ROC curves.

For visualization purposes only, confidence ratings will be divided into 20 bins, tailored for each participant to cover their dynamic range of confidence ratings.

For each of the six experiments, Hypotheses 1–4 will be tested using a one tailed t-test at the group level with. The summary statistic at the single subject level will be difference in mean confidence between and responses for Hypothesis 1, difference in area under the response-conditional ROC curve between and responses for Hypothesis 2, difference in between true confidence distributions and SDT-derived confidence distributions for hypothesis 3, and difference in mean log response time between and responses for Hypothesis 4.

In addition, a Bayes factor will be computed using the BayesFactor R package (Morey et al. 2015) and using a Jeffrey-Zellner-Siow (Cauchy) Prior with an rscale parameter of 0.65, representative of the similar standardized effect sizes we observe for Hypotheses 1–4 in our pilot data.

We will base our inference on the resulting Bayes Factors.


Statistical power

Statistical power calculations were performed using the R-pwr packages pwr (Champely 2020).

Hypothesis 1 (MEAN CONFIDENCE): With 106 participants, we will have a statistical power of 95% to detect effects of size 0.32, which is less than the standardized effect size we observed for confidence in our pilot sample.

Hypothesis 2 (METACOGNITIVE ASYMMETRY): With 106 participants, we will have a statistical power of 95% to detect effects of size 0.32, which is less than the standardized effect size we observed for metacognitive sensitivity in our pilot sample.

Hypothesis 3 (METACOGNITIVE ASYMMETRY: CONTROL): With 106 participants, we will have a statistical power of 95% to detect effects of size 0.32, which is less than the standardized effect size we observed for metacognitive sensitivity, controlling for response bias, in our pilot sample.

Hypothesis 4 (RESPONSE TIME): With 106 participants, we will have a statistical power of 95% to detect effects of size 0.32, which is less than the standardized effect size we observed for response time in our pilot sample.

Finally, in case that the true effect size equals 0, a Bayes Factor with our chosen prior for the alternative hypothesis will support the null in 95 out of 100 repetitions, and will support the null with a higher than 3 in 79 out of 100 repetitions. In a case where the true effect size is sampled from a Cauchy distribution with a scale factor of 0.65, a Bayes Factor with our chosen prior for the alternative hypothesis will support the alternative hypothesis in 76 out of 100 repetitions, support the alternative hypothesis with a higher than 3 in 70 out of 100 repetitions, and support the null hypothesis with a higher than 3 in 15 out of 100 hypotheses (based on an adaptation of simulation code from Lakens 2016).


Rejection criteria

Participants will be excluded for performing below 60% accuracy, for having extremely fast or slow reaction times (below 250 ms or above 5 s in more than 25% of the trials), and for failing the comprehension check. Finally, for type-2 ROC curves to be generated, some responses must be incorrect. Thus, only participants who committed at least two errors of each error type (e.g., mistaking a Q of O and mistaking an O for Q), will be included.

Trials with response time below 250 ms or above 5 s will be excluded.


Code Availability

All analysis code will be openly shared on the study’s GitHub repository: https://github.com/matanmazor/asymmetry. For complete reproducibility, the RMarkdown file used to generate the final version of the manuscript, including the generation of all figures and extraction of all test statistics, will be available on our GitHub repository.

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


Contributor Information

Matan Mazor, Institute of Neurology, Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London, UK.

Rani Moran, Institute of Neurology, Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, London, UK.

Stephen M Fleming, Institute of Neurology, Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London, UK; Institute of Neurology, Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, London, UK; Department of Experimental Psychology, University College London, London, UK.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

All raw data will be made fully available on OSF and on the study’s GitHub respository: https://github.com/matanmazor/asymmetry. Pilot data is available at: https://github.com/matanmazor/asymmetry/blob/master/Experiments/Q_in_O/results/pilot/jatos_results_batch3.csv


Consciousness in active inference: Deep self-models, other minds, and the challenge of psychedelic-induced ego-dissolution

George Deane — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8408766, CC BY 4.0.

Predictive processing approaches to brain function are increasingly delivering promise for illuminating the computational underpinnings of a wide range of phenomenological states. It remains unclear, however, whether predictive processing is equipped to accommodate a theory of consciousness itself. Furthermore, objectors have argued that without specification of the core computational mechanisms of consciousness, predictive processing is unable to inform the attribution of consciousness to other non-human (biological and artificial) systems. In this paper, I argue that an account of consciousness in the predictive brain is within reach via recent accounts of phenomenal self-modelling in the active inference framework. The central claim here is that phenomenal consciousness is underpinned by ‘subjective valuation’—a deep inference about the precision or ‘predictability’ of the self-evidencing (‘fitness-promoting’) outcomes of action. Based on this account, I argue that this approach can critically inform the distribution of experience in other systems, paying particular attention to the complex sensory attenuation mechanisms associated with deep self-models. I then consider an objection to the account: several recent papers argue that theories of consciousness that invoke self-consciousness as constitutive or necessary for consciousness are undermined by states (or traits) of ‘selflessness’; in particular the ‘totally selfless’ states of ego-dissolution occasioned by psychedelic drugs. Drawing on existing work that accounts for psychedelic-induced ego-dissolution in the active inference framework, I argue that these states do not threaten to undermine an active inference theory of consciousness. Instead, these accounts corroborate the view that subjective valuation is the constitutive facet of experience, and they highlight the potential of psychedelic research to inform consciousness science, computational psychiatry and computational phenomenology.

Keywords: active inference, predictive processing, consciousness, self, psychedelics


Introduction

Phenomenal consciousness—the ‘what-it-is-like’ (Nagel 1974) to experience—has now been an area of serious scientific study for at least 30 years (Seth 2018). More recently, the predictive processing framework has generated considerable excitement for its potential contribution to consciousness science. This is largely due to its capacity to go beyond merely positing the presence or absence of consciousness in a given system and to contrastive analysis of the computational mechanisms underlying various phenomenological states. However, a theory of consciousness within predictive processing remains elusive, largely due to the fact that predictive processing is not exclusively concerned with conscious processing (But see: Hohwy 2012; Dolega and Dewhurst 2015; Friston 2018; Solms and Friston 2018; Wiese 2018; Williford et al. 2018; Clark 2019; Clark et al. 2019; Kirchhoff et al. 2019; Whyte 2019; Friston et al. 2020; Hohwy and Seth 2020; Ramstead et al. 2020b; Safron 2020; Solms 2019, Whyte and Smith 2020).

Doerig et al. (2021) emphasize that predictive processing, as it stands, is insufficiently constrained to provide a theory of consciousness due to being vulnerable to what they call the ‘other systems argument’. A key desideratum for a theory of consciousness on their view is that it ‘should be able to determine which systems, apart from awake humans, are conscious’ (p. 7). They contend that predictive processing fails to deliver on this due to the fact that ‘there is no computational understanding of the crucial characteristics’ (p. 21) that define the conscious condition within predictive processing. In this paper I aim to show that predictive processing, in particular in the recent formulations of the active inference framework, has the resources to deliver a fully-fledged theory of consciousness via a theory of subjectivity grounded in self-modelling.

Active inference is a process theory of the free energy principle (Friston 2010; Friston et al. 2017a). Living systems, on this approach, can be understood to embody statistical models of their worlds, where they are biased towards the realization of ‘phenotype-congruent’ outcomes (Ramstead et al. 2020a). On this view, agents are ‘self-evidencing’ in that they act in order to maximize the evidence for their own existence (Hohwy 2016). The breadth of explanations within this approach—from microscale explanations applied to understand the adaptive behaviour of bacteria (Tschantz et al. 2020) and plants (Calvo and Friston 2017), all the way up to social and cultural dynamics (Veissière et al. 2019) and natural selection (Campbell 2016)—brings the need to identify the particular processes associated with consciousness itself into sharp relief.

The structure of the paper is as follows. In ‘The active inference framework’, I give an overview of the relevant mechanics of the active inference framework. In ‘Consciousness in active inference’, I propose a self-modelling theory of subjectivity (Metzinger 2004) within active inference. On this view, consciousness can be understood as arising from ‘subjective valuation’—the system’s inference about precision on control of self-evidencing or allostatic outcomes across multiple levels of the hierarchical generative model. I then consider how subjectivity is ‘shaped’ by hierarchically deep self-models, by considering some examples of disruptions in ordinary self-consciousness. In ‘Consciousness in other systems’, I explore how this characterization can inform attribution of consciousness to other systems, through identification of complex sensory attenuation mechanisms associated with the more elaborate forms of self-modelling understood to underpin consciousness on this account. ‘The selflessness challenge’ considers an objection, the ‘selflessness challenge’—that theories of consciousness that equate consciousness with self-consciousness (‘subjectivity theories’) are challenged by selfless experiences, most notably experiences of ‘ego-dissolution’ occasioned by psychedelic drugs (Letheby 2020; Millière 2020). In ‘Psychedelics and selflessness in active inference’ I build on an existing account of ego-dissolution in the active inference framework (Deane 2020), with a particular focus on the affective and hedonic tone of the experience. In ‘Responding to the selflessness challenge’, I respond to the selflessness challenge; I argue that understanding ego-dissolution in the active inference framework accounts for how the system can still be conscious without the typical structure of experience provided by deep self-models. Instead, these accounts in fact corroborate the view put forward in this paper—that subjective valuation is the constitutive facet of experience. I argue that within active inference, consciousness and subjectivity are best understood in terms of a model of allostatic control. The upshot of this is to show that both the active inference framework and psychedelic science have much to offer on the scientific understanding of consciousness.


The active inference framework

This section introduces the relevant mechanics of the active inference framework as a formalization of allostasis, before explicating how these mechanics can be understood to underpin phenomenal selfhood. Staying alive requires organisms to maintain homeostasis, an ‘internal balance’ (Cannon 1929), by keeping physiological states—‘essential variables’ (Ashby 2013)—within reasonable bounds. The principles underpinning homeostasis have long been cast within the language of control theory (Conant and Ross Ashby 1970), where homeostasis is achieved through autonomic control loops, such as sweating to lower body temperature. Creatures like human beings exhibit a form of prospective control or ‘predictive regulation’ termed allostasis. In other words, they regulate the internal milieu by anticipating physiological needs and acting to meet them before they arise (Sterling 2012; Pezzulo et al. 2015; Stephan et al. 2016; Schulkin and Sterling 2019; Corcoran et al. 2020).

The active inference framework formalizes allostasis in terms of a single imperative—to minimize the divergence between expected and observed outcomes under a generative model that is fine-tuned over the course of phylogeny and ontogeny (Badcock 2012). On the free energy principle, the basic imperative is to remain in ‘expected’ states—a ‘species-specific window of viability’ (Clark 2013, 13). The free energy principle (Friston et al. 2010; Badcock et al. 2019) thus casts control theoretic ‘essential variables’ in terms of high precision prior expectations. This means that organisms are phylogenetically endowed with an expectation (and therefore bias to act) to e.g. maintain a body temperature within reasonable bounds. These high precision prior expectations are not amenable to perceptual revision and instead must be fulfilled through corrective action (e.g. seeking out a shaded tree to maintain viable body temperature). Here, prior expectations are acquired through past experience, over the course of both phylogeny and ontogeny (Badcock et al. 2019).

The notion of a hierarchical generative model lies at the centre of the active inference framework. A generative model is specified in terms of probabilistic beliefs about how observations relate to the states of the world that cause them (the likelihood), beliefs about how the states evolve over time and prior beliefs—beliefs about the state of the world prior to observation. Inference here corresponds to inversion of the model in computing the probability of the unknown or hidden causes of the impinging sensory signals. It is intractable to compute this posterior directly and so approximate Bayesian inference is made tractable by optimization of a posterior although variational inference. In this way, the approximate posterior converges towards the true (unknowable) posterior through the minimization of variational free energy (Friston et al. 2017a). Crucially, free energy can also be interpreted as a bound on the evidence for a generative model. This means that minimizing the free energy just is maximizing model evidence—hence the notion of self-evidencing (Hohwy 2016; Palacios et al. 2020).

Active inference formalizes allostasis (and action) as an inference problem, ‘planning as inference’ (Kaplan and Friston 2018) under the free energy principle (Friston 2019). The planning and execution of action or a sequence of actions (a ‘policy’)—under this scheme—becomes a problem of inference where the action with the highest prior probability is that which minimizes ‘expected’ free energy—the expected dyshomeostatic consequences of an action policy (Kaplan and Friston 2018). Selection of optimal action policies involves having counterfactually rich expectations of the states of affairs that would be brought about contingent on actions (Seth 2014; Pezzulo 2017; Friston et al. 2017a). In other words, to select action policies that maximize self-evidencing outcomes over time, organisms rely on deep temporal models (Friston et al. 2017a). Deep temporal models encode expectations about the evolution of states of affairs over time contingent on action policies, such that the system can infer actions that result in sensory states conducive to continued existence—sometimes called the ‘attracting set’ (Friston 2012).

Just as with perceptual inference (belief updating or ‘state estimation’), action selection is understood in terms of Bayesian model selection, where possible action policies are scored with respect to the expected free energy associated with pursuing a given policy. Here, the agent is equipped with beliefs about transitions between (inferred) states of the world, where beliefs about state transitions are updated in light of the action or action policy that is currently being pursued. Conditioning state transitions on actions—in the generative model—allows the agent to select action policies that have the least expected free energy, where expected free energy can be decomposed into ‘epistemic and pragmatic’ value, such that the agent can learn about its environment while realizing prior preferences (Friston et al. 2015; Friston et al. 2017). This process of selecting actions that minimize expected free energy, which has been dubbed ‘allostatic control’ (Kiverstein and Sims 2021), is not itself thought to underwrite phenomenal selfhood (and experience). Rather, I will argue that phenomenal selfhood is underwritten by hierarchically deep inference about the precision on expected free energy. This ‘allostatic control model’—understood as a ‘subjective valuation’ on the ‘fit’ of the action model to the world spanning multiple timescales—will be unpacked in sections to come. First, it is worth unpacking what it is the system needs to control on this account—the minimization of expected free energy—in terms of the realization of prior preferences and maximization of epistemic value.


Pragmatic value and prior preferences

Agents are not disinterestedly inferring their control of sensation via action. Rather, in active inference the agent acts to realize prior preferences—changing the world to make it conform to prior expectations, as opposed to changing beliefs to conform to the world (i.e. perceptual inference). Active inference thus recasts ‘essential variables’—physiological quantities that must remain within specific bounds for an organism to stay alive (Ashby 2013)—as high precision ‘prior preferences’. Prior preferences are phenotype-specific states that the organism expects itself to be in—connecting control to states of the body and views of selfhood based in interoceptive inference (Seth and Friston 2016; Barrett 2017; Seth and Tsakiris 2018). Prior preferences about essential variables encode probability distributions over states (rather than a single ideal setpoint), and the sufficient statistics that specify this setpoint (mean and precision) are free to vary and can be toggled according to the context (Ainley et al. 2016). This is key in allostasis, as it allows for temporary deviations from a homeostatic setpoint in order to realize sensory states in the ‘attracting set’ on longer timescales. For instance, heart rate and blood pressure are more flexible to contextual alteration in order to realize certain actions (e.g. fleeing from a predator), while others such as blood pH and core body temperature may be less variable due to more constant high precision (Corcoran et al. 2020). While many prior preferences are phylogenetically endowed, over the course of ontogeny an organism will acquire prior preferences that subtend increasingly deep temporal scales. The expected free energy of a given policy, then, is going to depend to some degree on how much the given policy fulfils prior preferences, and so, as we will see, a critical part of the phenomenal self-model is understood in terms of an inference about control of the realization of prior preferences.


Epistemic value

Self-evidencing agents not only act in order to realize prior preferences, but they also engage in novelty-seeking behaviours that realize epistemic value (Friston et al. 2015). The epistemic value or affordance of a given policy refers to the information gain or resolution of uncertainty about the causes of sensation. Optimal epistemic action, or ‘epistemic foraging’, requires the agent to have beliefs about their own uncertainty, enabling action directed towards higher sensory precision. Agents minimizing expected free energy seek out observations that resolve ambiguity about the state and causal structure of the world. Curiosity and novelty-seeking behaviour are accounted for within this formulation of epistemic action (Friston et al. 2015; Kiverstein et al. 2017; Mirza et al. 2018; Pezzulo and Nolfi 2019). This can be understood in terms of sensitivity to long-term epistemic affordances (Bruineberg and Rietveld 2014; Parr and Friston 2017). When the agent is confident about its model of the world, and epistemic value is much the same across policies, pragmatic or instrumental value (fulfillment of prior preferences) dominates behaviour.


Consciousness in active inference

In this section I argue for a self-modelling theory of subjectivity within the active inference framework. The central claim is that consciousness is best understood as being underpinned by hierarchically deep self-models understood in terms of ‘subjective valuation’—precision estimation on the action model—across multiple levels of the generative model. In other words, consciousness arises in a system that evaluates the ‘fit’ of its model with the world—how well outcomes align with expected outcomes given the kind of creature it is—across multiple timescales. This inference informs action and policy selection across multiple timescales—from refining a motor action based on proximal sensory outcomes to domain general inferences about expected control across variable environments on longer timescales. The upshot of this section is a view of subjectivity as ‘subjective valuation’, understood as a kind of self-modelling that is (in normal awareness) intimately bound up with aspects of the phenomenal self, such as the sense of agency and affectivity.

For clarity about how different contents of consciousness map to the generative model, I sequentially unpack the inferential architecture of the hierarchical generative model and how this architecture relates to conscious contents in the following four subsections: ‘Perception’ covers basic models of perception as (hidden) state estimation approximating Bayesian inference; ‘Precision’ covers precision-weighting in perceptual inference; ‘Active inference’ connects active inference and planning as inference as a formalization of allostasis (Attias 2003; Botvinick and Toussaint 2012; Kaplan and Friston 2018; Millidge 2020) to particular aspects of phenomenal selfhood, arguing that an inference about ‘agentive control’—endogenous control of self-evidencing outcomes via action—means that phenomenal selfhood is implicit in the active inference framework. ‘Affectivity’ extends this picture to argue that affective inference can similarly be understood as an inference about allostatic control, manifesting computationally as precision on the action model that guides domain general policy selection and is closely related to interoceptive and emotional inference (Seth and Friston 2016; Fotopoulou and Tsakiris 2017; Smith et al. 2019). In ‘Towards a theory of subjectivity’ I argue that this hierarchically deep inference about endogenous control is not merely contents of consciousness, but rather ‘shapes’ subjectivity, permeating perception of the world (and self). This functions to ‘tune’ organisms to opportunities for (adaptive) action in the environment.


Perception

A simple starting point to think about the generative model is to consider it in the case of moment-to-moment perception, which can be understood as state estimation or the brain’s ‘best guess’ of the hidden causes of the incoming sensory signal. This basic (illustrative) generative model maps the relationships between observations (o)—the incoming sensory data and the hidden states (s) in the world that caused the sensorium. A ‘likelihood mapping’—encoding the probability of an observation under a generative model, given its causes (the hidden states in the world)—captures this relationship. In other words, what is the probability of the observations ‘given’ the world is in a certain state? Formally, this is denoted as a likelihood model P(o|s). The full generative model includes beliefs about the most likely state of the world prior to any observation, which is known in Bayesian inference as the ‘prior’, denoted by P(s).

Of course, what the system needs to infer is not the probability of observations given the hidden states, but the inverse, the probability of hidden states given the observations. This is achieved through variational Bayes—movement from what the system has access to observations, prior beliefs and beliefs about how observations are caused by hidden states, to what it needs to infer: the hidden states that are the most probable causes of the incoming sensation—i.e. the posterior probability of the states ‘given’ the observations P(s|o). Inference about hidden states given the observations is known as model inversion, as it is the inverse mapping from the consequences or outcomes to causes. Model inversion finds the most plausible cause of observations, and as such, perception can be understood as ‘posterior state estimation’, i.e. estimating the hidden states and other variables that cause sensory outcomes. Formally, the process of updating a prior belief into a posterior belief on the basis of new sensory evidence is called Bayesian belief updating.


Precision

Predictive processing architectures benefit from radical contextual flexibility afforded by ‘precision-weighting’. Precision-weighting can be understood in terms of amplification or gain control, regulating the interaction between top-down and bottom-up signals by weighting them according to their expected ‘precision’—where heavily weighted priors or prediction errors exert greater influence in determining the resulting posterior inference. Precision can be understood as a prediction of the reliability of one’s own beliefs, —e.g. confidence in the likelihood mapping. Attentional processes operate on second-order statistics like precision: in other words, attentional states can be understood in terms of beliefs about the (precision of the) system’s beliefs. This means that precision—on the simple generative model just described—can be understood as the extent to which the system thinks observations reliably map to hidden states. Formally, precision is the inverse variance of a probability distribution (Feldman and Friston 2010), and optimization of precision-weighting is frequently equated to attention within predictive processing schemes (Feldman and Friston 2010; Clark 2013). Heuristically, precision can be thought of as predictability or reliability of predictions—something that itself has to be inferred.

Predictive processing offers a picture of how a confluence of precision-weighted informational streams determines perceptual inference. Perceptual inference involves integrating information from across modalities to infer the hidden causes of sensation—for instance, during binocular rivalry, auditory (Lunghi et al. 2014), olfactory (Zhou et al. 2010) and tactile information (Lunghi and Morrone 2013) have all been shown to influence which percept is dominant. Interoceptive (Salomon et al. 2016) and proprioceptive (Salomon et al. 2013) information have been shown to affect visual experience using a continuous flash suppression paradigm.

Cue integration is one such example of how integration of (precision-weighted) informational streams gives rise to the resultant percept. In a cue combination task, observers are presented with two more cues about a perceptual variable—such as, in early cue integration, the use of two depth cues (e.g. stereo and motion parallax) (Landy et al. 1995). The reliability of the cues can be varied (for instance, by varying their visibility or contrast) to make one cue more reliable than the other. A series of studies have shown that when observers are asked to indicate their percept (a depth estimate), their estimates—depending on the cues, weighted by their precision, in combination with a prior probability—are approximately Bayes optimal (Landy et al. 1995; Ernst and Banks 2002; Knill and Pouget 2004).

Another example is gist perception in object recognition—where the ‘gist’ of the scene engages past experience to generate the most likely prediction about the object’s identity (Bar 2003; Oliva and Torralba 2006). For instance, in the case of an ambiguous object, the context of a scene can determine whether the ambiguous input is perceived as a hairdryer or a drill depending on whether the context is in a bathroom or a workshop. These predictions are fed back to early visual areas to speed perception by constraining the hypothesis space of possible interpretations.

‘Predictive penetration’—social, cognitive and emotional—have all been demonstrated (O’Callaghan et al. 2016). Sensorimotor contingencies—predictions about how the world changes according to our actions—have also been shown to shape the contents of consciousness (Skora et al. 2021). Importantly, precision is thought to mediate engagement with affordances—latent possibilities for action (Cisek 2011; Pezzulo and Cisek 2019) and sensory attenuation—the top-down filtering out of afferent (incoming) information, both from the body (interoception) and the senses (exteroception). As we will see, striking the right balance of precision in perceptual inference requires deep self-models.

The basic predictive processing story so far casts the brain as a hierarchical prediction machine using belief updating schemes to approximate Bayesian inference by utilizing ‘priors’ (probability distributions about hidden states of the world) and incoming sensory data (‘prediction errors’) to arrive at a posterior estimate: a ‘best guess’ of the hidden causes of sensory signals (Clark 2013, Hohwy 2013; Aitchison and Lengyel 2017; Nave et al. 2020). Prediction errors are a central concept in predictive processing and the free energy principle. In a mathematically general sense, the free energy gradients that drive Bayesian belief updating in the free energy principle can always be expressed as a prediction error (in the form of a difference in log probabilities). In specific schemes, such as predictive coding, prediction errors are often treated as explicit variables that may be encoded by the activity of specific neuronal populations in the brain (e.g. superficial pyramidal cells).

Predictive processing delivers a compelling story about the contents of perception, where ‘conscious perception is determined by the prediction or hypothesis with the highest overall posterior probability—which is overall best at minimizing prediction error’ (Hohwy 2012, 4). As yet, however, it is not clear why there should be ‘something-it-is-like’ to perceive—i.e. how subjectivity itself is underwritten by the mechanism’s prediction error minimization. In the next two sections, we see how these same principles can be built up to give an account of a subject of experience in terms of phenomenal self-models.


Active inference and the phenomenal self

‘The active inference framework’ gave an overview of active inference and allostatic control. This section and the next section on affective inference will look at how this notion of how allostatic control can be tied to phenomenal selfhood, in particular how the system’s inference or evaluation of its own allostatic control—used to inform ongoing policy selection across multiple timescales—can be understood to underpin the phenomenology of being an agent.

The phenomenal self-model can be understood as ‘the content of the conscious self: your current bodily sensations, your present emotional situation, plus all the contents of your phenomenally experienced cognitive processing’ (Metzinger 2003, 299). Phenomenal selfhood is understood as being ‘The way you appear to yourself, subjectively, consciously’ (Metzinger 2004, 26). Increasingly, the formal principles of self-modelling implied by active inference are thought to underpin phenomenal self-modelling (Limanowski and Blankenburg 2013; Hohwy and Michael 2017; Friston 2018; Limanowski and Friston 2018, Deane 2020; Deane et al. 2020). On these views, ‘some notion of “self-hood” or “self-agency”—in the sense of inference about control—is inherent in active inference’ (Limanowski and Friston 2020, 2), as optimal action planning rests on this notion of control—where the system infers its control of sensation via action to realize self-evidencing outcomes. As such, the self is seen as being a ‘hypothesis or latent state (of being) that can be associated with a self-model’ (Limanowski and Friston 2020, 3). In what follows, the inference about precision on intentional selection—cast in terms of an ‘allostatic control model’—is thought to underpin phenomenal selfhood. This inference about allostatic control is understood to span from lower-level motor control all the way up to domain-general (and abstract) expectations of allostatic control across contexts.

Inference about the control of sensation via action—‘agentive control’ (Deane et al. 2020)—has been linked to the phenomenology of being an agent (Limanowski and Friston 2020). Agentive control is best understood as the system’s inference of its own ability to endogenously control sensory inputs via action (Hohwy and Michael 2017) and as such is intimately related to the ‘sense of agency’—the experience of oneself as an agent who can cause events by acting (Haggard 2017). Agentive control is understood here to be temporally deep, because expectations of the consequences of actions are not confined to the immediate future, but can predict abstract and distal outcomes (Pezzulo et al. 2015). For example, an agent may expect proximal sensory consequences of tipping a watering can to water a plant pot, but also have temporally deep—and ‘abstract’ (Gilead et al. 2019)—expectations about the form of the plant over the timescale of weeks and months contingent on actions. Recall that, under active inference, lower levels of the predictive hierarchy track regularities that are unfolding on shorter timescales and higher levels track regularities unfolding on longer timescales (Kiebel et al. 2008; Friston et al. 2017b). In just the same way that an organism can infer its own ability to control the immediate sensory consequences of action, by tracking regularities over time it can track its control of sensory outcomes more generally, where expectations of the downstream consequences of action inform policy selection (Friston 2018).

A central idea here is that, in acting, the system must infer ‘itself’ as able to bring about the (self-evidencing) consequences of the action, where the self-evidencing consequences are understood in terms of expected free energy. Inference about agentive control is intimately related to the allocation of precision and most specifically the lowering of precision to attenuate sensory evidence in certain contexts. There are two forms of sensory attenuation—‘physiological’ and ‘perceptual’ sensory attenuation (Palmer et al. 2016)—that critically relate to agentive control on this account.

The first to consider is ‘physiological sensory attenuation’ (Palmer et al. 2016), which is critical for movement initiation in active inference (Brown et al. 2013). Action initiation involves ‘systematic misrepresentation’ (Wiese 2017)—whereby proprioceptive evidence that, for instance, my arm is not moving, is attenuated to allow the system to bring about the desired movement (Adams et al. 2013; Brown et al. 2013). Higher-level prior beliefs attenuate current sensory evidence and higher precision is afforded to the anticipated sensory consequences of the desired action. Prediction error is then suppressed by making the prediction come true, through reflex arcs at the lowest level of the hierarchy (Parr et al. 2018). In the setting of motor control, this perspective on action is closely related to ideomotor theory (Limanowski 2017) and 20th-century formulations in terms of the equilibrium point hypothesis (Feldman and Levin 1995). In other words, all that is required for intentional movement is a specification of the desired sensorimotor endpoint of a movement—and motor reflexes bring the position of the body into line with that equilibrium or setpoint. Another perspective on this formulation is perceptual control theory (Mansell 2011), where action is in the game of bringing about desired sensory consequences—in this instance proprioceptive sensations from the musculoskeletal system. In order to move, then, the system predicts itself in the desired state, and as able to control sensation via to bring about the desired state. Physiological sensory attenuation thus aids in entertaining counterfactual hypotheses about oneself (Limanowski and Friston 2020) in order to generate the self-fulfilling prophecy of moving.

This self-attenuation needs only be applied transiently for movement initiation, but these same sensory attenuation mechanisms are thought to underpin various states of altered self-experience. For instance, in the ‘rubber hand illusion’ (Botvinick and Cohen 1998), visual information about the location of the hand is deemed to be precise due to the corroborating synchronous stroking pattern on the rubber hand, while the conflicting proprioceptive input suggestive of the hand’s real location is down-weighted in order to maintain a coherent bodily representation (Limanowski and Friston 2020).

‘Perceptual sensory attenuation’ is the top-down filtering of afferent information to limit how much feedback is received from self-generated movement. On the current account, perceptual sensory attenuation is critical to the formation of the ongoing inference about agentive control. Originally developed as a theory of motor control, the ‘comparator model’ posits that motor commands are refined through comparing sensory consequences of an action with the intended consequences of an action (Miall and Wolpert 1996; Wolpert and Flanagan 2001). Subsequently, the comparator model has been used to account for the sense of agency (Feinberg 1978; Frith 2005; David et al. 2008), where inference about endogenous control over the causes of sensory signals is thought to underpin the sense that an action is agentive or self-generated. For instance, sense of agency would be low in the case of a mismatch between motor output and sensory input, such as (when wearing a VR headset) a virtual hand that moved in a way that did not correspond to movements of the subject’s real hand. The mismatch between the expected and actual consequences of a given action justifies the attribution of sensory outcomes to exogenous (external) rather than endogenous (internal) causes, such that attribution of sensory outcomes to exogenous causes results in a reduced or absent sense of agency (Sirigu et al. 1999). Indeed, incongruent action-outcomes have been linked to a reduced sense of agency (O’Sullivan et al. 2018). A self-other distinction critically relies on balancing this attribution to exogenous and endogenous causes.

Selectively attenuating precision on sensory inputs allows the system to filter out irrelevant inputs (Crapse and Sommer 2008a), such as those caused by self-generated actions. One such example of this is saccadic suppression, where, despite saccadic eye movements, perception of the environment remains stable. Reduced precision on afferent inputs from self-produced tactile sensation is thought to cause inability to tickle oneself (Blakemore et al. 2000). Sensory attenuation in relation to movement and self-experience will be discussed in more detail in the sections on disturbances of self-consciousness and other minds.


Affective inference

Affective inference, on the current account, is also understood in terms of an inference about allostatic control. Affective inference—in terms of a contextually flexible inference of the precision on prior preferences and epistemic affordances (opportunities for epistemic gain or uncertainty reduction)—acts to ‘tune’ the organism to possibilities for self-evidencing action in the environment. Precision on prior preferences is inferred across the control hierarchy (or ‘deep goal hierarchy’ Pezzulo and Cisek 2019). Pain perception is a great example of ‘tuning’ to the current context. Precision is allocated to, for instance, the ‘healthy body condition’ prior preference (Ongaro and Kaptchuk 2019) according to a host of contextual factors. This flexibility enables organisms to ‘tune their own pain perception according to both their prior beliefs and the specific biological goals they believe are attainable in that context’ (Moutoussis et al. 2014, 70). In accordance with this, mounting evidence speaks against the more classical view of pain as tracking tissue damage, in favour of a view of pain perception as underpinned by a process of inference. In particular, Bayesian models of pain perception provide evidence that affectively charged percepts are inferential in nature (Morton et al. 2010; Anchisi and Zanon 2015). For example, studies show that patients who receive treatment in a medical context experience considerably higher pain relief than those who receive analgesic drug treatment covertly (Benedetti et al. 2003). The felt intensity of pain can be adjusted according to the context and the survival needs of the animal, modulated by attention, expectation, conditioned pain modulation and placebo responses (Atlas and Wager 2012; Atlas et al. 2014; Kirsch et al. 2014; Kong and Benedetti 2014). Even social information can have a profound influence on experience: other people’s pain reports affected participants’ pain experience and physiological indicators of increased pain such as the skin conductance response (Koban and Wager 2016).

Inference about endogenous control of self-evidencing outcomes can thus be understood as an inference about ‘subjective fitness’—the expected precision of the organism’s phenotype-congruent action model (Hesp et al. 2021). On this account, interoceptively registered bodily changes track how well the organism is doing at minimizing expected free energy—i.e. fulfilling prior preferences and resolving uncertainty (Joffily and Coricelli 2013; Seth and Friston 2016; Kiverstein et al. 2019). This contextually flexible evaluation of model fitness is essential for organisms to persist and perform adaptive actions in volatile environments. Promoting self-evidencing outcomes on longer timescales requires organisms to be sensitive not only to prediction error reduction in the present, but the rate of prediction error reduction over time (Joffily and Coricelli 2013; Kiverstein et al. 2019; Van de Cruys 2017). On this view, certain rates of prediction error over time—such as progress towards a goal—become prior preferences fulfilled by (temporally extended) action. As such, deviation from the prior preference manifests to the system affectively, acting as motivation to realize the prior preference via action. The roots of these approaches can be traced to control theoretic precursors that postulate a second feedback system that senses and regulates the rate of the action guiding system (Carver and Scheier 1990).

Inference about the reliability of the action model allows the system to increase or decrease precision on the current policy (Kiverstein et al. 2019; Hesp et al. 2021). For instance, if the current policy is reducing prediction error at a rate that is worse than expected, this manifests to the system as negative affect and acts as an incentive to discontinue the current course of action. Affective valence here is being reimagined within the active inference framework as a ‘domain general controller’ (Deane et al. 2020; Ramstead et al. 2020b). Inference about how well the system can expect to reduce error via action ‘in general’ is informative as it informs precision on policies across contexts, acting as a domain general prior on the precision of policies generated by the action model (Hesp et al. 2020).

Deane et al. (2020) suggest that a sensitivity to worse than expected rates of prediction error reduction over time (Kiverstein et al. 2017, Hesp et al. 2021), manifesting phenomenologically as negative affect, drives the system to switch to more tractable goals. For instance, while loss of control in a particular context (such as learning to play a particularly difficult piece in a piece of music) might create negative affect, this negative affect functions as an incentive to switch to a task with a better expected rate of prediction error reduction. As such, loss of control in a particular domain does not necessarily impact a more domain-general sense of control, related to more fundamental and pervasive sense of self as a causally efficacious agent. As such, affective inference—inferring precision on prior preferences and epistemic affordances across multiple hierarchical levels—tunes the organism to adaptive actions in the given context.


Towards a theory of subjectivity

In his paper ‘What is it like to be a bat?’ Thomas Nagel argues:

An organism has conscious mental states if and only if there is something it is like to ‘be’ that organism—something it is like ‘for’ the organism. (Nagel 1974, 436)

The preceding sections saw how the sense of being a ‘self’ is inherent in active inference. It may be argued however that while the active inference framework may shed light on the computational correlates of the contents of consciousness, it cannot shed light on why there is a subject of experience in the first place—why there is ‘something it is like’ to be an agent.

Why then, in the active inference framework, is experience ‘felt’? The claim here is that phenomenal consciousness is underpinned by estimation of the precision of its own action model. To be more specific: the system needs to engage in subjective valuation, i.e.—set precision on competing action policies across multiple levels of the hierarchy based on inference about endogenous control of self-evidencing outcomes. Precision on action policies on this account is understood to be a fundamentally ‘affective inference’. This gives a novel perspective on how to conceive of why incoming sensory data should mean something ‘for me’ as a subject, computationally the meaning being ‘What does this mean for precision on my action model?’. This confidence estimate in the action model spans multiple levels of the hierarchy, from the highest levels underpinning the most invariant expectations of allostatic control across contexts to the lowest levels tracking moment-to-moment sensorimotor action selection and correction. This valuation is ‘subjective’ in the sense that it can be out of step with reality—i.e. the system could be over-confident or under-confident in these estimations.

As such, the mechanisms underpinning phenomenal consciousness on the current picture—a ‘deep control model’—act to ‘tune’ the organism to adaptive action in the world across multiple interlocking timescales. On this view, our status as ‘beast machines’ shapes our subjective experience (Seth and Tsakiris 2018). For instance, it has been demonstrated that neutral stimuli are more often perceived as fearful when subjects were given (false) feedback of increased heart rate (Anderson et al. 2012). Hierarchically (and temporally) deep contextualization of interoceptive signals tunes an organism to appropriate action and engagement with environmental affordances (Pezzulo and Cisek 2019) and assigns appropriate weight to priors and ascending prediction errors across the cortical hierarchy. Notice that this means that even state estimation associated with perceptual inference is determined by the overarching inference about control of self-evidencing outcomes—both in terms of the predictive models encoding sensorimotor relations (‘counterfactual richness’) grounding the subjective reality of perceptual contents (Seth 2014) and in terms of those perceptual contents being filtered through deep goal hierarchies (Pezzulo et al. 2015).

It is through this inference about allostatic control that a conscious agent encounters ‘a structured world apt for action and intervention, and inflected at every level, by an interoceptively-mediated sense of mattering, reflecting “how things are for me as an embodied agent”’ (Clark 2019, 7). The ‘sensorimotor’ and ‘affective’ dimensions of consciousness on this view are both underpinned by a hierarchically deep inference on the fit between the actual and expected outcomes of actions that informs subsequent action selection. Even the low-level inference about sensorimotor control operates within the context of nested goal hierarchies and as such is understood as inherently affective in virtue of being enslaved by higher-level goals (Pezzulo et al. 2015). For instance, failing to execute a motor command correctly involves violating an expected rate of prediction error reduction. Hierarchically deep inference means that experience of the world is suffused with our ‘cares and concerns’ (Ramstead et al. 2020b) across multiple levels and accords with the view that visual perceptual experience is determined by the agent’s ‘poise’ over the ‘action space’, where we encounter the world as a ‘matrix of possibilities for pursuing and accomplishing one’s intentional actions, goals and projects’ (Ward et al. 2011, 1).

Interpreting what the current sensory input means ‘for me’—i.e. for precision on the action model at different levels of the hierarchy—allows the system to arbitrate between competing affordances on different timescales. The upshot of this is a common motivational currency for navigating trade-offs between affordances competing on different timescales (Pezzulo and Cisek 2019). Conceiving of valence as a ‘common currency’ to arbitrate between action plans in this way connects this proposal to numerous accounts of phenomenal consciousness in the literature (Cabanac 1992; Morsella 2005; Merker 2007). Moreover, contextual modulation of the precision on expected free energy is critically related to flexible behavioural control (Pezzulo et al. 2015) and as such bridges the current story to the association between consciousness and flexible behaviour (Dehaene et al. 2017).


The shape of subjectivity: disruptions in (self-)consciousness

Altered self-experience provides some of the most compelling illustrations as to how subjectivity is shaped through an inference about allostatic control. This section briefly considers depersonalization and meditation.

A domain-general loss of precision control has been used to understand depersonalization disorder (Deane et al. 2020). This account—through connecting views of affectivity in terms of precision estimation on expected free energy to the feeling of being an agent—casts the computational mechanisms of depersonalization as an inferred loss of allostatic control, whereby the system posits itself as causally inefficacious at realizing self-evidencing outcomes across contexts. As we saw in the previous section, the affective system usually acts to tune the system to action opportunities across multiple interlocking timescales. Depersonalization is understood as occurring due to a global loss of precision on action policies and as such the world loses ‘phenomenal depth’—as described by sufferers of depersonalization—in that it ceases to solicit engagement and is perceived as flat or two-dimensional (Medford et al. 2006; Ciaunica et al. 2021). Major depression, similarly, has been characterized in terms of ‘domain general inference of a loss of allostatic control’ (Ramstead et al. 2020b).

This phenomenology is contrasted with a perceived gain in allostatic control in meditation practitioners, as precision (on prior preferences, for instance) becomes increasingly under endogenous control (Deane et al. 2020). This account makes use of the fact that mental action in active inference follows just the same principles as the account of action initiation put forward earlier, but where the hidden states are ‘attentional’ states (precisions) and the state transitions are transitions between attentional states (Smith et al. 2020). The idea here is that ‘focused attention meditation’ (Lutz et al. 2019) can be understood as the endogenous withdrawal of precision from prior preferences, due to the practice of repeatedly bringing attention back to the attentional object, such as the breath. For instance, the sensation of an itch can be understood in terms of increased precision on a scratching policy. Through withdrawing precision from the sensation and back to the target sensation (such as the breath) the system learns an extra level of agentive control, i.e.—endogenous control of precision on prior preferences. Over time, this becomes domain general, such that the system learns to have precision control over its own affective system.


Consciousness in other systems

This section will provide a preliminary sketch of how, through identifying the neural mechanisms associated with the allostatic control model, we can assuage the concerns posed by the ‘other systems’ argument and begin to make inferences about which kinds of creatures and systems are likely to be conscious subjects. The view put forward in this paper is that inference about confidence in endogenous self-evidencing capacity, or precision on expected free energy, underpins phenomenal consciousness. Inference about control balances physiological and perceptual sensory attenuation mechanisms in order to ‘tune’ organisms to act adaptively in their environment, enabling both adaptive motor control and determining the perceptual salience in the given context. This section sketches how the complex sensory attenuation mechanisms associated with consciousness on the present account can give clues as to the neuroanatomical substrates and processes that are indicative of conscious experience.

Holst and Mittelstaedt (1950) identified an interpretative problem as to whether sensory signals arise from the environment or the animal’s own muscles and movement, dubbed the ‘reafference problem’. The reafference problem arises due to the fact that sensory receptors are indifferent to the cause of their activation, whether it be from exafference—activation stemming from the environment, or reafference—inputs that result from an animal’s own movements (Holst and Mittelstaedt 1950). Sensory neurons are able to respond with high sensitivity to exafferent inputs despite disruptive self-generated inputs (Bell 1981; Poulet and Hedwig 2002; Eliades and Wang 2008; Keller and Hahnloser 2009; Ahrens et al. 2012). Across species, the sophisticated filtration process underpinning this high sensitivity to exafferent inputs is thought to be achieved through the mechanisms of ‘corollary discharge’—predictions of the sensory consequences of actions that act to suppress reafferent inputs (Crapse and Sommer 2008a). In predictive processing, corollary discharge can be understood simply as top-down predictions that explain away sensory prediction error (Friston et al. 2010).

Crapse and Sommer (2008a) make a distinction between lower-order (reflex-inhibition and sensory filtration) and higher-order (sensory analysis and sensorimotor learning/planning) corollary discharge based on their underlying neuroanatomical substrates. Lower-order corollary discharge enables reflex inhibition and sensory filtration, in order to regulate and control sensation entering the central nervous system, and appear to have the function of ‘transient, protective inhibition of sensory networks’ (Crapse and Sommer 2008a, 592). For example, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans—often used to study simple nervous systems—has a simple behavioural repertoire and only 302 neurons and uses lower-order corollary discharge in order to inhibit reflexes that would be triggered by reafference. Klein and Barron (2016) argue that in this very simple nervous system—with only two layers separating sensory neurons from motor neurons—there is no evidence that this sensory attenuation mechanism contributes to a structured model of the self or a model of action-outcome contingencies informing selection from a range of possible actions. This is behaviourally as well as neuroanatomically apparent: when hungry, nematodes respond with increased locomotion in a random search pattern (Lüersen et al. 2014; Artyukhin et al. 2015). By contrast, hungry rodents, ants and bees will direct their search towards locations where they have encountered food previously (Oades and Isaacson 1978; Seeley 1995; Wehner 2013). In the case of the nematode, the corollary discharge does not seem indicative of a model of temporally deep control, and the lack of anticipatory and goal-driven behaviour makes it unlikely for nematodes to have phenomenal consciousness on the present proposal.

Crapse and Sommer (2008a) identify higher-order corollary discharge as involved in predictive control in perceptual cohesion and action sequencing—this ‘does’ seem suggestive of a deep control model. For example, bats explore their environment by emitting beams of sound and then comparing the emission with the spatiotemporal aspects of the returning echo and to construct a cohesive and counterfactually rich world model. This complex process involves having predictions about regularities tracking multiple timescales (Kiebel et al. 2008), and the differences between the corollary discharge and the input are used to infer properties such as the size, speed and location of the object reflecting the sound. In action sequencing, higher-order corollary discharge is also involved in temporally extended planning strategies—e.g. primates use corollary discharge to keep an internal record of the current saccade to facilitate planning the next saccade (Crapse and Sommer 2008b). Complex reafferent processing is also shown in juvenile songbirds as they imitate the song of tutor (Brainard and Doupe 2000; Margoliash 2002). This requires refining ongoing action plans via continuous updating of an internal record of current state, allowing for flexible contextual interpretation of sensory input towards the realization of temporally deep goals (Crapse and Sommer 2008a).

These complex and context-sensitive sensory filtration mechanisms may be the most promising hallmarks of consciousness in non-human animals. Peter Godrey-Smith—in considering the evolution of subjectivity—reaches a similar conclusion: ‘once animals start to accommodate and utilize reafference, the character of sensing changes. The animal is now not only open to the world, but open to the world as the world, as distinct from self.’ (Godfrey-Smith 2019, 13; Jékely et al. 2021). The current account may also provide a fuller picture of why ‘unlimited associative learning’—due to facilitating the complex reafferent processes associated with a deep self-model—may be a marker of the evolutionary transition to minimal consciousness (Bronfman et al. 2016; Ginsburg and Jablonka 2019; Birch et al. 2020).


The selflessness challenge

Understanding consciousness in terms of self-consciousness and self-modelling aligns the current account with many other approaches across psychology, neuroscience and philosophy that cast self-consciousness as necessary or constitutive of consciousness itself (Damasio 1999; Metzinger 2003; Gallagher 2010, Zahavi 2014; Lou et al. 2017; Millière 2017). For instance, variations on this claim made in the phenomenological tradition date back at least to Husserl, and more recently Zahavi (2014) says that ‘[S]elf-consciousness is an integral and constitutive feature of phenomenal consciousness […]’ (p. 62). Damasio (1999) argues ‘If “self-consciousness” is taken to mean “consciousness with a sense of self,” then all human consciousness is necessarily covered by the term—there is just no other kind of consciousness as far as I can see’ (p. 19). All these ‘subjectivity theories’ take on the idea that consciousness is phenomenologically centred on the self as the experiencing subject, where consciousness entails a kind of self-consciousness.

Milliere and Metzinger (2020) argues that subjectivity theories are committed to the ‘necessity claim’—the claim self-consciousness is necessary for consciousness in general, in contrast to the ‘typicality claim’—that self-consciousness is merely present in ordinary experience. Millière distinguishes six different notions of self-consciousness that are commonly discussed in the literature, arguing that there is empirical evidence that there are states of consciousness where these states fail to be instantiated.

The necessity claim appears to be embedded into the active inference framework. Friston (2018) states ‘Is self-consciousness necessary for consciousness? The answer is yes. So, there you have it—the answer is yes.’ (p. 1). On one hand, the capacity to formalize the deep links between consciousness and self-consciousness is an explanatory advantage of the active inference framework. It provides a unifying theoretical framework for understanding a host of closely related phenomena, including selfhood, emotion, attention and the sense of agency.

On the other hand, commitment to the stronger claim may present a problem for active inference in delivering a theory of consciousness. Milliere and Metzinger (2020) highlight the fact that this view of self-consciousness as embedded into the very structure of experience may be what Dennett calls Philosopher’s Syndrome: ‘mistaking a failure of imagination for an insight into necessity’ (Dennett 1993, 401). Several recent papers have argued that experiences of altered selfhood present a problem for theories of consciousness that claim self-consciousness is necessary for consciousness (Billon and Kriegel 2016; Letheby 2020; Millière 2020). For instance, Billon and Kriegel (2016) take the cases of ‘inserted thoughts’ in schizophrenia, and the disowned mental states of patients with depersonalization disorder, as problematic cases for proponents of the claim that self-consciousness is necessary for consciousness—as apparent cases where self-consciousness appears to be missing from consciousness.

The subjectivity theorist, then, seems to have two options. The first is to deny that these cases truly present a challenge to subjectivity theories, in virtue of being only ‘partially selfless’. Millière notes that none of the partially selfless states of consciousness would be sufficient to rule out a disjunctive version of the necessity claim—where any form of self-consciousness would be sufficient but not necessary for consciousness. The second option is to deny that there really are states of consciousness lacking in self-consciousness. This line of argument appears more difficult in the face of evidence for states of consciousness that appear to be ‘totally selfless’—lacking in all the ways one could be self-conscious. Both Millière (2020) and Letheby (2020) take the ‘totally selfless’ states of psychedelic-induced ego-dissolution to be evidence against the claim that self-consciousness is necessary for consciousness.

Serotonergic psychedelics such as lysergic acid diethylamide, psilocybin and N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT; found in ayahuasca) are known to produce profound alterations in phenomenology (Preller and Vollenweider 2016). Most notably for present purposes, psychedelic experiences, especially at high doses, are characterized by profound alterations in self-consciousness (Huxley 1952; Leary et al. 1964; Lebedev et al. 2015). Both Millière (2020) and Letheby (2020) argue that the ‘total’ ego-dissolution induced by the serotonergic psychedelic 5-methoxy-DMT (5-MeO-DMT) is the strongest evidence against the view that self-consciousness is necessary or constitutive of consciousness. While there is empirical evidence that some advanced forms of meditation practice can also occasion ‘totally’ selfless states (Millière et al. 2018; Winter et al. 2020; Laukkonen and Slagter 2021), here I will focus on psychedelics as the most robust catalysts of selfless states.

Consider these phenomenological reports of the 5-MeO-DMT experience retrieved from the database of drug experiences erowid.org, cited in Millière (2020) as evidence of ‘totally selfless’ states:

I was completely disassociated from the ‘ real world’ and [from] any sense of self. It was the most jarring feeling. (#107905)

It is a complete annihilation of self […]. I was absolutely nothing but a sensory perceiver, stuck within the split seconds that were eternity. (#18198)

It felt as if all of the atoms of the molecules that typically form my physical self simply dispersed, and even my sense of self, or ego, vanished […]. (#56384)

I wasn’t me any longer. There was no me. There was no ego. (#27601)

These experiences present considerable counterevidence to the necessity claim, owing to being both vividly phenomenally conscious while totally lacking in any kind of ordinary self-consciousness. Do these experiences provide genuine evidence against the claim that self-consciousness is necessary for consciousness? More specifically, are they problematic for the active inference account of consciousness in terms of self-consciousness? To address this question, the next section will provide an account of ego-dissolution in active inference.


Psychedelics and selflessness in active inference

The REBUS—‘RElaxed Beliefs Under pSychedelics’—model casts the action of psychedelics in the predictive brain in terms of a ‘relaxation’ (lowering) of the precision of high-level priors, thereby liberating bottom-up information flow (Carhart-Harris and Friston 2020). Although a preliminary account, the REBUS model is growing in empirical support (Alamia et al. 2020; Dupuis 2020; Girn et al. 2020; Herzog et al. 2020). The phenomenology of the psychedelic experience is thought to accord with this description of the underlying computational mechanisms. Recall that, in a predictive coding scheme, if prediction error can be explained away at lower levels, high-level representations of the model remain stable, as there is no need to update. Under psychedelics, the relaxation of high-level priors means that prediction errors that would usually be explained at lower levels are driven up the predictive hierarchy, resulting in instability in higher-level representations, whereby high-level priors no longer constrain lower-level predictions. At lower doses, this manifests as the phenomenological effects of psychedelics—e.g. walls may have the appearance of ‘breathing’ (Carhart-Harris and Friston 2019).

This relaxation of high-level priors results in the system adopting a high Bayesian learning rate on sensory evidence (Mathys et al. 2014; Hohwy 2017; Deane 2020). A low learning rate means there is a greater influence of higher-level priors in determining the resulting posterior, and a high learning rate means there is a higher precision on sensory evidence and less constraint imposed by higher-level priors. Appropriately setting the Bayesian learning rate—the precision on sensory evidence—is crucial for the system to approximate Bayesian inference over time, as an overreliance on prior expectations leads to a failure to learn from sensory evidence and an overreliance on sensory evidence can lead the system to ‘overfit’—essentially, find patterns in noise. The perceptual effects of psychedelics have been characterized as ‘rampant’ overfitting of sensory evidence (Deane 2020)—where the system cycles through candidate hypotheses to explain the influx of highly precise prediction error ascending the cortical hierarchy.

Another feature of psychedelic phenomenology is that sensory impressions often take on a unique significance often described as highly aesthetic. Consider Aldous Huxley’s descriptions of the mescaline experience in ‘The Doors of Perception’ (1952):

I looked down by chance, and went on passionately staring by choice, at my own crossed legs. Those folds in the trousers—what a labyrinth of endlessly significant complexity! And the texture of the gray flannel—how rich, how deeply, mysteriously sumptuous! (p. 39)

The books, for example, with which my study walls were lined. Like the flowers, they glowed, when I looked at them, with brighter colors, a profounder significance. (p. 24)

On the current account, this quality of significance accompanying the perceptual effects of psychedelics can be understood as the system inferring high epistemic value due to the high precision on sensory evidence. This is because ‘the better the precision on the prediction error, the higher the learning rate; that is, the more we trust the quality of the evidence the more we should learn from it’ (Hohwy 2017, 76). Under the view of affective experiences broadly described earlier as inference about ‘how well am I self-evidencing?’—the positive emotions in psychedelic experiences: ‘exhilarated elation with unmotivated laughter, deep feelings of peace, exuberant joy, and hedonistic pleasure’ (Preller and Vollenweider 2016, 236)—could put down to the greater than expected epistemic value associated with the current policy. This point is relevant for the affective characterization of ego-dissolution to come.


Psychedelic-induced ego-dissolution

Deane (2020) characterizes psychedelic-induced ego-dissolution as resulting from a failure of sensory attenuation (see Girn et al. 2020; for recent empirical support for this hypothesis). Recall that predictions of the sensory consequences of actions (‘corollary discharges’) allow the system to differentiate between endogenous (self) and exogenous (other) causes of sensation, such that unexpected sensation is attributed to external causes. Under a view of phenomenal selfhood as an allostatic control model, the sense of being an agent arises from inferring oneself to be an endogenous cause of sensation; i.e. determined by the predictability of action-outcome contingencies. A number of disruptions in self-experience have been accounted for in these terms. For instance, the symptomatology of schizophrenia—such as thought insertion, where patients report feeling that their thoughts are not their own—have been understood in terms of a failure of these sensory attenuation mechanisms (Ford and Mathalon 2005; Frith 2005; Rösler et al. 2015; Thakkar et al. 2021). Here, the system fails to attribute self-generated outcomes to endogenous rather than exogenous causes, with the phenomenological manifestation to the agent being a perceived loss of agency over their thoughts (Stephens and Graham 1994; O’Brien and Opie 2003; Gallagher 2004). In the case of voice hearing this can result in attribution of inner speech to an external source such as another agent (Ford and Mathalon 2005; Ford et al. 2007).

Corollary discharges—as predictions of the sensory consequences of actions—act to cancel out self-generated sensory outcomes via sensory attenuation. Unexpected consequences are then attributed to exogenous rather than endogenous causes. This means that the more sensory prediction error is generated, the more likely it is that an action or thought has external as opposed internal or endogenous causes (Frith 2005; Corlett et al. 2019). Deane (2020) notes that under the REBUS model of the action of psychedelics, the influx of both exteroceptive and interoceptive prediction error means that the outcomes of actions (and mental actions) become radically unpredictable. As a result, the system ceases to posit itself as an endogenous controller of sensation (and as a causally efficacious agent)—manifesting phenomenologically as ego-dissolution. In the account of thought insertion above, the thought was attributed to ‘other’ rather than self, due to not being inferred to be self-generated, based on a failure of these mechanisms. Ego-dissolution here is being understood in terms of similar mechanisms to the example of thought insertion described above but is experienced as a more global dissolution of selfhood due to the influx of unpredictable inputs from across the cortex, as opposed to being isolated to certain activity.


Affective tone

While ego-dissolution is described as being devoid of self-consciousness, it is nonetheless described as a highly conscious state, characterized by affective extremes. Carhart-Harris and Friston (2020) distinguish between ‘complete ego-dissolution’—a state of ‘complete surrender, associated bliss, and union with all things’ (Carhart-Harris and Friston 2019, 321); and ‘incomplete’ ego-dissolution—a state characterized by intense fear, anxiety and distress.

‘Complete’ ego-dissolution can be understood on the current account to be underpinned by two closely related computational mechanisms. The first relates to pragmatic value and prior preferences. Recall that, on the account of self-modelling proposed here, the inference on allostatic control tunes precision on expected free energy. For instance, this could be a higher precision on a particular prior preference (consider the example of pain perception given earlier). Precision on unfulfilled prior preferences can be a persistent source of suffering to the system—one such example being chronic pain, where chronic pain is underpinned by high precision on a prior preference that is unable to be fulfilled through action (Hechler et al. 2016). On the view that action arises from minimizing the discrepancy between the actual (inferred) current state and the desired state, relaxation of the constraining influence of high-level priors means they cease to structure consciousness to engage the organism in their fulfilment, and as such, end their associated suffering. High-level priors constraining more domain-general affective states such as mood (Clark et al. 2018) would also be relaxed under the REBUS model. This connects closely to the therapeutic potential of the experience: ‘psychedelics work to relax the precision weighting of pathologically overweighted priors underpinning various expressions of mental illness’ (Carhart-Harris and Friston 2020, 1). Deane (2020) highlights that the lessened influence of prior preferences accords with descriptions of the phenomenology of ego-dissolution, for instance: ‘It felt as if “I” did no longer exist. There was purely my sensory perception of my environment, but sensory input was not translated into needs, feelings, or acting by “me”’ (unpublished online survey data quoted in Millière et al. 2018, 7).

There is another reason ‘complete’ ego-dissolution may be characteristically ecstatic. Inference about allostatic control is not just about realizing the pragmatic affordances of action, but also in maximizing the epistemic value associated with a given policy. Recall that, in normal functioning, precision on sensory information would track the expected epistemic value of sensory inputs. In the psychedelic state, the relaxation of high-level priors, and corresponding increase in sensory precision, means the system infers that the current state is realizing great epistemic value (See ‘Psychedelics and Insight’ in Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2020). This particular phenomenological quality seems unique to the serotonergic psychedelics—in a direct comparison between psilocybin and dextromethorphan (a non-serotonergic psychedelic) experiences, psilocybin produced ‘greater visual, mystical-type, insightful, and musical experiences’ (Carbonaro et al. 2018, 1).


Responding to the selflessness challenge

We can now return to the question of whether psychedelic-induced ego-dissolution threatens active inference theories of consciousness grounded in self-modelling. To recap the central position of this paper, subjectivity is underpinned by an inference about allostatic control—namely an inference on ‘how well am I self-evidencing’. In other words, subjectivity is underpinned by an inference evaluating about how well the system is bringing about (phenotype-specific) expected outcomes, informing policy selection, and shapes subjectivity determining what is salient to the organism. This hierarchically deep inference about precision on the action model is understood to be the computational underpinnings of phenomenal selfhood—the sense of being an agent. Phenomenal selfhood on this view is deep in that it relates to an inference about the fit between actual and expected outcomes on multiple hierarchical levels, tracking expected outcomes on proximal and distal timescales. In other words, this evaluation of the fit between the expectations and outcomes ranges from transient sensorimotor expectations about the how sensation will unfold contingent on motor actions, to the temporally deep (and abstract) expectations of allostatic control across contexts. These ‘deep’ self-models structure subjectivity in permeating perception of the world—the ‘meaning’ of sensation is determined by what it means ‘for me’—i.e. the implications for control of interoceptive states and allostatic control.

As we have seen, at first glance selfless states such as those occasioned by psychedelics threaten the necessity relationship between phenomenal self-modelling and consciousness. However, equipped with the account of the computational mechanisms underpinning psychedelic-induced ego-dissolution of the previous section, the inferential process evaluating the fit between model and world is shown to be intact, as the phenomenology of ego-dissolution (complete or incomplete) on this account is underpinned by a very particular inference about allostatic control that remains present in the psychedelic state.

The present account puts subjective valuation as the most basic constitutive feature of a conscious experience—sensation is always infused with what it ‘means’ for the organism: ‘not everything that happens to us enters our awareness, not by far … but everything that does is not merely informationally registered but also felt’ (Kolodny et al. 2021, 2). This fact is brought into sharp relief in the account of psychedelic-induced ego-dissolution, as affective experience remains even when all the other structuring features of experience are extinguished. The upshot of this view is that affective valence can be understood as the most fundamental part of conscious experience (Panksepp 1998, Damasio 1999, Damasio and Carvalho 2013; Man and Damasio 2018). This is a view that dates back at least as far as George John Romanes

‘The raison d’être of Consciousness may have been that of supplying the condition to the feeling of Pleasure and Pain.’ (Romanes 1888, 111)

Grounding consciousness in basic affectivity also has a precedent in the literature on the free energy principle and consciousness, which is particularly consonant with the current picture. Mark Solms has argued, partially based on evidence of consciousness in decorticated animals and congenitally decorticate (hydranencephalic) humans, that

‘Consciousness itself is affective. Everything else (from motivation and attention, leading to action and perception, and thereby to learning)—all of it—is a functional of affect. Affect obliges the organism to engage with the outside world.’ (Solms 2019, 12)

Moreover, this view seems aligned with a view of ego-dissolution as only partially selfless states and with the view proposed here that higher layers of the phenomenal self-model structure consciousness

‘Affect just is a self-state (and through feeling—i.e., precision optimisation—it necessarily generates consciousness itself), which activates (selects) salient perceptual representations, which eventually include cognitive re-representations of the self.’ (Solms and Friston 2018, 17)

On this view, feelings in the form of subjectively felt valence are the most basic constitutive phenomenal states, they pervade all of experience, guiding the organism to fitness-promoting states (Inzlicht et al. 2015; Kolodny et al. 2021). While in typical experience, subjective valuation functions to fine-tune learning (Eldar et al. 2016) and regulate behaviour, we can see the same mechanisms in place in atypical experience such as the psychedelic state.

It is reasonable to assume that many will not be satisfied with this characterization of self-consciousness. For instance, on the definition of self-consciousness as consciousness of oneself ‘as oneself’ (Smith 2017; Millière 2020), it seems reasonable to conclude that psychedelic-induced ego-dissolution is best understood as being totally selfless, as argued by Millière (2020) and Letheby (2020). It may be the case that whether ego-dissolution is understood as a state totally devoid of self-consciousness boils down to how self-consciousness is defined. Millière (2017) notes that the disagreements about the necessity claim and the typicality claim may hinge on terminological variation (Guillot 2017), due to the polysemy of ‘self-consciousness’ and ‘sense of self’. For present purposes, this is inconsequential. On its more stringent definition, it may be argued that self-consciousness is truly absent in states of drug-induced ego-dissolution—i.e. if the affective inference present in these states is deemed not to qualify as self-consciousness due to not being understood as a representation of oneself ‘as oneself’. On this definition, the active inference approach to consciousness put forward in this paper simply does not qualify as a subjectivity theory and so is not vulnerable to the selflessness challenge.

It is worth acknowledging there that while psychedelic states may instantiate affective consciousness in the absence of sensorimotor consciousness, the current account does not rule out that there can be states of consciousness that vary on these dimensions. The possibility of states of consciousness, which in contrast to the psychedelic state, score low on domain-general affectivity and high on sensorimotor consciousness is consistent with the current account. Godfrey-Smith (2019) argues that sensorimotor consciousness and evaluative consciousness may be separable dimensions of consciousness, raising the possibility of two types of phenomena that are grouped under ‘subjective experience’:

‘If we ask, introspectively, about conspicuous features of human experience that may have early forms, it might be intuitive that one side of the phenomenon involves tracking external objects and events as external – achieving a point of view on things – while another involves distinctions between good and bad, a distinction that might be present in phenomenal washes that have no definite referral to organism or to environment.’ (p. 14)

Godfrey-Smith goes on to note that some spiders demonstrate complex perceptual capacities, but score low in respect to evidence for complex or varying motivational states. This would be expected in creatures that, given an evolutionary niche, do not need a more sophisticated ‘domain general controller’ instantiated by affective inference. Other creatures—such as certain gastropods—may have richer subjective valuation in the absence of more complex sensorimotor capacities. On the current account, however, both sensorimotor and evaluative aspects of consciousness are underpinned by a common evaluative inference about realizing phenotype-congruent outcomes across multiple timescales. In other words, an inference about how well the organism is bringing about expected states from low-level and temporally proximal motor plans to high-level and temporally distal expectations of self-evidencing outcomes. It is therefore consistent with the present account that the sensorimotor and affective aspects of consciousness can vary independently. That said, on the present account, sensorimotor consciousness is at least minimally affective owing to being driven by ‘systematic misrepresentations’ of the system in preferred states of being—it arises through the system tracking the discrepancy between actual and preferred states of being.

The active inference approach to consciousness and subjectivity put forward in this paper casts consciousness and self-consciousness as intimately connected, where phenomenal self-models ‘shape’ subjectivity. However, I have aimed to show that this approach can also accommodate (and illuminate) phenomenological states largely lacking in self-consciousness. These ‘selfless states’—understood as ‘(rare) cases in which normally congruent processes of computational and phenomenal self-modelling diverge’ (Limanowski and Friston 2020, 12)—retain the core aspect of phenomenal self-modelling—subjective evaluation—even in drastically altered states of consciousness like ego-dissolution.


Conclusion

This paper has argued that phenomenal consciousness is best understood within predictive processing in terms of the deep self-models inherent in the active inference framework. On this account, subjectivity is structured by a ‘deep control model’—a hierarchically deep self-model that is tracking the temporally deep endogenous control of self-evidencing outcomes. Higher levels provide deep contextualization (interoceptive inference) of afferent signals from the body (Miller and Clark 2017), tuning the organism to adaptive opportunities for action. Two objections to this view have been considered: (i) that the core characteristics of consciousness in predictive processing is underspecified and as such cannot inform which systems are conscious, and (ii) the challenge of psychedelic-induced ego-dissolution. I have argued that neither of these objections is troubling for an active inference theory of consciousness and as such active inference is a very promising framework for consciousness science.


Conflict of interest statement

None declared.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

None declared.


Bayesian theories of consciousness: a review in search for a minimal unifying model

Wiktor Rorot — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8512254, CC BY 4.0.

The goal of the paper is to review existing work on consciousness within the frameworks of Predictive Processing, Active Inference, and Free Energy Principle. The emphasis is put on the role played by the precision and complexity of the internal generative model. In the light of those proposals, these two properties appear to be the minimal necessary components for the emergence of conscious experience—a Minimal Unifying Model of consciousness.


Introduction

[T]his is not mysterious, it is just a mathematical statement of the way things are. (Friston et al. 2020, 11)

The goal of this paper is to provide an overview of the research on consciousness—with specific focus on phenomenal consciousness (Block 1995)—that has been so far carried out within the formal schema of the Free Energy Principle (FEP) (e.g. Friston 2009).

Over the past 15 years, the FEP—together with related frameworks stemming from the same theoretical core, namely the Predictive Processing (PP; e.g. Hohwy 2013; Clark 2016; Wiese and Metzinger 2017) and Active Inference Framework (e.g. Friston et al. 2017a)—has become one of the central approaches in cognitive neuroscience, neurobiology, and philosophy of mind and an increasingly important approach to artificial intelligence, specifically reinforcement learning (see e.g. Ueltzhöffer 2018; Millidge 2019). I will refer to these theories with the name “Bayesian cognitive science,” coined by Ramstead et al. (2020), despite the fact that the FEP does not exhaust all possibilities for “Bayesian” theories of cognition and consciousness. Although there is much debate about the general viability and the de facto meaning of this framework (see e.g. Colombo and Wright 2018; Litwin and Miłkowski 2020; Andrews 2021), it currently seems that it is here to stay for the foreseeable future.

In a recent paper, Hohwy (2020) discusses the current focus of the FEP, as well as emerging new areas of research within this framework. Among them, he lists the growing body of work on consciousness. This work spans several, mutually exclusive, philosophical perspectives on subjective experience, as well as touches on issues common to many of them, such as the problem of identifying neural correlates of consciousness (Hohwy and Seth 2020). In this work, the FEP exhibits its “attractive duality” (Hohwy 2020, 11)—i.e. its orthogonality to extant lines of argument.

Surprisingly, despite the disparities, all those proposals are based on similar elements of the FEP formalism - in particular, the concepts of “precision” and “complexity” (in the technical sense of those two terms, described in the next section). Wanja Wiese (2020) has advanced the notion of a “minimal unifying model” as a framework for building a consensus between various accounts of consciousness. In this paper, I will review the existing body of work on consciousness in the Bayesian cognitive science. Based on this review, I will argue that these two properties of internal models—precision and complexity—do in fact constitute a minimal unifying model at least for Bayesian cognitive science of consciousness. In this way, this body of work can be interpreted as making coherent (albeit limited), empirically testable predictions about the neural mechanisms of consciousness.

In what follows, in the “A very short introduction to the FEP” section, I will provide a very short introduction to the FEP, focusing on the common elements of the three frameworks of Bayesian cognitive science. Next, in the “Conscious experience under the FEP” section, I will provide an overview of the theories of consciousness that employ these frameworks. In the “Discussion” section, I will discuss the Bayesian theories of consciousness in general, trying to gesture towards a common approach within those different accounts. Finally, in the “Precision and complexity as a Minimal Unifying Model” section, I will discuss the interpretation of the core of this common approach in terms of a minimal unifying model, which I believe to be the most informative.


A very short introduction to the FEP

The FEP (Friston 2019) states a simple tautology: any living system, as long as it stays alive, can be described as minimizing the dispersion of its constituent states. For the purpose of this definition, “living system” is understood as one that is in a nonequilibrium steady state (NESS), and staying alive means maintaining this status. To do this, the system has to remain far from the thermodynamic equilibrium in a (relatively) low entropy state (hence the tautology). Furthermore, the FEP cashes out the Good Regulator theorem (Conant and Ross Ashby 1970), which states that every good regulator of a system must be isomorphic with that system (i.e. must be a model of that system). As long as it remains far from thermodynamic equilibrium, the system behaves as if it employed or instantiated a generative model, an internal statistical representation of the target NESS density (and the worldly influences). Effectively, the system can be described as capable of anticipating the changes it undergoes and of adaptive behavior. The principle has been applied to a wide range of self-organizing systems (e.g. Friston and Stephan 2007; Friston 2013; Friston et al. 2015a; Kirchhoff and Kiverstein 2018; Fields and Levin 2019). However, from the philosophy of science perspective, it is best regarded as a modeling framework rather than a model per se [Litwin and Miłkowski (2020) and Andrews (2021) make a compelling argument in this direction].

With regard to cognition, the “Bayesian cognitive science” paints the picture of the brain as a hierarchical “prediction machine.” Using its information about the state of the world, specifically about the hidden causes of sensory input—formally represented by probability distributions referred to as the recognition density and the generative model—the brain (or the embodied cognitive system) attempts to predict the incoming stimuli. The mismatch between prediction and input, the prediction error, is then passed from the bottom up along the neural hierarchy and is used to bring the recognition density closer to the actual distribution of causes either via an update of the internal model itself—perceptual inference—or through active involvement with the world—active inference—which attempts to bring the hidden causes closer to the generative density (one can think of it as a self-fulfilling prophecy). The idea of the interplay between top-down prediction and bottom-up prediction error is at the core of the applications of the framework to actual neural circuits, as is the case with e.g. the predictive coding model of vision (Rao and Ballard 1999).

Prediction errors indicate surprisal (in the technical sense of information theory, mathematically equivalent to entropy), and this indicates that the system is leaving the NESS. Hence, the minimization of surprisal follows strictly from the formulation of the FEP. However, since this value is intractable, an approximation must be used. The (variational) free energy provides an upper bound on surprisal by measuring the difference between recognition and generative density.

This free energy functional can be formally decomposed into two equivalent formulations (see e.g. Friston 2009), corresponding to the aforementioned perceptual and active inference, which can be symbolically depicted as: $$ \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$$\begin{equation*}F = Divergence + Surprise\vspace*{-8pt}\end{equation*}$$\end{document} $$ $$ \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$$\begin{equation*}F = Complexity - Accuracy\vspace*{6pt}\end{equation*}$$\end{document} $$

The latter decomposition is crucial for our current purposes. These terms are defined as follows:

Complexity denotes the amount of information required to reconstruct the generative density, given a full knowledge of the recognition density (quantified with a Kullback–Leibler divergence between the two densities).

Accuracy denotes how close are the predictions generated by the internal model to the actual distribution of probabilities of observations, given the hidden causes.

Thus, the process of active inference can be understood as the process of selectively sampling the world to bring sensations closer to what is expected (note that, throughout the paper, the terms “precision” and “complexity” are used only in the technical sense described here and below.)

However, the increase in accuracy is bound to an increase in complexity and to the risk of overfitting the internal model. This fact comes simply from the irreducible uncertainty and randomness of the world. To take it into account, the model has to give up some accuracy (and complexity) in exchange for robustness.

Before I move to the discussion of how the Bayesian cognitive science tries to explain consciousness, I will provide an example of an explanation of attention employing the FEP (roughly falling under the PP label), showcasing crucial components of this framework and introducing further notions that will turn out central later on.


Attention under the FEP

PP explains attention in terms of the control of precision assigned to top-down hypotheses and bottom-up prediction error signals (Feldman and Friston 2010; Hohwy 2012). Formally speaking, precision is the inverse variance of a probability distribution. Precision, most notably describes the reliability of the prediction error signals (sensory noise) and the hypothesis generated from the generative density (neural noise). Despite both cases being formally defined in terms of inverse variance, precision assignments are independent and, as such, have to be independently tracked by the cognitive system. In the more complex case of active inference, Parr and Friston (2017a,b) identify three types of precision assignments, most importantly sensory and expected free energy precision (see also Smith et al. 2021), linked to different neurotransmitter systems in the brain and responsible for mechanisms of attention (Parr and Friston 2017b).

Since precisions are not given and need to be inferred from the available data, they are also subject to control from the system itself—especially since they are volatile between context and sensory modalities. As we learn from the Good Regulator theorem, if the brain is supposed to manage precision expectations (on a sub-personal level), then they have to be somehow modeled—either directly, in the form of precision expectations (as Hohwy 2012 argues), or indirectly, in the form of the hyperparameters of the generative density (Buckley et al. 2017). This process can also be regarded as somewhat disjointed and separate and hence interpreted as a specialized model for managing precisions [this point is leveraged by Dołęga and Dewhurst (2019) as we will see below].

Under this description, exogenous attention—the experience of a stimulus “with a large spatial and/or temporal contrast (abrupt onset)” (Hohwy 2012, 6)—arises due to the expectation that stronger signals should have a larger signal to noise ratio, and hence a better (sensory) precision. On the other hand, endogenous attention—the top-down, internally governed assignment of focus—operates by directly modulating the responses of neuronal units encoding beliefs about (expected free energy) precision (Hohwy 2012, 7), effectively assigning higher precision to the relevant spatiotemporal regions.

Hohwy (2012) discusses several examples of inattentional blindness to show in detail how this account of attention can explain them. Here, I will briefly recount his account of change blindness to make the somewhat formal discussion above more down to earth.

Consider an experiment where the participant is presented two similar images of an airplane. The second image differs in that it is covered in mudsplashes, as well as the airplane depicted misses an engine. Since the distractor—mudsplashes—offers a strong signal and is a relatively more visible (larger or more salient) change than the missing engine, it will “grab” the attention, i.e. high precision will be assigned to the corresponding parts of the signal. In result, this change will activate a specific hypothesis about the world—that the participant is presented with a transient occlusion or a change to the photo, with a strong prior belief that the photo beneath the mudsplashes remains the same. Only after this hypothesis is accepted as the model, and the prediction errors corresponding to unexpected appearance of mudsplashes are explained away, the subtle change corresponding to the absence of the engine can be assigned a higher precision and thus—can be brought to the participant’s attention.


Conscious experience under the FEP

There are several competing models that attempt to account for conscious experience—specifically for the phenomenal consciousness—employing tools provided by the Bayesian cognitive science. These are:

Bayesian implementation of Graziano’s Attention Schema Theory (B-AST) (Graziano 2013; Dołęga and Dewhurst 2019);

higher-order order state space approach (HOSS) (Fleming 2020);

Predictive Global Neuronal Workspace theory (PGNW) (Hohwy 2013, Whyte 2019; Whyte and Smith 2021);

the “generative entanglement” (GE) account (Clark 2018, Clark et al. 2019);

Projective Consciousness Model (PCM) (Rudrauf et al. 2017, Williford et al. 2018);

Dual Aspect Monism (DAM) (Solms and Friston 2018; Solms 2019; see also Chanes and Barrett 2016);

Markovian Monism (MM) (Friston et al. 2020).

The list above is organized roughly along the axis of the degree of realism of the accounts—as I have previously mentioned, the FEP research on consciousness is characterized by “attractive duality” in that it is orthogonal to extant distinctions. Space considerations do not allow for a full discussion of all the accounts listed above. I will, however, attempt to provide the gist of each.

It is important to note that these accounts address different aspects of phenomenal consciousness, so they are not entirely competing with one another. However, many of them overlap in some respects providing incoherent solutions to similar problems.

Finally, an important caveat: many of the theories of consciousness discussed below follow a realist interpretation of the FEP, arguing that brains (or embodied cognitive systems) actually do perform free energy (FE) minimization—e.g. Williford et al. (2018) uses the claim that “some quantity is being optimized” to argue for realism about the computational theory of mind. In some cases, this is justified by the authors’ reliance on specific process theories of FEP (PP and Active Inference Framework; see Andrews 2021); however, in general, such an approach does not stand up to scrutiny [as Andrews (2021) and van Es (2020) convincingly argue].


Bayesian Attention Schema Theory (AST)

AST has been originally proposed by Graziano (2013). Under this view, consciousness is subjective awareness, and it results from the subject attending to a given stimulus. More precisely, access consciousness is realized by attention, while the structure of first-person experience with associated phenomenology is explained by the properties of the process of control of attention. Control of attention falls upon an internal model called the “attention schema,” conceived of in analogy to the internal model of the body, namely—the body schema. This means that the subject has access to a simplified model of how attention is deployed, which it can look into whenever a report of what is it conscious of is required. And, according to AST, whenever we claim to be conscious of something, we are in fact using higher-order cognition to “introspect” our attention schema and report what information it holds. This proposal fits well with PP explanation of attention, described above, and, hence, a Bayesian implementation of AST has been recently proposed (Dołęga and Dewhurst 2019).

A crucial part of both original AST and its PP formalization is the account of the source of the “special” character of phenomenal consciousness. Attention schema represents the attentional processes for the agent in a sparse manner, as its task is to control perceptual and cognitive systems, which does not require fully detailed representation. Dołęga and Dewhurst point out that this “frugality” is in fact a necessary requirement of a PP model of cognition—it ensures a proper balance between complexity and accuracy. According to the AST, this sparsity results in the “user illusion” (Dennett 1991) of there being something special, nonfunctional, and irreducible about phenomenal experience.

Against the WH account (discussed below), they further incorporate elements of Daniel Dennett’s multiple drafts view of consciousness (Dennett 1991), arguing that it is not simply the best hypothesis that becomes the contents of conscious perception. First, it is necessary for active inference to reduce the space of possibilities and then for attention to actually probe the hypotheses. This ties the account of “fame in the brain” (Dołęga and Dewhurst 2020) back to the AST, providing a mature deflationary theory of consciousness that treats the illusion of phenomenality seriously.


The higher-order state space approach

The HOSS proposed by Stephen M. Fleming addresses directly the issue of reportability of the contents of subjective experience. Fleming proposes a computational model that accounts for the decision to report “I am aware of X” versus “I am unaware of X.” His central claim is that “awareness is a higher-order state in a generative model of perceptual contents” (Fleming 2020, 2). This means that awareness is explicitly included as a one-dimensional (discrete or continuous, if we allow for degrees of awareness) internal random variable in the generative model of a higher order than the variable tracking perceptual contents of experience. Simulations of Fleming’s remarkably simple model show its ability to account for phenomena of global ignition associated with awareness (an important element of different global workspace theories; see below).

Fleming’s model directly includes an asymmetry between being aware and unaware. The author claims that while being aware of an apple and of a hammer are two distinct states, both phenomenally and functionally, being unaware of apple and of hammer are very similar. This has consequences for prediction error in the PP account of perception: the hypothesis that the system is aware allows for much larger amount of prediction error since it invokes large belief updates within the generative model. Fleming’s simulations show these predictions to be correct and his interpretation takes the large Kullback–Leibler divergence, appearing when the system accepts the hypothesis “seen” versus “unseen” to correspond to the ignition pattern in the brain associated with reports of being aware.

Fleming further suggests a connection to precision in a possible extension of his model. He points out that inference about the state of awareness can be aided by beliefs about attention and other states of the perceptual system, which he suggests can be implemented as beliefs about precision. In this way, he links his proposal with Graziano’s AST (see previous section), even though according to HOSS attention only provides “input into resolving ambiguity” (Fleming 2020, 7, italics original), and is not sufficient for determining awareness, which is a significant incongruency between the theories.

Fleming’s account, inasmuch as it can be expanded beyond the model of awareness it focuses on, builds on higher-order theories of consciousness (e.g. Lau 2007). This distinguishes this proposal from other Bayesian accounts of consciousness discussed here. HOSS takes consciousness to be a higher-order process of inference, which may take place without any active cognitive access to this information, e.g. in working memory. This provides limitations on the kind of cognitive architectures that allow for conscious processes to occur: they must allow for factorization along at least two lines (presence/absence and the contents of perception) of a rich multidimensional state space. This factorization may be computationally demanding and resultingly limit the kinds of cognitive systems that could be considered conscious. It also introduces complexity into HOSS, which can be taken to control how this factorization is performed by imposing an upper bound of the amount of states distinguished, although Fleming does not make this connection.


The winning hypothesis account

The WH account of conscious perceptual experience has been originally hinted at in Jakob Hohwy and collaborators’ seminal paper on binocular rivalry (Hohwy et al. 2008; further developed in Hohwy 2012). It focuses on access consciousness (Block 1995) and does not discuss mental processes underlying phenomenal experience.

The main claim is that the contents of conscious experience are determined by the hypothesis about the state of the world, which has currently the highest posterior probability, i.e. the brain’s best guess. Each hypothesis about the state of the world can be assessed along two separate dimensions, with regard to first- and second-order statistics of the inference—namely, it can be both accurate and precise. Hohwy (2012) claims that, in order to constitute conscious perception, the hypothesis must score relatively high on both of them (see Fige 1 in Hohwy 2012), hence—since precisions in PP framework reflect attention, as described above—the percept must be actively attended by the subject.

This is best visible in the PP story of binocular rivalry, a perceptual phenomenon that occurs when subjects are presented with two different visual stimuli to each eye, e.g. a picture of a house and of a face. What subjects consciously perceive at any moment is either a face or a house and, over time, contents of perception fluctuate between the two images. PP (Hohwy et al. 2008) explains this phenomenon by indicating that both stimuli correspond to two separate hypotheses about the state of the world. Moreover, the hypotheses are mutually exclusive (due to strong prior expectations that no two objects can occupy the same space and that faces and houses are distinct objects). The brain must accept one of the guesses, leaving large amount of prediction error. This prediction error makes the inference unstable and finally results in a switch to a second best guess, which, however, does not account for all the inputs and remains unstable as well.

This account has been extended by Parr et al. (2019a) and applied to the phenomenon of Troxler fading, where static fixation leads to the experience of fading of peripheral stimuli. The choice of the WH is closely related to action and active inference (as discussed in more detail in the section on the GE account below). Parr and colleagues highlight the fact that binocular rivalry appears similar to Troxler fading, where perceptual switches are due to eyes shifting around the image—an overt action. In the former phenomenon, the shifts in percepts might be considered results of covert action, namely of attention shifting. This underscores the role of the control of precision in the WH account, creating a potential link not only to the GE approach but also to B-AST.


Predictive Global Neuronal Workspace theory

The WH proposal has been further extended and integrated with the Global Neuronal Workspace theory [Dehaene and Changeux 2011; PGNW is developed by Hohwy (2013; Whyte (2019), and Whyte and Smith (2021)]. The two accounts are discussed separately, as the WH has also appeared throughout the literature as a distinct proposal, without reference to the larger apparatus of global workspace theory.

Global workspace is a proposition of a mechanism for information exchange between otherwise isolated brain regions and processes. The theory states that to become conscious, information must enter this global workspace implemented “in a network of densely connected pyramidal neurons possessing long-range excitatory axons connecting prefrontal and parietal cortices” (Whyte 2019, 4; see Dehaene and Changeux 2011). Serial information processing (resulting in experience of a “stream” of consciousness) comes from the inhibition of competing input processes. The central prediction of the model is that initial, local activity in the sensory cortices corresponds to unconscious stimulus processing, while conscious access appears in a relatively late time window relying on global activation in the prefronto-parietal network.

Dehaene (2008) proposed that the late ignition corresponds to the accumulation of evidence for a hypothesis about the state of the world. Hohwy (2013) further supplements this proposal with the role of action. In his account, ignition corresponds to the point at which a given hypothesis has accumulated sufficient amount of evidence to warrant a shift from perceptual to active inference (see also Whyte 2019). Selecting the best available policy of action requires that the hypothesis about the state of the world be held fixed. This indicates also that there should be top-down connections from the global workspace to sensory inputs, which carry hypotheses about the contents of consciousness. This approach offers a distinct hypothesis about the mechanism behind global ignition from the proposal of HOSS, and direct empirical comparison would be beneficial. One possible approach would be through designing an experiment with a fine control of granularity of state space of stimuli so that prediction of presence and absence would lead to equal amount of prediction error. In this case, according to HOSS, ignition would not in fact arise. However, given that the stimuli were chosen so that both their presence and absence elicits a demand for action—and active inference—if PGNW is on track, ignition would still arise, as if the brain fixed its best guess about the state of the world.

In an important study, Whyte and Smith (2021) provide simulations of visual consciousness with an implementation of the PGNW based on a recent version of the Active Inference Framework (Parr et al. 2019b). Their model simulates the electrophysiological and behavioral results from phenomenal masking and inattentional blindness experiments. This provides initial empirical support for the ideas behind the PGNW, as the results of simulations fit well with empirical data collected from human participants. In the paper, the authors also develop further the role of precisions in PGNW, showing that different levels of signal strength (precision of sensory likelihood a.k.a. sensory precision) and attention (precision of the hypothesis a.k.a. expected free energy precision) correspond to the standard taxonomy of factors influencing conscious access proposed within the GNW (Dehaene et al. 2006). Moreover, the authors expand the PGNW model by discussing the role of temporal depth, which is necessary in their account for the report of conscious experience (see also the Integrated World Modeling Theory section). In this way, they are able to provide a definition of conscious access in terms of an inferential process occurring at a sufficiently deep temporal level to allow for the integration and contextualization of information processing at less deep levels (Whyte and Smith 2021, 13).

Not only is the PGNW consistent with the neuroscientific evidence for the non-predictive version but it also provides several unique hypotheses that: (i) conscious representation should be continuous with processing at lower levels of the hierarchy, (ii) consistency of expectation influences the amplitude of P3 event-related potential component associated with subjective report (Whyte and Smith 2021, 12), and (iii) depending on the uncertainty about the stimuli, the dynamics of activity between prefrontal and parietal regions will be significantly different, corresponding to precisions assigned to either predictions (closer to the front of the brain) or prediction errors (in parietal regions) (Whyte 2019).


The generative entanglement account

Andy Clark has developed a separate perspective on the problem of phenomenal consciousness (Clark 2018, Clark et al. 2019).

Clark’s account shares certain superficial features with the WH account in that the contents of consciousness depend on the cognitive systems’ “best hypothesis” about the state of the world. However, what sets this approach apart is the view of GE (Clark 2019) as the source of phenomenality. Given the task of predicting the state of the environment in which the subject—cognitive system itself—plays a significant causal role, there arises a need for the system to maintain a self-model able to predict its own states, “reactive complexes,” or “dispositions” (Clark 2019, 653) in response to certain structured patterns of sensory flows, in which interoceptive, exteroceptive, and proprioceptive inputs remain entangled. Because of this entanglement and resulting complexity, the reactive dispositions are modeled as coarse-grained, abbreviations or latent variables for those inflows. In other terms: they constitute the system’s mid-level hypothesis about the state of the world (Clark et al. 2019).

These “qualia” are puzzling to the agent for several reasons. First of all, these mid-level inferences underdetermine the actual state of the world while remaining highly certain to the system (i.e. they have high precisions assigned). In result, they are treated as mere “appearances” (Clark et al. 2019, 29), which nonetheless cannot be easily “shaken off.” Second of all, since these hypotheses model system’s own states, there is no need for a higher-level model explaining how these reactive dispositions came about—and in fact there is no such model (Clark 2019, 655). In result, the system has access only to the final estimation. “Qualia” are elements of a simplified self-model, which aims to be both accurate and concise in order to guide future choice and action.

Positing the contents of phenomenal consciousness on an intermediate or mid-level of the information processing hierarchy has a longer history, as it has been initially proposed by Jackendoff (1987) and later repeated by Prinz (2012). This view has often been criticized due to the difficulties with delineating the postulated intermediate level according to the criteria proposed (Marchi and Newen 2016). However, Marchi and Hohwy (2020) show that the notion of active inference provides clear-cut identification of the scope of phenomenal consciousness, which, in case of humans, happens to be in fact intermediate. This idea connects Clark’s GE back to Hohwy’s WH account. The contents of consciousness depend on the best hypothesis, which is held fixed for the purpose of active inference. At the same time, each organism has a privileged spatiotemporal scale on which the active inference operates, depending on the organization of the organism’s behavioral dispositions. In case of humans, Marchi and Hohwy identify this privileged scale with that of intuitively “basic” actions: reaching, grasping, taking a step, turning, crouching, etc. Hence, for active inference to be able to provide the organism with an optimal policy, the hypothesis specifying the contents of conscious experience has also to be spelled out on this spatiotemporal level. In case of humans, this in fact corresponds to the intermediate level, and the Marr’s “2.5d sketch” (Marr 1982; see Marchi and Hohwy 2020).

A slightly different proposal that fits with the scheme of the GE account has been earlier put forward by Jęczmińska (2017). Jęczmińska uses elements of the PP framework—in the version developed by Clark—to argue for a possibility of providing a novel, expanded theory of conscious experience through an intersection of Global Workspace Theory (in the version of Baars 1997) with the Sensorimotor Theory (as developed by O’Regan and Noë 2001). This account is, however, lacking details, and its main input boils down to underscoring the importance of the ongoing integration of data from different sensory modalities in the brain and its role in guiding action.


Projective Consciousness Model

The PCM was originally conceived by David Rudrauf with several collaborators—most significantly Kenneth Williford and Daniel Bennequin (Rudrauf et al. 2017, Williford et al. 2018). While the model strongly relies on the view of mind advanced by the FEP, the central part of the explanation of consciousness it proposes comes from geometrical considerations.

The PCM accepts the view of mind advanced by the Active Inference Framework and its explanations of unconscious processing, control of behavior, and the functional role of consciousness—which is taken to be facilitation of FE minimization. However, the standard account of Active Inference Framework is expanded with discussions of the internal geometry of the generative model.

The PCM follows the program of (neuro)phenomenology in identifying phenomenal invariants of conscious experience (Williford et al. 2018, 3) and postulating them as axioms—as well as explananda—of the theory. In this way, the model accepts a conceptualization of the problem of consciousness focusing on the perspectival (in the spatial sense) and intentional elements of conscious experience. This perspectivality leads Rudrauf et al. (2017) to accept that the lived space is non-Euclidean and better described by projective geometry—a non-Euclidean geometry initially developed by Renaissance architects and painters and currently important in e.g. virtual reality and computer graphics research. Thus, according to the PCM, for the generative model to be capable to support conscious experience, it has to have the form prescribed by the projective geometry. More formally, they offer the concept of a “Field of Consciousness,” a three-dimensional projective space defined by a particular vector space corresponding to the point of view. The mental processes of perspective taking thus correspond to projective transformations (i.e. geometrical transformations of the space to a different point of view and its associated vector space), and the authors explicitly claim (Williford et al. 2018) that such transformations are computed by the brain (specifically by posterior cortical and subcortical structures; Rudrauf et al. 2017). The authors discuss several examples (e.g. visual illusions, such as Necker cube and out-of-body experiences) of application of the framework and support its plausibility with computer simulations.

This account declaratively connects the elements of global workspace theory as it assumes the central availability of conscious information with elements of the integrated information view (Rudrauf et al. 2017; Williford et al. 2018). Furthermore, it is compatible with some other accounts of consciousness within the Bayesian cognitive science, most specifically with the WH account, as Rudrauf et al. (2017) use the WH account to explain the uniqueness of the subject’s perspective (i.e. it is the one that is capable of explaining away the largest amount of the prediction error). The authors themselves identify “the thesis that projective transformations and projective frames necessarily subtend the appearance and workings of consciousness” (Williford et al. 2018, 15) as a key novel contribution of their model.


Integrated World Modeling Theory

Adam Safron’s IWMT (Safron 2020) builds on the foundations provided by the Active Inference Framework and Integrated Information Theory (IIT) (e.g. Tononi et al. 2016), with—again—a strong influence of the Global Neuronal Workspace Theory (e.g. Dehaene 2014), as well as several others accounts of consciousness, including those discussed in this paper. Safron shows that IIT and Active Inference Framework are largely coherent and, specifically, that a union of the two accounts helps to solve some of the outstanding problems of each, such as e.g. the panpsychist consequences of integrated information view. The IWMT is a far-reaching, complex account of consciousness and, due to space considerations, I will have to omit some details.

To summarize this proposal, IWMT sees the essence of consciousness in a process “capable of generating a world model with spatial, temporal, and causal coherence with respect to the system and its causal inter-relations with its environment” (Safron 2020, 4). The postulated “integrative world models,” which sit at the core of this account connect postulates from Active Inference Framework, integrated information, and global neuronal workspace: they consist of generative models, with sufficient temporal and counterfactual depth, which are generated by complexes of integrated information and by global workspaces (understood as implementing Bayesian model selection). The integrative aspect refers to the spatial, temporal, causal, and agentive coherence, which are understood as ways of categorizing experience (giving the view a somewhat Kantian flavor).

On the algorithmic level, the key proposal of the IWMT are Self-Organizing Harmonic Modes (SOHMs), a mechanism for implementing complexes of integrated information, as well as global workspaces within the brain. The harmonic modes are synchronizations of activity of neural regions, providing effective connectivity between the said regions and potentially implementing self-evidencing [in the sense of Hohwy (2016)]. At the same time, according to the IWMT, they can explain both how particular perceptions cross the threshold of consciousness, as well as how unitary experiences emerge from probabilistic world models. Safron refers SOHMs to neural rhythms, with different functions—and experiential consequences—depending on the frequency bands.

Another mechanistic postulate of the theory is the implementation of PP in the cortex in the form of (folded) variational autoencoders in which the internal representation corresponds to inferred hidden causes. This somewhat standard account of neural implementation of PP is expanded through a reference to the turbo coding theory—a technical procedure of encoding signal to ensure maximal channel capacity through an introduction of redundant encoding (and decoding) of the signal by at least two encoders/decoders. The redundancy of information enables a feedback loop between the decoders, which provides the system with an error correction mechanism. In case of the cortex, turbo codes enable a connection between several circuits (modeled as folded autoencoders), providing them with a shared latent space that may be used e.g. for multimodal sensory integration. Although Safron does not discuss it directly, the reliance of IWMT on autoencoding—and the dimensionality reduction at the core of this algorithm—means that an essential feature of a generation of the world models is the reduction of the complexity of probability densities corresponding to them.

Phenomenologically speaking, IWMT ascribes to a form of a “non-Cartesian” theater, positing an internal, supposedly nonhomuncular, observer as a subject of the experiences. It envisages phenomenal experience as real, implemented by the state of the current maximal SOHM in the posteromedial cortices.


Dual Aspect Monism

Solms (2019), building on earlier work with Friston (Solms and Friston 2018), offers yet a different take. According to the author, Chalmers’ hard problem of consciousness (Chalmers 1996) correctly points out that phenomenal consciousness cannot be reduced to function of vision or memory. However, for Solms, it does not mean that phenomenality itself is not functional or that it cannot be explained in functional terms.

His main point can be reconstructed as follows: both subjective experience of consciousness and physiological processes in the brain are different appearances of some other, abstract, functional process in the same way that lightning and thunder are different appearances of an electrical discharge. The case of children suffering from hydranencephaly, i.e. completely decorticated, in which case patients remain waking and their wakefulness has a certain qualitative—phenomenal—aspect, indicated by the fact that they are capable of affective states, leads Solms to identify consciousness with the function of “feeling” and locate it in subcortical structures that remain intact in the decorticated patients.

Solms argues that the function of feeling is to enable homeostatic control in unpredicted contexts, and states that “consciousness is felt uncertainty” (Solms 2019, 7). As this monitoring is related to survival, it is inherently value laden and classifies as good those actions and states that lead to survival (increase organism’s fitness). This leads both to subjectivity (i.e. availability only from the first-person perspective) as only the system itself can monitor its own internal states and to the qualitative nature of experience, which results from the compartmentalization of states of the organism into categorical variables, enabling the system to deal with the increasing complexity of its self-model. Finally, as conscious experience is influenced by contextual factors, precision weighting is necessary to control the prediction errors, and, hence, it is the mechanism implementing conscious access. Note, however, that, in Solms’ account, precisions are not identical with attention but rather implement both attention and motivation (Solms 2019, 12).

The crucial role played by the homeostatic sources of experience in Solms’ model makes an interesting connection to a previous attempt to connect PP framework to the Global Neuronal Workspace theory; the proposal of the “limbic workspace” (Chanes and Barrett 2016; as Whyte 2019 points out this proposal differs from PGNW discussed above with regard to postulated model and its predictions). Chanes and Barrett (2016) focus on the role that limbic cortices (e.g. anterior insula, parahippocampal gyrus, and cingulate cortex) play in cortical processing and conscious access. The authors suggest that limbic cortices select between representations, factoring in the organism’s homeostatic needs and preferences. Moreover, since these brain areas have bidirectional connections to subcortical structures, as well as other cortical regions, they seem to be a plausible extension of Solms’ model, connecting his explanation of “feeling” to the processing in brain cortex, showing how mental images could be imbued with a “what it’s like.” If such a connection would turn out to be plausible, it would significantly expand the scope of Solms’ original account.


Markovian Monism

MM (Friston et al. 2020) is advanced from the first principles (Colombo and Wright 2018) as a theory of the origin of consciousness. It does not provide any mechanistic nor implementational details for the actual realization of consciousness, but rather it shows how sentience (in a weak sense of responding to sensory impressions) is entailed by the tenets of the FEP. Specifically, it claims that sentience follows from the existence of the Markov blanket. Furthermore, it is an explicitly metaphysical account of phenomenality (but see the criticism of Beni 2021). While it differs in scope and approach from other papers discussed here, it provides several important insights into the general picture of consciousness sketched by the Bayesian cognitive science and, as such, requires some discussion.

In this review, I will focus on two features of this account: the Cartesian duality of mind with its description in terms of information geometry and Friston and collaborators’ reference to the central role of precision for consciousness.

The Cartesian duality of the mind can be cast in terms of a possibility of describing the cognitive system from two perspectives: a third-person perspective of psychology, neuroscience, etc., as well as from the first-person perspective of subjective experience. According to the FEP, this division appears when we consider any system as delineated by a Markov blanket—i.e. the set of states or variables that render the internal states of the system conditionally independent from anything else. While Friston argues [e.g. in his monograph (Friston 2019); but see Bruineberg et al. (2020) for critical analysis of this proposal] that the existence of the Markov blanket is necessary for the existence of every “thing” as far as it can be distinguished from everything else, a key insight here comes from the fact that the delineated system can be described in terms of gradient flow on self-information or surprisal (roughly speaking, this is possible as it is the steady-state solution to the Fokker–Planck equation, a standard description of time evolution of dynamical systems). Together with the very existence of the Markov blanket, this provides the modeler with the possibility of describing the internal states as modeling external states, precisely in the manner described in the introduction to the FEP above. If we equip these statistical manifolds with a Fisher information metric (which quantifies the distance between two points by accumulating the Kullback–Leibler divergence between distributions encoded on the manifold en route from one point to the other), we impose an information geometry onto the Markov blanket delineated system; but as we have two independent densities, we, in fact, need to define two information geometries—intrinsic, describing autonomous (i.e. internal and active) states, parameterized by time, and extrinsic, describing external states and parameterized by beliefs—i.e. internal states.

While this is only an account of why conscious experience appears in principle, omitting its structure and implementation in the case of actual human experience, Friston et al. (2020, 21–22) argue that not only does it show the origin of sentience and account for the private, subjective character of phenomenal qualities but it also entails several of the criteria of consciousness, as characterized by the IIT (e.g. uniqueness and unity of conscious experience).

More specific details of neural implementation of consciousness are only briefly discussed. The authors point out that the Fisher information metric on the internal statistical manifold is the curvature of the variational free energy. Furthermore, they claim that this is the same parameter as the precision or confidence of beliefs about external states. This parallel is not worked out in formal detail but rather attributed to the work on gauge theories (Sengupta et al. 2016); however, even the informal definition of Fisher information metric provided above should give the reader the general idea of the considerations showing this equivalence. This makes a direct reference between the work on MM and the work on DAM described above, as well as several other papers claiming e.g. that precision plays a key role in opacity or transparency of phenomenal beliefs (Limanowski and Friston 2018).


Discussion

Bayesian cognitive science offers a hodgepodge of approaches to the study of consciousness, which differ in the definition of the problem, the extent of phenomena covered, the level of formal and/or implementational detail, as well as in metaphysical commitments of the views. These differences are briefly summarized in. This picture fits well with the “orthogonality” of PP approaches with regard to current debates in neuroscience and philosophy of mind, as stated by Jakob Hohwy (Hohwy 2020, 11). Furthermore, this duality is actively exploited by researchers, who not only attempt to connect PP accounts with extant prevailing theories of consciousness, such as global neuronal workspace theory, or IIT, but also believe that FEP can build bridges between those, somewhat inconsistent, accounts.

I will now turn to the discussion of the “larger picture” that the Bayesian cognitive scientists working on consciousness paint, some problems it encounters, and its possible interpretation in terms of a minimal unifying model.


Bayesian cognitive science of consciousness

What becomes clear once we discuss all of these accounts together is that, despite their differences, their formal solutions to the specific phenomena of consciousness are more or less the same between the accounts. Specifically, they all agree that precision (or precision optimization) and complexity of the internal model are responsible for access and phenomenal consciousness. The general picture is the following:

The contents of conscious perception depend upon the posterior probability assigned to different hypotheses about the state of the world (B-AST, WH, PGNW, GE, and PCM) and

the landscape of possibilities is reduced to serial processing due to the exigencies of action (WH and GE),however, access to this selected hypothesis is managed by precision weighting of different processing streams, which can take the form of attention (B-AST, HOSS, and PGNW) and possibly happens post hoc, i.e.—at the point of storage (B-AST and DAM).

In order to efficiently manage precisions, a higher-order model for precision optimization is required. It can take the form of a meta-model (WH), a self-model (GE and DAM), an attention schema (B-AST), or a higher-order state in the model (HOSS).

The contents of this model are maintained on an intermediate level, which balances out precision and complexity and allows active inference to provide optimal policies (B-AST, GE, IWMT, and DAM). At the same time, the model is not accessed by any kind of higher level process and, as such, remains at the top level of information processing hierarchy (B-AST, HOSS, GE, and IWMT) even if its contents are passed on for further processing.

The structure of this model is the source of the “special,” “ineffable” character of phenomenal experience (B-AST, GE, and IWMT),however, it does not necessarily diffuse the metaphysical reality of the predictions of this model, taking the form of qualia (GE) or feelings (DAM), which are as real as perceptions of objects such as “cats” or “computers” (GE).

There are obviously points of important disagreement. To note only the most extensive:

The PCM does not assign the existence of phenomenal consciousness to the meta-model of precision but rather to the generative density itself (it dissents with regard to points 3–5). The “special,” “ineffable,” and perspectival character of experience comes from the geometrical structure of the model. Note, however, that it is formally possible that one of the effects of the geometrical transformations postulated by PCM is a reduction of complexity of the model as these transformations focus on what could be called the “syntactic” structure of perception while eschewing some level of detail. A possible argument for this interpretation would focus on the fact that the projective transformations postulated by the PCM do not necessarily preserve the identity of transformed objects. Furthermore, to support this idea, one could argue that the transformation postulated by this model is not directly computed in the brain, but rather approximated, using a representation with reduced complexity. Following this argument is, however, outside the scope of this paper, and furthermore—this dissension of projective consciousness has its (conceptual) advantages for the Bayesian theories of consciousness at large.

The IWMT does not explicitly connect access consciousness to attention and precision, positing the self-organizing harmonic modes as the key mechanism (it dissents with regard to points 1–2). While Safron’s considerations—especially the hypotheses about the role of specific frequencies of neural rhythms—enable us to directly connect self-organizing harmonic modes with attentional processing (mainly because of the relationship between the harmonic modes and alpha and beta EEG frequency bands, which are associated with attentional processing in the literature; see e.g. Klimesch 2012), the relationship between these “metastable synchronous complexes of effective connectivity” and precision optimization is more convoluted. Functionally, it seems plausible to regard the self-organizing harmonic modes as akin to an attention schema as they “may act as systemic causes in selecting specific dynamics through synchronous signal amplification” (Safron 2020, 14). However, since, formally, they are defined in terms of attractors for phase space description of neural activity, it is difficult to see how they could be deconstructed into specific variables of the said neural system, including precision, due to the interdependencies of variables in the system. Hence, precision is not usually explicitly modeled by the self-organizing harmonic modes, making the IWMT distinct from the other FEP approaches to attention. Instead, precision optimization is performed in a distributed fashion, as a by-product of multiple neural processes: both an “as if,” implicit management of attention, and explicit, conscious and unconscious, direct “attentional shifts.” What follows is that access to consciousness is not directly implemented by attentional biasing but rather by a more generic process. This also bears some similarities to the HOSS, where Fleming (2020) underscores that precision optimization is not the only mechanism responsible for awareness. This view is in fact more in line with the current state-of-the-art research on the role of attention for consciousness, which underscores the importance of differentiating between different types of attentional processing (see e.g. Pitts et al. 2018).

The MM is the great absent of the list above, as it remains silent on these issues, focusing on providing formal foundations for the more detailed models.

There are of course other similarities shared less widely by only two or three of the proposals discussed here. Their limited scope does not warrant inclusion in the general picture painted above; however, it is important to note some of the emerging proponents like temporal depth (related to complexity), whose importance has been underscored e.g. in recent developments of the PGNW (Whyte and Smith 2021) and in IWMT.

Finally, it is important to note that if one were to restrict to only a subset of approaches within Bayesian cognitive science and to concepts exclusive to the framework, the general picture could differ significantly. In a recent article, Vilas et al. (2021) review explanations of various phenomena of consciousness specifically from the Active Inference Framework and develop a significantly different picture from the one proposed above, one relying heavily on the structure of the generative model, in particular its temporal and counterfactual depth. However, as the authors accurately point out, once we limit ourselves to Active Inference Framework only, the emerging picture remains preliminary and needs to be extended with mechanistic and implementational details.

A cross-section of the accounts discussed in this review provides us with a general view of consciousness that all Bayesian cognitive science theories are likely to be congruent with. However, I believe that a more profound reading of these similarities is justified. Namely, the postulated role of precision and complexity can be regarded as Minimal Unifying Model of consciousness (MUM; in the sense of Wiese 2020).


Can Bayesian cognitive science alone provide a theory of consciousness?

Before turning to the discussion of the MUM, one important objection needs to be noted. In a recent paper, Marvan and Havlík (2021) analyze some of the accounts of consciousness discussed here. Their goal is to argue that PP does not by itself provide a theory of consciousness but requires external explanatory machinery provided by established theories of consciousness to do so. Given the detailed overview of accounts of consciousness within Bayesian cognitive science provided here, their criticism seems to be to some degree correct. Out of those theories, perhaps, only the WH, the GE accounts, DAM, and MM do not make explicit references to some theory of consciousness “external” to the framework, although the last account is outside of the scope of Marvan and Havlík interests (for reasons already discussed). Marvan and Havlík directly criticize the main claim of the WH approach, pointing toward incompatible evidence from blindsight (see also Dołęga and Dewhurst 2020 criticism) and continuous flash suppression paradigm (Tsuchiya and Koch 2005). In this way, they reject also the GE account. DAM, however, is not mentioned by them and seems immune to their objections. In this case, conscious access is implemented by only precision weighing, which is a “proprietary” idea of Bayesian cognitive science and could provide an explanation of continuous flash suppression. In very informal terms, one could point out that continuous flashing even to one eye reduces the precision assigned to all information coming from visual modality. This happens since the brain starts to classify these (unlikely) sensory inputs as noisy and unreliable and, normally, there is a correspondence between the reliability of both eyes, leading to distrusting both eyes. In result, it discards the correct hypothesis explaining the pattern presented to the second eye. This kind of explanation could be experimentally tested with participants who have worse eyesight in one eye—in this case, flashing should cause significantly weaker suppression as the brain most likely would model the precision of each eye separately. Alternatively, the absence of suppression in a multimodal version of continuous flash suppression could provide support for this hypothesis.

Furthermore, some of the accounts that refer to other theories of consciousness make connections to “external” accounts without depending on those theories’ explanatory tools, as in the case of e.g. Fleming’s HOSS and the recent take on the PGNW due to Whyte and Smith (2021). In these two cases, in fact, PP is capable of providing an explanation of the source of ignition associated with awareness rather than rely on this notion to explain conscious access. In HOSS, as discussed previously, ignition is taken to be associated with inference and asymmetrical prediction error appearing when the higher-order random variable tracking awareness accepts hypothesis “seen.” In PGNW, the phenomenon of ignition is reproduced by the model when it is presented with the stimulus. Whyte and Smith connect ignition in their model with evidence accumulation and belief update at temporally deep levels of their generative model. In this way, Bayesian cognitive science of consciousness escapes Marvan and Havlík’s criticism but furthermore is able to supplement more established theories with mechanistic details.

Finally, while it is common to treat PP as a theory of cognition, with strong unifying ambitions, such a perspective is in fact very controversial. The unificatory ambitions have been pointed out as failed (Litwin and Miłkowski 2020) and, among the recent shift toward more instrumental understanding of the FEP (Colombo and Wright 2018; van Es 2020; Andrews 2021), it has been also suggested that PP does not hold as a “theory” in the first place but should rather be considered a framework or a toolbox (Litwin and Miłkowski 2020). While this point is debatable in relation to PP on its own, it is much less so in the context of Active Inference Framework, the FEP, and the Bayesian cognitive science at large. If we take such a perspective, Marvan and Havlík objections are correct, yet misguided, since there was never a need for Bayesian cognitive science to provide theory of consciousness all by itself. This perspective seems also the most charitable for the interpretation of precision and complexity in terms of a minimal unifying model, as I will argue below.


Precision and complexity as a minimal unifying model

Wiese (2020) proposes the notion of the minimal unifying model as “a model that

specifies only necessary properties of consciousness (i.e. it does not entail a strong sufficiency claim),

has determinable descriptions that can be made more specific, and

integrates existing approaches to consciousness by highlighting common assumptions” (Wiese 2020, 2).

I argue that precision and complexity can be seen as elements of exactly such a model, complementary to the information generation account that Wiese discusses. The relation between Wiese’s account and the one proposed here is the following: since Wiese posits only that MUM should specify necessary properties of consciousness, information generation (Kanai et al. 2019) can be easily supplemented by the notions of precision and complexity in the manner discussed below (see the end of the “Conditions for a MUM” section). Furthermore, these two proposals are logically independent to a large degree. Should empirical evidence lead us to reject either information generation or precision and complexity as unnecessary for conscious experience, the other element can still be considered a MUM.

To flesh out my proposal, I will show that the roles that precision (optimization) and complexity (limiting) play for, respectively, access and phenomenal consciousness do indeed meet the three conditions set by Wiese. In doing so, I am abstracting away from the details of particular views discussed earlier in the paper and focusing on the core of the Bayesian approach to consciousness outlined in the “Bayesian cognitive science of consciousness” section. The key point is to show that these two features are in fact necessary for consciousness under this general Bayesian approach. Then, I will analyze whether precision and complexity can be considered a MUM independently of the Bayesian cognitive science that they were developed as a part of similar to the way that Wiese disjoints information generation from the larger proposal of Kanai and colleagues.


Conditions for a MUM

The first condition states that MUM should consist of necessary but not sufficient features. Here, I will argue briefly against the sufficiency of precision and complexity and turn to its necessary character in the next section as it is closely related to the connection between Bayesian cognitive science and the current proposal.

While all accounts discussed above assign a strong explanatory role to precision and complexity, each of them provides further specifications and limitations with regard to relevant properties. This in fact has been the subject of the criticisms put forward by Marvan and Havlík (2021). The WH account is closest to establishing precision optimization as sufficient for conscious access. However, the simulations by Parr et al. (2019a), as well as the work of Marchi and Hohwy (2020), point out that while precision is responsible for managing current contents of conscious experience, action and active inference are further required to specify any particular percept. Most strongly, the insufficient character of precision is underscored by Fleming in his HOSS, where he explicitly points out that precision provides input into resolving ambiguity but does not determine awareness. Complexity, on the other hand, is strongly entangled with the processing of hypotheses and updating of the generative model and, while it can be conceptually disconnected (as shown below), it only plays a role of a limit or a reference point for other processes and, hence, cannot be considered a sufficient condition of consciousness.

The second condition is met quite obviously as both “precision” and “complexity” are well-defined terms within the formalism of Bayesian cognitive science. There are multiple competing models arguing for specific neural or at least algorithmic interpretations of these processes (see e.g. Spratling 2017). Regarded independently of this framework, they still retain their strong, mathematical definitions and can be fitted into multiple different theories of consciousness as exhibited by the different connections Bayesian cognitive science makes to established accounts of consciousness.

Finally, the third condition states that MUM should allow for making connections between existing accounts of consciousness. We can consider this condition on at least two levels.

First of all, if we accept the broad assumption that something sufficiently similar to the Bayesian cognitive science is a correct theory of cognition, several of the discussed accounts make claims (with different degree of evidence cited to support them) that the FEP can be employed to build bridges between predominant theories of consciousness. It should suffice to refer to B-AST, PGNW, and IWMT. Furthermore, the connections to theories such as global neuronal workspace or IIT build upon precisely the notions of precision and complexity.

Second of all, as mentioned above, understanding precision and complexity as a MUM is complementary, rather than competitive, to the information generation theory of Kanai et al. (2019). The Kanai et al. (2019) view can be summarized as a view that the basic function of consciousness consists of generating representations of events that are possibly spatiotemporally detached. Information generation in this model follows from a compression–decompression view of perception, algorithmically described by variational autoencoders. To describe what kind of information it is, the authors employ the notion of a generative model, in the sense of FEP described above, and Wiese makes a connection to the algorithmic information theory of consciousness (or simply Kolmogorov theory), advanced by Ruffini (2017), which helps clarify the compression–decompression view, and introduces the notion of complexity into the MUM advanced by Wiese.

It is important to note that this is a different notion of complexity and we should be wary of conflating it with the one employed in Bayesian cognitive science. Ruffini (2017) and Wiese (2020) use the term “complexity” in the technical sense of Kolmogorov complexity (see Cover and Thomas 2006). The two notions are closely related as they both provide quantifications of the amount of information loss (a formal treatment of those similarities is provided by e.g. Cerra and Datcu 2011). Furthermore, they are both (in general) incomputable and can be approximated in terms of data compression. The most important difference is that the notion of “relative entropy” (Kullback–Leibler divergence seen in the free energy equation) is specified within the probabilistic framework of classical information theory and shares its inability to “describe information content of an isolated object” (Cerra and Datcu 2011, 903). Kolmogorov complexity, on the other hand, is defined within algorithmic information theory, which takes the notion of information content of an isolated object as a primary concept (Cerra and Datcu 2011, 903). Cerra and Datcu show that it is possible to construct a parallel for the notion of relative entropy within the algorithmic information theory, defined on the basis of Kolmogorov complexity, as “the compression power which is lost when using such a representation for [a string] x instead of its most compact one, which has length equal to its Kolmogorov complexity” (903).

Despite these different backgrounds, both notions of complexity play similar roles. For Ruffini (2017), “structured conscious awareness is associated to information processing systems that are efficient in describing and interacting with the external world (information)” (5), where efficiency is described as low (Kolmogorov) complexity of incoming data given the internal model. In Bayesian cognitive science, complexity similarly is used to account for “efficiency” of the generative model. Hence, despite different formal definitions employed, considering complexity as a MUM is compatible with information generation theory. Furthermore, the inclusion of precision optimization to this account would be straightforward, as shown below.


Precision and complexity (optimization) as necessary properties of consciousness

The question of whether precision and complexity optimization can be considered necessary properties of a conscious system depends to a degree on our acceptance of the Bayesian cognitive science story of cognition. If one agrees that this theory provides a sufficiently adequate model of cognitive systems, then the answer to this question is obvious, as these are central terms in Bayesian cognitive science and even more so in its account of conscious experience. However, it is not the case once we consider a broader picture. While Wiese (2020) argues that all theories of consciousness have to contain the component of information generation, and this claim seems uncontroversial, the same cannot be said about precision and complexity. For example, it is an empirical question whether a theory that would posit that the complexity of an internal model [in a very general sense, akin to what is required by Kanai et al. (2019) and Ruffini (2017)] is set to a constant value or that the cognitive system is incapable of estimating and managing precision of incoming inputs would be capable of explaining consciousness (the latter might be the case in IWMT, as mentioned above). However, at the same time, the postulates of precision and complexity optimization are not limited to an acceptance of a full Bayesian cognitive science story about the mind and they can supplement other accounts. It is especially so if we accept that these ideas form a framework rather than a unifying theory of mind (see Litwin and Miłkowski 2020).

Consider again the information generation theory (Kanai et al. 2019) and precision optimization. In constructing their theory, Kanai and colleagues specifically aim to address the aspect of consciousness concerned with the broadcast of information [as opposed to metacognition, distinction put forward by Dehaene et al. (2017)]. They argue that what underlies functions associated with global broadcast is the “capability of generating fictional representations using internal, sensorimotor models” (Kanai et al. 2019, 3). What their account leaves out and one more reason to conclude that it presents necessary but not sufficient condition for conscious experience is precisely the question of how this generated information becomes available across the brain. Kanai and collaborators simply state that this information is maintained in short-term memory, placing the central question of the global workspace theory outside of the scope of their interests. However, since information generation can be implemented in a predictive coding scheme, it is straightforward to employ the tools of PP to explain the short-term memory in terms of precisions (or weights) assigned to perceived versus generated information.

We have seen, similarly, how precision and complexity can be related to the global neuronal workspace theory and the IIT. Hence, the claim of this paper can be read in two ways.

First, in a relatively uncontroversial but limited way:

Precision and complexity constitute a MUM for Bayesian cognitive science of consciousness.

In the manner described by Wiese, casting common elements of the Bayesian theories of consciousness in terms of a minimal unifying model helps unify them [in the sense of Miłkowski (2016) and Miłkowski and Hohol (2020)] with existing theories of consciousness—in this case, also with formerly proposed minimal unifying model. In this way, precision and complexity optimization become key elements for future experiments seeking to test Bayesian theories of consciousness. In the manner already spearheaded in the studies of Whyte and Smith (2021) and Parr et al. (2019a), such experiments should seek to reproduce results of behavioral and imaging studies within standard paradigms employed in the study of consciousness. Initial experiments should focus especially on the role of precision and complexity to validate the widely Bayesian approach. This could be done by e.g. repeating the studies of Fleming (2020) with explicit modeling of precision estimation, instead of assuming fixed noise (as Fleming does).

Second, in a broader but fairly controversial way:

Precision and complexity constitute a MUM of consciousness in general.

The close relation between Bayesian approaches to consciousness and the more classical accounts suggests that once we accept the interpretation of Bayesian cognitive science in terms of a framework or a toolbox, there is a broad group of theories that may be extended with precision and complexity. In fact, precision assignments can be included in almost any information processing-based account of consciousness, which includes variance, entropy, or another term playing a comparable role—i.e. almost any existing account. Complexity posits additional restrictions as it requires the account to postulate an internal model but only in a very broad sense—again, met by a plethora of existing accounts. This interpretation, however, might be taken to weaken the technical sense of these two terms and in result—to restrict the amount of the explanatory work they can do. Furthermore, adding precision and complexity to existing theories can have a post hoc, reinterpretative, and redundant character. However, as has been shown throughout this paper, there are some instances where these two concepts can contribute to deliver novel, testable explanations of phenomena and properties of consciousness for more classical accounts. One such plausible example comes from the explanations of global ignition provided by HOSS and PGNW. Both suggest a plausible mechanism underlying ignition, often glossed over within global neuronal workspace theory, and both could be empirically validated outside of the setting of Bayesian cognitive science in the manner described in a previous section. If this research program were to succeed, it would further secure a strong foothold for the Bayesian cognitive science as a useful toolbox for explaining mechanisms underlying cognition.


A relational approach to consciousness: categories of level and contents of consciousness

Naotsugu Tsuchiya, Hayato Saigo — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8517618, CC BY 4.0.

Characterizing consciousness in and of itself is notoriously difficult. Here, we propose an alternative approach to characterize, and eventually define, consciousness through exhaustive descriptions of consciousness’ relationships to all other consciousness. This approach is founded in category theory. Indeed, category theory can prove that two objects A and B in a category can be equivalent if and only if all the relationships that A holds with others in the category are the same as those of B; this proof is called the Yoneda lemma. To introduce the Yoneda lemma, we gradually introduce key concepts of category theory to consciousness researchers. Along the way, we propose several possible definitions of categories of consciousness, both in terms of level and contents, through the usage of simple examples. We propose to use the categorical structure of consciousness as a gold standard to formalize empirical research (e.g. color qualia structure at fovea and periphery) and, especially, the empirical testing of theories of consciousness.


Problems in characterizing consciousness on its own

Over the last few decades, the question of the nature of consciousness is gaining a respected position as the target of scientific inquiry. Much of the empirical research has tried to identify the neural correlates of consciousness (Koch et al. 2016). Building on the massive amount of empirical evidence, some models or theories have been proposed to explain the link between various features and aspects of the neural activity and the associated functions and phenomena of consciousness (Engel and Singer 2001; Graziano and Kastner 2011; Lamme 2015; Northoff and Huang 2017; Brown et al. 2019; Mashour et al. 2020).

Another distinct approach to consciousness is to study it using a mathematical framework (Hoffman 1966, Stanley 1999; Tononi 2004; Fekete and Edelman 2011; Yoshimi 2011; Prentner 2019; Kleiner 2020; Prakash et al. 2020; Signorelli et al. 2021). Among these, the Integrated Information Theory (IIT) of consciousness by Tononi and colleagues (Oizumi et al. 2014; Tononi et al. 2016) is arguably the most developed and discussed in the literature. IIT takes a unique approach, where it tries to first identify the essential properties of consciousness, which are always true to any experience. These essential properties are called “phenomenological axioms,” and IIT tries to derive mathematical postulates that any physical system should satisfy to support these properties. IIT then proposes an explanatory “identity” between phenomenal consciousness and information structure (Haun and Tononi 2019).

In the past (Tsuchiya et al. 2016), we, the authors, have suggested that, rather than trying to propose the explanatory “identity” between the two in a single step, it would be empirically more tractable to break up the IIT project into the following three subprojects: (i) to characterize the structure of conscious phenomenology as a category; (ii) to characterize the structure of information as a category; and (iii) to assess the degree of similarity between the structures. For the second issue, we and others have made some initial efforts on the mathematical side (Northoff et al. 2019; Kleiner and Tull 2020; Tull and Kleiner 2020). Notably, there has been progress on the application of category theoretical approaches toward stochastic processes (Manin and Marcolli 2020) to formalize information structures (Baudot and Bennequin 2015; Baudot et al. 2019). For the third issue, we also made an initial attempt (Haun et al. 2017). Here, we deal with the first issue: how we can characterize the structure of consciousness as a category. Note that category theory has been proposed to model aspects of cognition and how they are supported by neural networks in the brain (Ehresmann and Vanbremeersch 1987, Arzi-Gonczarowski 1999; Healy et al. 2008; Phillips and Wilson 2010, Ehresmann and Gomez-Ramirez 2015; Phillips 2020).

Precisely defining consciousness has been notoriously difficult (Dennett 1988; Sloman 1991; Stanovich 1991; Chalmers 1996; Velmans 2009; Kleiner 2020), but certain characterizations of consciousness are accepted by many for use in empirical consciousness research (Koch et al. 2016; Mashour et al. 2020). One of the widespread consensus is to distinguish the “level” and “contents” of consciousness (Laureys 2005; Boly et al. 2013). For example, Searle (Searle 2000) gives the following definition: “Consciousness consists of inner, qualitative, subjective states and processes of sentience or awareness.” Consciousness, so defined, begins when we wake in the morning from a dreamless sleep and continues until we fall asleep again, die, go into a coma, or otherwise become “unconscious.” In the case of the contents of consciousness, a particular conscious experience of red color, often called a red quale (Kanai and Tsuchiya 2012), is typically characterized as “redness of red” or “red like this wine.” In these cases, consciousness is characterized in reference to another conscious experience. This relational nature of consciousness appears to be one of the fundamental characteristics of consciousness (Nagel 1974; Chalmers 1996; Kleiner 2020).

In this paper, by introducing several notions of category theory, we offer mathematical justification for the relational characterization of consciousness. In fact, situations where a particular object is not possible to define or even characterize on its own arise relatively often outside of consciousness research. In these situations, what has been effective is to rely on the relationships between the object to be defined and its surroundings. For example, some linguists consider that meanings of a word can be understood only through how the word is related to other words and how they are put into the context in the sentence (e.g. Frege 1980; De Saussure 2011). In ecology, it is essential to characterize any life form within an ecosystem; defining a tree without mentioning the geological area in which it lives and which animals, insects, and other plants interact with it and in what way would miss the very essence of what that tree is. In quantum theory, the essence of quantum features is that they are only possible to explain through the interactions between the objects (Coecke and Kissinger 2017). In cosmology, black holes are, in themselves, impossible to measure and characterize, but their interaction with their neighbors can be measured and used to characterize their properties. In mathematics, various types of infinity can be distinguished through what types of relationships they have with other mathematical objects.

There is a deep mathematical foundation in why these theoretical fields can dispense with a direct definition of an object in favor of characterizing its interaction with its surroundings. That is what we introduce to consciousness research in this paper: the Yoneda lemma. In short, the Yoneda lemma allows us to equate A with B (up to isomorphism defined in “What does it mean for objects to be the same in a category? Isomorphic objects in a category”) if the relationships between A and the rest of objects (including B) are the same (up to natural equivalence defined in “Functor category, whose objects and arrows are functors and natural transformations”) as those between B and the rest (including A). Importantly, this is true, even if A and B themselves are difficult to characterize in and of themselves, as in the case of black holes in cosmology or infinity in mathematics. While defining consciousness directly in a way where everyone agrees is not easy, characterizing consciousness through a rich set of relationships is much more feasible.

Note that we will not offer a definitive definition(s) of consciousness in this article. Rather, our plan is to introduce a novel perspective on how we can start doing so through the application of the Yoneda lemma. Through our proposed approach, eventually, we would hope to completely justify the relational definition of consciousness. But first things first. To apply the Yoneda lemma, we need to propose several possible categories of consciousness. After introducing key concepts in category theory, we will come back to the issue of how we can apply the Yoneda lemma in consciousness research and discuss what it means for consciousness research. For example, the Yoneda lemma will enable us to address the question of the equivalence of color qualia structure at the fovea and the periphery in a systematic way.


What’s the category in category theory?


Categories of consciousness

In this section, we will explain the basics of category theory, which is necessary to explain the Yoneda lemma with a view to its application in consciousness research. We will propose two categories: category of level of consciousness, Lv, and category of contents of consciousness, Q Note that we are not claiming that these examples are “the” only possible formulation of categories of consciousness. They are invoked here as a starting point. For an accessible introduction to category theory, see Lawvere and Schanuel (2009); Spivak (2014); Bradley (2017); Northoff et al. (2019).

The basis of category theory is three concepts: (i) category, (ii) functor, and (iii) natural transformation. Let us start with a category.

Definition: For a collection of objects to be considered as a category, they must satisfy the following five axioms.

An arrow has its “ source” object called domain and “target” object called codomain.

For every object, there is a self-referential arrow called identity.

A pair of arrows is composable if the domain of one arrow equals the codomain of another.

Identities do not change other arrows by composition.

Composition is associative.

In other words, a category is a system consisting of “objects” and “arrows.” explains the above definition with a diagram in an intuitive manner.

For a category of level of consciousness, we consider global states of consciousness or the degree of wakefulness as an object. The level of consciousness is usually assumed to go from 0 in dead humans, which is lower than deeply anesthetized or dreamless sleep, and highest in fully wakeful states (Mormann and Koch 2007). Note that one object can contain many elements. As an example, let us consider a fully wakeful state as an object. One can distinguish each moment of experience as different elements. An object in this case is a group of these elements considered as one entity, much like the colloquial use of a “category.” Mathematically speaking, an object does not have to be one element.

For a category of contents, we can consider any possible content of consciousness, such as color, sound, and pain. As is usually the case in mathematics, however, starting from the most general situation, encompassing all levels of consciousness in all animals or all types of contents, is not a wise strategy to make progress. Accordingly, we will consider a very concrete case of consciousness categories below and leave generalization of these categories to future work.

An arrow, →, relates an object with another object. For example, f: A → B denotes a relationship f between object A and object B. In the case of level of consciousness category Lv, we can define the meaning of f to be the level of consciousness in A “is higher or equal to” B. Soon, it will become clear why we need “equal to.” Read on! In the case of content category Q, we can define the meaning of f to be that A “is experienced as nearly indistinguishable with” B in a certain aspect.

If the system consisting of objects and arrows satisfy further three conditions (composition, associativity, and unit) as depicted in, then it qualifies as a category. We visualize these three requirements concisely and intuitively using diagrams. This is one of the most powerful aspects of category theory: simply visualizing complex relationships to facilitate the understanding of the subject matter.


A category of level of consciousness

Let us verify whether our proposed objects and arrows for level of consciousness, Lv, can qualify as a category. Objects are certain levels of consciousness supported by a human brain, such as A, B, C, etc. An arrow f exists between two conscious levels A and B, if level of consciousness A “is higher than or equal to” B.

Consider the requirement of composition. Suppose that f: A → B and g: B → C exist as arrows for objects A, B, and C in consciousness level category Lv. That is, the level of consciousness A is higher or the same as B, and B is higher or the same as C. Then, it follows that A is higher than C or the same. In other words, there is an arrow from A to C, which is the combination of f and g, which we denote as f;g. Therefore, the condition for composition is satisfied.

Next, let us consider associativity. We assume that for levels of consciousness A, B, C, and D, three arrows exist f: A → B, g: B → C, and h: C → D. Then, (f;g);h means that (i) we first confirm that A is higher than or the same as C (i.e. f;g) and (ii) due to h (i.e. C is higher than or equal to D), we conclude that A is higher than or the same as D. On the other hand, f;(g;h) means that (i) we first confirm g;h, that is, B is higher than or equal to D, and (ii) we conclude A is higher than or equal to D. In other words, associativity requires these two conclusions to be exactly the same. In the diagram, this translates to the fact that two conclusions via two paths are exactly the same if the starting and the ending points are the same.

Finally, let us check the unit. This is the reason why we have added “or equal to” as a part of the definition of the arrow. For any level of consciousness A, there exists an arrow 1A: A → A because A is always higher than or equal to A. If f:A → B exists, then If f: A → B exists, then 1A;f means the following. (i) We confirm that A is the same as A. Then (ii) we conclude that A is higher than or equal to B. Similarly, f;1B means the following. (i) We confirm A is higher than or equal to B. Then, (ii) we confirm B is equal to B. If we define f: A → B as A is strictly higher than B, our proposed system of objects and arrows for level of consciousness Lv does not qualify as a category.

Our category of level of consciousness Lv is an example of categories called “preordered sets.” Preordered sets are categories such that between any two objects there is at most one arrow. The arrows in preordered sets are called “preorder.”


A category of contents

Next, let us examine if our proposed definition can make a system of contents of consciousness Q into a category. Here, objects are the contents of consciousness. Let us consider a system Q that consists of only three objects, A = red sunset, B = red crayon, and C = red wine. For simplicity, we consider a case of a preordered set; that is, between two objects, there is either one arrow or none at all. Suppose there is an arrow from A to B when the contents of the two consciousness are “nearly indistinguishable” in terms of their color [for those who are concerned about the gradual degradation of distinguishability, see Tsuchiya et al. (2021)]. In other words, if there is an arrow f between the two contents of consciousness A and B, then f: A → B, and A is subjectively felt as nearly the same as B in terms of their color. It is clear that the composition holds. In other words, if the redness of sunset and crayon are similar, and the redness of crayon and wine are similar, then the redness of sunset and wine are also similar. Mathematically speaking, if f: A → B and g: B → C, then f;g: A → C also holds. Associativity holds as well. The unit is also valid (these two proofs are simple and left to the reader). Therefore, our proposed system of objects and arrows Q can constitute a category.

Here, since arrows mean “nearly indistinguishable,” the direction of an arrow does not matter. Now that we are considering a preorder, there is only one arrow in either direction. This implies that any arrow in this category is invertible. That is, any arrow has an arrow of a reverse direction such that the composition of the two is the identity arrow. Invertible arrows are also called “isomorphism” not only in preordered sets but also in categories in general. When all arrows are isomorphism, the category is called “groupoid.” In sum, we proposed an exemplar category Q, which is preorder and groupoid, where all arrows are isomorphism (if there are multiple isomorphisms between objects, then such a category is groupoid but not preorder).


What does it mean for objects to be the same in a category? Isomorphic objects in a category

So far, we have introduced categories Lv and Q for level and contents of consciousness. Next, to deepen our understanding of what it means to define an object, we will consider what it means for objects A and B to be equivalent.

When we say that A and B are the “same” in everyday life, it means that they are equivalent with respect to some definitions or assumptions and ignoring various aspects. For example, when there are two apples on the right and the left, they may be similar in terms of their color or a category within the fruit, but they are different in their surface textures. In fact, they are not the same thing, being located in different places. Category theory provides a wealth of mathematical tools to handle these subtle differences in “sameness” (Tsuchiya et al. 2016) in that it characterizes different kinds of sameness using various types of relationships.

Let us explain the sameness between objects in a category, called “isomorphism.”

Definition: The objects A and B in a certain category C are isomorphic if there is an “invertible” arrow (called isomorphism) between them. When the arrow f: A → B is “invertible,” there exists an arrow g: B → A with f;g = 1A and g;f = 1B.

In the case of category Lv, if coma level A is lower than minimally consciousness level B, the reverse of the arrow f: A → B does not exist. In our proposed example of the category of contents with three objects, all arrows are isomorphisms (see Section 2.3), that is, any pair of objects is isomorphic if there exists an arrow between them.

This concept of isomorphism is much looser and more flexible than the usual concept of “equalities.” For example, under the framework of set theory, a set of alphabets {a, b, c, d, e} is not equal to a set of numbers {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. The difference in terms of “elements” disqualifies them to be considered as equal sets. Now, consider a category Set whose objects are sets and arrows are functions or mappings between sets. Within the category Set, two objects (i.e. sets) {a, b, c, d, e} and {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} are considered as isomorphic objects in the sense that each element can be mapped from one set to the other set in a one-to-one manner. In fact, a concept of a number, such as 5, is “defined” when we regard these “different” sets as the “equivalent” in a certain respect. In this sense, isomorphism captures the concept of “essential sameness” in the category. As another example of isomorphism between objects in a category, consider a category of topological space, Top, which is the foundation of the mathematical field called topology. In Top, objects are topological spaces and arrows are continuous maps. While coffee cups and donuts are usually considered as “completely different” objects, they are isomorphic in Top.

In order to make progress in consciousness research, equivalence in the sense of isomorphism is not powerful enough. As we discuss later, we believe that different types of sameness in category theory will be more useful and find wider application in consciousness research. In particular, isomorphism between categories, or even looser sameness, called categorical equivalence will be critical. To introduce these concepts, we need to introduce two concepts: functors and natural transformations, which are the topics of the next two chapters.


Preliminary conclusion and discussion

We believe that introducing the concept of preordered sets as a category of level of consciousness Lv has an important implication in consciousness research. Some authors have raised issues with the concept of level of consciousness (Bayne et al. 2016; Pautz 2019). One of the issues is that this concept seems to imply a gradual change from unconsciousness to full consciousness, which is not widely agreed upon. Another issue is the existence of certain pairs of conscious states, where we can never subjectively compare which state is “higher” as conscious level. For example, which is higher in level of consciousness between vivid dreaming and drowsy awakening states? Or, what about between deep general anesthesia and coma, where consciousness completely disappears? We believe that these issues arise because the scholars who criticize the concept of level of consciousness implicitly assume that “level” is something that is “isomorphic” to natural numbers (or positive real numbers), where it is always possible to rank the order between two objects. Such a strongly ordered structure is called “total order” in mathematics. We believe that the total order assumption is not necessary at all for the concept of level of consciousness to be useful. We propose that a looser concept, preorder, is a useful and appropriate concept for level of consciousness. As for preorder, any two objects (levels) may or may not have a relationship “≦.”

Our proposed category Lv can be applied to many cases. Compared to the fully wakeful states, deeply anesthetized, dreamless sleep, or coma would be lower in the level of consciousness. In Lv, we will have no arrows between cases of lower level of consciousness, where subjects have no ability to compare their levels and do not show any behavioral outputs to be meaningfully compared. Likewise, Lv can be proposed across animals without proposing any arrows between animal species but only considering arrows within animals (between fully wakeful and deeply anesthetized, deep sleep, or coma).

Note that the two categories Lv and Q proposed here are just toy examples and we are not claiming that they are “the” categories of consciousness. In both level and contents of consciousness, it is possible to focus on other aspects of consciousness and consider the corresponding categories. For example, by focusing on an aspect of consciousness that changes over time, one can propose a “category of mobility” (Saigo et al. 2019). Another kind of category, called “co-slice category,” is effective in capturing association possibilities and metaphorical structures of meaning (Fuyama and Saigo 2018) [note that the subjective experience of “meaning” of a word is not accepted widely, however; see Kemmerer (2015) and McClelland and Bayne (2016) for recent discussions on this issue]. Tsuchiya et al. (2021) explains a further framework to loosen the condition of arrows in Q by making it in variable degrees of similarity using a concept of enriched categories (Lawvere 1973; Leinster and Meckes 2017; Fong and Spivak 2019).

The point of this section was to provide the readers an understanding that it is not difficult to propose a category of consciousness. Some readers may think that as a mathematical theory, category theory cannot be applied to the problem of consciousness, especially because of the problem in composition (Pitt 2018). As we explained, however, category theory can be applied if “objects” and “arrows” are appropriately defined and if they satisfy a few conditions.


What is a functor?


A functor is an arrow between categories

In simple terms, a functor is an arrow between two categories (for a graphical definition). Importantly, a functor needs to map one category to another category while keeping the “structure” of the category (e.g. commutativity). From the viewpoint of equivalence discussed in the last chapter, “the existence of a functor” is one important condition to consider as the sameness between categories. The sameness as “existence of a functor” is much weaker than the other types of sameness discussed in this paper.

Definition: A mapping F, which maps an object and an arrow in category C to an object and an arrow in category D, is called a functor if it satisfies the following three conditions:

F(1X) = 1 F(X), that is, the identity arrow of X will map to the identity arrow of F(X).

f:X → Y will map to F(f):F(X) → F(Y), that is, the arrow from X to Y maps to the arrow from F(X) to F(Y).

a composite arrow f;g in category C is preserved as F(f;g) = F(f);F(g).

To see the relevance of functors in consciousness research, let us examine a functor from categories of level of consciousness Lv. To remind you, Lv is a preordered set; objects and arrows in Lv are level of consciousness and “≦” as introduced previously. As we argued ‘there’ the construction of category Lv and clarifying its specific structure itself is a difficult research program in itself. But here, we focus on the other problem: to establish a consciousness meter, which translates to a construction of a functor from category Lv to a convenient preorder category D. As an example, consider a category D whose objects and arrows are natural numbers and ≦. Readers can check easily that D is a preorder category; any pair of objects have at most one arrow (e.g. 1 ≦ 2), any arrows can be composed in an associative manner (e.g. 1 ≦ 2 ≦ 3) and that each object has a unit arrow (e.g. 1 ≦ 1).

Let us consider a mapping F that maps from category Lv to category D and satisfies the conditions to be a functor. In other words, F maps any object of Lv, that is, any level of consciousness, into a natural number, while all ≦ relations in Lv are preserved in D. In other words, searching for a functor F is the same as the construction of a consciousness meter as strived for by some consciousness researchers. We also note here that mapping in the other direction, that is, from D to Lv does not have to be a functor. In other words, the validity of a consciousness meter, F, is not compromised if two objects with one arrow (e.g. 1 ≦ 2 in D) do not map onto Lv functorially. For example, from D to Lv, a mapping G may map 1 to coma and 2 to deep general anesthesia. If G does not map ≦ in D into ≦ in Lv, then G is not a functor. However, as we pointed out in the last section, it is unclear whether ≦ exists between coma and deep anesthesia; thus, this itself is not a problem for F as a valid consciousness meter.

Next, let us consider a functor F for category Q for contents of consciousness as considered in the last section. Q is a groupoid, and its three objects are A = red sunset, B = red crayons, and C = red wine. Arrows are “nearly indistinguishable” in terms of color. Here, we consider two persons’ categories QX and QY. For Ms X, all objects’ colors are nearly indistinguishable; thus, there are arrows for any pair of objects AX, BX, and CX. However, for Mr Y, all objects are distinguishable; thus, there are no arrows among AY, BY, and CY.

In this situation, there are 27 functors that map from category QY to category QX since the destination of each object in category QY can be any of AX, BX, and CX. For example, one functor F1 maps AY to AX, while it maps BY and CY into BX. The only arrows in QY are the identity arrows. The identity for AY maps to that for AX, while those for BY and CY maps to that for BX. The requirement of composition is also satisfied (because the only way to compose arrows in QX is to compose the identity with the identity, which is the identity).

What about functors from category QX to category QY? Like the above example, if F collapses all objects in QX into one object in QY, F can satisfy all conditions to be a functor. If F does not collapse them, what happens? For example, if AX is mapped to AY, while BX is mapped to BY. Because Mr Y can distinguish AY and BY, there is no arrow between AY and BY. However, Ms X sees AX as indistinguishable from BX. Thus, the arrow that connects AX and BX is lost in translation during this mapping. Such a faulty mapping does not qualify as a functor. From a viewpoint of equivalence, there is a certain “structural similarity” in subjective similarity characterized by categories QX and QY in a sense that there exists a functor from one category to the other. But the richness of the structure is “different” as can be quantified from the number of arrows in each category. This nicely represents the situation of the subjective experience of Ms X and Mr Y—they experience the objects with certain structural similarity and difference in richness in the structure.

In sum, functors can be used to compare structures between categories. In terms of categories of contents of consciousness Q, functors are not limited in the usage of comparison of similarity structures among individuals as in our examples. Functors can be used to compare structures of content category of color with content category of shape, content category of meaning, etc. within individuals. This is one of the possible future directions of category theoretical research of conscious contents.


Category of categories

In a category of categories, Cat, objects and arrows are categories and functors (and this is the origin of the title for the last section). This is an interesting characteristic of category theory; depending on the viewpoint, what we are talking about can be considered as objects in a certain category or arrows in another category. Furthermore, a functor, which is considered as an arrow between two categories in this section, will be considered as an object in the later section. All of this comes from the fact that category theory is mathematics that focuses on “relationships.”

Let us consider a category of categories using an example of category of content Q. We ask Ms X and Mr Y to come back on the stage. If we consider category QX and QY as objects and functor F as arrows, the example in is an exemplar category of category Q.


What is a natural transformation?

A natural transformation is the central concept in category theory. Indeed, category theory was originally invented to introduce the concept of natural transformation. To explain natural transformation, the concept of functor was introduced. And to explain the concept of functor, the concept of category was introduced. Natural transformations are necessary to state and prove the Yoneda lemma. The Yoneda lemma and its inspiration for consciousness research is the central message of the paper: even if it is difficult or impossible to characterize consciousness per se, we can do so by characterizing all arrows in the relevant category.


A natural transformation is an arrow between functors

A natural transformation maps a functor to another functor while keeping the structure of the functor. The basic structure of category theory can be stated in terms of categories, functors, and natural transformations. While there are more, solid understanding up to natural transformation is critical to handle category theory. It is important to develop an intuition about a natural transformation. It is a family of arrows in the category, which a functor maps the original category into. The graphical definition in helps understand this concept.

Definition: Consider functors F and G that map category C to category D. When a mapping t from functor F to G satisfies the following two conditions, t is called a natural transformation and we write t: F G.

Given an object X in category C, t gives an arrow tX: F(X) → G(X) in category D.

For any arrow f: X → Y in category C, tX;G(f) = F(f);tY holds in category D.

tX is called the X component of t.


Natural transformation for category Lv

To understand the relevance of natural transformations in consciousness research, let us first consider the category of level of consciousness Lv and the functors. Suppose Ms F proposed a functor F as a consciousness meter, which maps all levels in preorder category Lv to preorder category D (objects and arrows are natural numbers and ≦). F maps all objects in Lv to numbers in D and ≦ in Lv into ≦ in D. On F’s monitor, level of consciousness under deep general anesthesia shows up as number 10, while that under the wakeful state is 100. Then Mr G also developed another functor G as a consciousness meter. On G’s meter, the level under deep general anesthesia is 20 and the wakeful state is 200. In both cases, the arrow in category C is preserved as the arrow in category D as ≦. Now, we ask: what is the nature of the relationship between F’s and G’s consciousness meters?

Let us assume that there exists a natural transformation t between functors F and G. Then, according to Condition 1 above, the natural transformation t gives us two arrows tA and tW for two objects that we considered in category Lv: A for anesthesia and W for wakefulness. tA and tW are two arrows in category D, which satisfies the following: tA: F(A) = 10 → G(A) = 20, tW: F(W) = 100 → G(W) = 200. Interestingly, this arrow corresponds to ≦, the arrow in D.

Moreover, according to Condition 2, with respect to two objects A and W and the arrow f:A → W in category Lv, we have tA;G(≦) = F(≦);tW. The left-hand side of this equation means that (i) we first evaluate the value for anesthesia in F (=10) to translate into the value in G (=20), then (ii) we confirm the relation between A and W (≦) in category Lv to be translated into the relation in G’s monitor (20 ≦ 200). The right hand side of the equation means that (i) we first translate the relation A ≦ W in category Lv into category D (F(A) = 10 ≦ F(W) = 100) and then (ii) we map the value for wakefulness in F’s monitor (=100) into G’s monitor (=200). In sum, this family of arrows in category D guarantees a lawful relationship between two functors, preserving the original relations in category Lv (note that we also have two more relations with respect to the identity arrows for 1A and 1 W in category Lv).


Natural transformation for category Q

Next, let us consider a natural transformation for the category of contents Q. We consider two categories based on Q introduced in the section on “A category of contents” and consider a situation that can be tested in a psychophysical experiment. For simplicity, we consider two objects as subjective experience of a red Apple (A) and a red Berry (B) and arrows as a relationship for “nearly indistinguishable” in terms of color. Category C refers to objects and arrows in the Central visual field, while category E refers to those in the Entire visual field, which includes the central, left, and right visual field. A mapping R from C to E translates objects and arrows to those in the Right visual field. Likewise, a mapping L from C to E translates those in the Left visual field. The mappings L and R are likely to be functors in healthy subjects. One way to test this idea is to operationally define category C with objects as a set of perceptual objects and arrows as similarity relationships. Likewise category E, which includes C but also across the entire visual field. Under this condition, psychophysical experiments measuring similarity relationships can test if the mapping L and R satisfies the functor conditions. In the following, we assume L and R satisfy the functor conditions.

Natural transformation t can clarify the relationship between functors L and R. Let us go through this example slowly as this is an important point. Assume the existence of a natural transformation t from functor L to functor R. Now, with respect to objects A (Apple) and B (Berry) as well as its arrow f (f:A → B; A is nearly indistinguishable from B in terms of color) in category C for Central visual field, a natural transformation is a collection of arrows in category E for Entire visual field. These arrows include tA: L(A) → R(A) and tB: L(B) → R(B) (Condition 1), both of which mean “nearly indistinguishable” in terms of color, which are indeed the arrows in category E. tA means that Apple is nearly indistinguishable in terms of color in the Left and Right visual field.

Condition 2 says for an arrow f:A → B in category C, we have tA;R(f) = L(f);tB. The left side of this equation first confirms that Apple is indistinguishable between Left and Right visual fields, then it confirms that Apple in Right is indistinguishable from Berry in Right. The right side of the equation first confirms that Apple is indistinguishable from Berry in Left, then Berry in Left is indistinguishable from Berry in Right. In other words, Condition 2 means that the color of Left Apple is indistinguishable from the color of Right Berry, and it allows us to go in either way to prove this fact. The power of the natural transformation t is to handle a lot of arrows, such as tA and tB, all at once in a lawful manner.


Functor category, whose objects and arrows are functors and natural transformations

Using the concept of natural transformation, we introduce another critical concept to prove the Yoneda lemma: functor category. Functor categories and equivalence defined in this manner, we suspect, is something that is likely to be completely missing in current language in consciousness research, and it is very useful for future conceptual analyses.

Definition: Functor category, Fun(C, D), considers objects and arrows as functors from category C to category D and natural transformations between them.

From the viewpoint of the contents category, let us consider a functor category. We extend the example categories C and E in. Simply, treating functor L and R as objects and a natural transformation t as an arrow constructs a functor category Fun(C, E).

What is the benefit of considering a functor category? One of the benefits is to allow us to introduce two concepts: “natural equivalence” and “categorical equivalence.” Categorical equivalence is likely to be a critical target to establish in empirical studies of the structure of consciousness within a framework of category theory; for example, one application is the examination of categorical equivalence of color similarity structure at the fovea and the periphery.

Previously, peripheral and central color vision have been claimed to be “essentially the same” (Tyler 2015; Haun et al. 2017) or not (Dennett 1991; Lau and Rosenthal 2011). Between these visual fields, objective resolutions are different; yet, when the size of objects are matched for the resolution, essential visual phenomenology, including color experience, seems “essentially the same” (Gordon and Abramov 1977; Hansen et al. 2009; Webster et al. 2010). How can we proceed to extract and quantify the sameness of obviously different objects?

First, you might think of “isomorphism” between category C and E for Central and Entire visual fields, respectively (Remember the section on “What does it mean for objects to be the same in a category? Isomorphic objects in a category”). As we introduced in the section “Category of categories”, C and E are objects of Cat (category of categories), where arrows are functors. Isomorphism in Cat, which is also called “categorical isomorphism,” requires that, for functor F: C → E, there exists functor G: E → C such that 1 C = F;G and 1E = G;F. This turns out to be a very strong requirement and it does not work in the case between C and E here. This is because functor G collapses E into its subset C; thus, F cannot recover the original E from C.

On the other hand, what occurs if we consider the “isomorphism” instead of equality in 1 C = F;G and in 1E = G;F? “Isomorphism” here is nothing but an invertible natural transformation, which is called natural equivalence, in functor categories Fun(C, C) and Fun (E, E). In this case, we obtain a weaker, yet very proper and flexible, kind of equivalence. In this sense, two categories C and E are equivalent. This is the level of equivalence that we are looking for, and potentially useful for consciousness research. The sameness, obtained through natural equivalence, is called “categorical equivalence” between category C and E.

Definition: Categories C and E are categorical isomorphic if there are functor F: C → E and functor G: E → C such that 1 C = F;G and 1E = G;F. Category C and E are categorically equivalent if there are invertible natural transformations from 1C to F;G and 1E to G;F

In our example of Central and Entire visual fields, C and E will not be “categorically isomorphic,” which implies one-to-one relation on object and arrows since a functor from E to C should collapse the multiple objects or arrows into the same object or arrow. On the other hand, C and E can be “categorically equivalent” since it allows such multiplicity up to isomorphisms. If this can be experimentally verified, then we can conclude that content structures are “essentially the same” across visual fields. If, however, something essential is lost within a part of the visual field, say, blindspot, scotoma (Ramachandran and Blakeslee 1998), or colorblindness in a quadrant (Gallant et al. 2000), then, categorical equivalence would not hold any more.

Empirically, we can possibly test the existence of categorical equivalence between color similarity structures as content categories between the fovea and the periphery. While color similarity structure has been extensively studied in psychophysics (Kuehni 2010), most experiments allowed subjects to move their eyes freely in an unlimited time. As a result, the structure of color experiences is understood better at the fovea than the periphery, resulting in disputes (Cohen et al. 2020; Cohen and Rubenstein 2020; Dennett 1991; Lau and Rosenthal 2011; Tyler 2015; Haun et al. 2017). We surmise that a weaker notion of categorical equivalence is much more likely to be applicable in various types of structures of consciousness and more fruitful to seek for than the other stronger notions of the sameness (e.g. categorical isomorphism).


Explaining the Yoneda lemma

Finally, we are ready to introduce one of the most important results of category theory, the Yoneda lemma, to consciousness research. If we can apply the Yoneda lemma to consciousness research, we can characterize consciousness through its relationships with the others even if we cannot describe what consciousness is per se. To be more precise, the general conclusion of the Yoneda lemma is that the characterization of an object in a category is determined up to isomorphism by its arrows to the other objects in that category. We believe this is a substantial change of perspective, especially in the context of consciousness research: properties of an object are essentially the same as how the object relates with the others.

Having said that, some may say that a concise and general direct definition of an object is vastly superior to the exhaustive characterizations of its relationships to other objects. However, as we noted in problems in characterizing consciousness on its own, the difficulty in dealing with consciousness is its difficulty to describe it in itself. How can I examine my definition of “redness” at the fovea compared to my “redness” at the periphery? As a start, I can compare my “redness” at fovea to all other experiences, including “redness” at periphery. Next, I can do the same by comparing my “redness” at periphery to all other experiences. This is an empirical approach to characterize a structural relationship. This procedure can establish equivalence of color experiences at the fovea and the periphery. The Yoneda lemma provides a mathematical footing to this empirical approach: we can eventually establish equivalence of my redness across the visual fields.


Hom sets and hom functors

Before applying the Yoneda lemma to consciousness categories, let us introduce only two more concepts: hom sets and hom functors.

Definition: A collection of arrows from object X to object Y in category Q is called a hom set and written as homQ (X, Y). A hom functor maps an object X in category Q into a set, which is an object in category Set. A hom functor also maps an arrow f in category Q into a function, which is an arrow in category Set. A function maps a set to another set in category Set (see for hom sets and 6b and c for hom functors).

Among hom functors, one that is obtained by fixing an object A in category Q is called hom functor hA. Let us go back to our familiar example: an object A for Apple. Then, hom functor hA can be understood as “all relationships that Apple has with other objects in category Q.” Formally, hA is a functor from category Q to category Set. This is because hA maps objects Berry (B) and Cherry (C) in category Q into homQ (A, B) and homQ (A, C) in category Set, which can be understood as “how Apple relates to Berry in all possible ways” and “how Apple relates to Cherry in all possible ways.” hA also maps an arrow f to homQ(A, f), which is an arrow in category Set. Note that an arrow in Set is a function from a set to another set. For unfamiliar readers, homQ(A, f) is a little confusing. To understand this, recall that f is one of the arrows from object A to B in category Q, which can mean “nearly indistinguishable,” for example. Let us single out one of the arrows in homQ (A, B) as an arrow “a,” which means A is “nearly indistinguishable in its color” with B. Then, a can be composed with f to obtain a;f. This compositional situation means as follows: A is related to C (in a sense of “a;f”), where C is related to B (in a sense of “f”), which is related to A as “nearly indistinguishable in its color”. Note that, in categories where there are more than one arrows between objects, an arrow from A to C, which means “nearly indistinguishable in its color,” may be a distinct arrow from a;f. hA(f) maps a particular arrow from A to B into the corresponding arrow from A to C. If you consider arrows as elements in a set, this means that hA(f) is a function between two sets of arrows, that is, homQ (A, B) and homQ (A, C).

Note that until the last paragraph, we have always considered only one arrow from one object to the other, that is, we have simply considered categories of preorder in order to simplify various concepts in category theory. However, we will need to consider many arrows from one object to another object. homQ (A, B) is a powerful conceptual tool to think about such situations. We can consider homQ (A, B) as a list of properties of Berry in terms of relationship from Apple.

Pushing this idea further, we can denote a list of properties of all objects in category Q from the perspective of Apple as homQ (A, -) = hA. We use “-” to denote the argument in which any object in category Q can be substituted. For example, homQ (A,-) contains homQ(A, B) (i.e. a set of arrows from A to B, listing the properties of Berry from Apple’s viewpoint) as well as homQ(A, C) (i.e. a set of arrows from A to C). Thus, hA can be interpreted as all sets of arrows emanating from A to characterize the viewpoint of Apple. The dual notion is homQ (-, A) = Ah, which can be interpreted as all sets of arrows pointing to Apple. In other words, Ah is a list of properties of Apple, from the viewpoints of each and every object in category Q. These concepts are schematically represented in. hA and Ah are likely to be useful to consider the issue of subjective viewpoints in consciousness research.


What can we say from the Yoneda lemma?

The Yoneda lemma says:

For each object A of C, the natural transformations Nat (hA, F) ≡ Hom(Hom(A,-), F) from hA to F are in one-to-one correspondence with the elements of F(A), that is, Hom(Hom(A,-)F) ≅ F(A). Moreover, this isomorphism is natural in A and F when both sides are regarded as functors from C × Fun(C, Set) to Set.

Due to the technicality, we will omit the proof of the Yoneda lemma here. The readers who grasped all concepts introduced so far can understand the proof in a standard textbook of category theory (Awodey 2010; Leinster 2014). The important theorem that follows from the Yoneda lemma is as follows:

Theorem: For objects A and B in category Q, hA ≅ hB is a necessary and sufficient condition for A ≅ B.

Here, A ≅ B means that A and B are isomorphic objects in category Q. hA ≅ hB means that there exists a natural equivalence between hA and hB. A natural equivalence is a natural transformation from functor hA to hB, which is invertible. Remember a functor category, which we introduced previously. Given that hA and hB are both functors from category Q to category Set, they are objects of Fun(Q, Set). Thus, “hA ≅ hB” means hA and hB are isomorphic objects in Fun(Q, Set). In other words, there is an invertible natural transformation (i.e. a natural equivalence) between them.

Let us translate the theorem into English. hA (and hB) means all relationships that A has with all other objects in category Q. Thus, hA ≅ hB means that all relationships for A and those for B are “naturally convertible” to each other (note that hA and hB includes the relationship from A to B and B to A as well). If A and B are isomorphic objects in category Q, then it is relatively easy to prove hA ≅ hB. However, a nontrivial mathematical fact is that hA ≅ hB can prove A ≅ B. Even if it is impossible to directly compare A and B, we can make a conclusion about it by examining how A and B relate to others. This approach is akin to the approaches taken in other fields; when studying meaning in semantics, environments in ecology, and astronomical objects in cosmology. Of course, the exact and precise approach is taken in mathematics. Here, we are proposing its application for consciousness research.

Some readers may think that hA ≅ hB is more difficult to test empirically than A ≅ B. Surprisingly, however, there are many cases where it is overwhelmingly easier to check hA ≅ hB than A ≅ B. There is no shortage of examples in mathematics. Next, we consider it in the context of consciousness research.


A simple application of the Yoneda lemma in consciousness research

Let us apply the above theorem for category of contents Q. To gain some insights, we consider the Checkershadow illusion (Adelson 1995). In this “illusion,” square A looks very dark, while square B looks quite bright. In, we show square A* and B* without any background, which makes it easy to see that the brightness of A* and B* are physically the same. The striking effect of this “illusion” does not reduce even if you try to cognitively convince yourself that it is just a 2D image or that the direction of the shadow in the image is contradictory to the lighting condition in your room. It exemplifies the fact that the subjective experience of brightness of an object strongly depends on the context of the objects.

Are the brightness of A and B the same? Can we define the subjective brightness of A and B? If there are individual differences in how we perceive brightness, is there any way to systematically examine and characterize subjective brightness?

Let us consider squares A and B in from a perspective of category theory. Within category Q, A and B are not isomorphic. Why? Here, we consider objects as squares denoted by A, B, i, ii, iii, and iv and arrows as “nearly indistinguishable” as before.

First, consider if there is an arrow from A to i. Due to the clear boundary between A and i, they look quite different; thus, there is no arrow. Meanwhile, there is an arrow from B to i partly due to the fact that the bottom right part of i is indeed the same as that of B. However, if you pay attention to the top left part of the i, it becomes clear that i has a gradation and that i and B are not that similar. Yet, the cylinder on the top right provides an explanation of this difference within i as an effect of shadow. Furthermore, the overall configuration of the checkerboard also facilitates the sameness between B and i. In the end, we conclude the existence of an arrow from B to i. At this point, there is already a difference between a collection of relationships between A and the other objects and those between B and the others; thus, A and B cannot be isomorphic. This prediction coincides with our subjective phenomenology of “difference” between A and B, which provides a preliminary support of our framework of category Q.

What has been said above applies similarly to i, ii, iii, and iv. According to our framework, this collection of arrows created a conscious experience where A and B do not look the same. Meanwhile, the theorem predicts that A and B should look the same if we erase the sources that generate the discordances between arrows from A and arrows from B. And this is a more meaningful aspect of the theorem: if hA ≅ hB, then A ≅ B. The sources of discordance may include the green column and its shadow, the regularity of the checkerboard pattern, etc. Let us consider any points in the display as a potential object. Here, we assume A has a “nearly indistinguishable” arrow with a set of objects. Note that this set of objects include A itself (as “identity”) and B. If B has the arrow with the same set of objects, then mathematically, from hA ≅ hB, we can prove A ≅ B.

In fact, after painting squares i, ii, iii, and iv into a white color as in the background, one of the authors (H.S.) now feels that A and B look the same. The other author (N.T.) feels that A and B became much more similar than before but they are still distinguishable. By removing further contextual cues, as in, A* and B* look the same to most people. At this point, some readers may find that the arrows that we have adopted so far, signifying “nearly indistinguishable,” are too coarse to be useful in this situation. To capture different degrees of perceived similarity, we believe that “enriched category” will be useful (Lawvere 1973; Leinster and Meckes 2017; Fong and Spivak 2019; Tsuchiya et al. 2021). The Yoneda lemma is also known to exist in the enriched category (Bonsangue et al. 1998); thus, our argument here still holds in the enriched category.

Note that we are not claiming that this is a novel explanation about the Checker shadow illusion. In fact, the application of the Yoneda lemma is never surprising as long as we work on preorder sets, where there exists at most one arrow between objects. Unfortunately, there have been very few empirical psychophysics studies that examined multiple arrows between objects so far. This is a highly promising avenue of future research.

In sum, the Yoneda lemma predicts that two objects A and B should look the same if we eliminate the discordances of relationships between A and the others vs B and the others.


Discussion

In this paper, we introduced categories of consciousness in several forms and showed that the Yoneda lemma can be applied to obtain novel perspectives and predictions on consciousness. While the exact and concise definition of consciousness remains difficult, its characterization through indirect characterization of its relationships to others using convergent methods (see, for example, (Velmans 2009)) is actually a valid way as guaranteed by category theory and, in particular, the Yoneda lemma.

We can already use some tools from category theory to characterize some aspects of consciousness in terms of level and contents in relational terms, as we demonstrate with some simple toy models. As the research makes progress, we surmise that we can possibly characterize all aspects of consciousness in relational terms in principle. For other related proposals of a relational characterization of concepts, see Chalmers (1996), Edelman (1996), Goldstone et al. (2005), Kleiner (2020), Loorits (2014), Signorelli et al. (2021), and Fink et al. (2021).

As a future prospect, we think it is critical to consider various categories of consciousness within a larger structure of category of consciousness categories. Categorical equivalence between two conscious contents categories clarifies “in what sense” these consciousnesses are essentially the same.

The importance and novelty of our proposal here can be better appreciated by the following criticism on similarity judgment in consciousness research by Pautz (2019):

“To see how Similarity-Congruence falls short, let us return to hypothetical case … some unfamiliar sentient organism, Karl. You want to determine exactly what experiences Karl has… Karl is presented with three objects consecutively … three T-shapes such that T1 is more like T2 than T3. Then, given Similarity-Congruence, you can deduce that Karl has some trio of experiences, E1, E2, and E3, such that E1 is more like E2 than E3. But, as a simple point of logic, Similarity-Congruence is not logically strong enough to tell us precisely what those experiences are… it doesn’t tell us whether they are colour experiences of similar shades of red, or whether they are colour experiences of similar shades of green. In fact, it doesn’t tell us whether they are experiences of colour or experiences of (say) smell. That is, it doesn’t entail the specific, determinate qualitative contents of those experiences.”

Our proposal, specifically with the Yoneda lemma, is all about the power of “a collection of arrows (or relationships)” that is necessary to determine the color experience of red or green, the smell of fish, the sound of a bell, etc. And the essential role of a collection of relations does make sense in light of the fact that there has been no clinical report of a patient who lost color of red but not others. When brain damage causes color blindness, the reported cases are all about the entire loss of color experience (and associated concepts) in specific visual location (Gallant et al. 2000) but not a particular color or range of colors. Similar things can be said about visual motion (Zihl et al. 1983). Loss of a single category of perception, such as faces (e.g. prosopagnosia) and objects, has been linked to some specific brain lesions (Milner and Goodale 1995; Kanwisher and Yovel 2006) but rarely on a particular face [except for the loss of “familiar” faces and objects, called “Capgras Syndrome” (Ramachandran and Blakeslee 1998)]. On the other hand, loss of a single linguistic concept (i.e. forgetting) is common. Why can we lose a specific single concept in the linguistic case but not for the experiences of color or motion, which is bound to the retinal locations? While anatomical localizations and functional mapping in neuroscience can give us a hint, they do not address this theoretical question.

We believe that one possible answer to this riddle is to do with the Yoneda lemma. We hypothesize that the essence of the color experiences resides in relations with other colors (which may or may not be perceived at a given time), that is, without the entire sets of relations, color experiences just cannot emerge. On the other hand, we hypothesize that the essence of linguistic conceptual experiences [if any (Kemmerer 2015; McClelland and Bayne 2016)] is its relational structure that allows one concept to be missing from the web of relations. In retrospect, therefore, the essential role of a collection of relations in consciousness may be obvious (Palmer 1999). Yet, we are not aware if a collection of massive similarity ratings has been ever collected or considered in consciousness research. Replacing the characterization of conscious experiences with a collection of comparative descriptions with other experiences can have a mathematically solid foundation: the Yoneda lemma in category theory.

Combining the perspective of the Yoneda lemma with quantitative theories of consciousness, such as IIT (Oizumi et al. 2014; Tononi et al. 2016), we should be able to establish a new research program into animal consciousness (Tsuchiya 2017). Pioneering works in monkeys have introduced highly creative behavioral experimental tasks, such as binocular rivalry (Leopold et al. 2003) and no-report paradigms (Wilke et al. 2009), well beyond simple button press reports, which poorly characterize consciousness even in humans [also see Matsuzawa (1985) and Matsuno et al. (2004)]. These animal researchers have already brought various “arrows” in category Q for nonhuman primates. This type of research can be extended to other animals, such as dolphins, birds, octopuses, mice, and even insects such as flies (Boly et al. 2013; Barron and Klein 2016, Leung et al. 2021).

What other new perspectives can category theoretical analyses bring into consciousness research? Normally, researchers consider properties of the external world, such as the amount of light, as objective and physical reality. And, we call our perception “veridical” under the situation, where our subjective experience matches with these objective properties as in. On the other hand, we call our perception “illusory” when our perception disagrees with the objective properties as in. This “disagreement” invites some to call this figure as Checkershadow “Illusion.”

However, the very usage of the term “illusion” already implies the world view of the researchers. To some, what is “real” is the outside world and what we perceive can be “illusory.” This view is not necessarily endorsed by many consciousness researchers, especially by those who take phenomenology more seriously [also, see an argument from evolutionary game theory to claim that conscious percepts should not be “veridical” in this sense (Prakash et al. 2020)].

Category theoretical perspective allows researchers to keep a distance from metaphysical debates and to focus on what is empirically possible to investigate about conscious experience: its relationships with other experiences. Such an attitude is ontologically neutral. This, in turn, can potentially facilitate an interdisciplinary investigation of the contextual effects across experimental psychologists, neurophysiologists, and computational neuroscientists, philosophers, mathematicians under the same hood. To accelerate collaborations with category theory and some mathematical theories of consciousness, such as IIT, it will be necessary to develop further notions in stochastic categories (Manin and Marcolli 2020), information structures (Baudot and Bennequin 2015; Baudot et al. 2019), enriched categories (Tsuchiya et al. 2021), and category algebra (Saigo 2021).

Some readers may think that the Yoneda lemma application in is an overkill as A and B can be directly compared in that example. Of course, this is a simple example to make a point. However, various controversies surrounding consciousness research are rooted in a question of whether conscious experiences are equivalent between two conditions, under which direct comparisons are difficult. For example, with or without paying attention, are conscious experiences essentially the same (Block 2007; Cohen et al. 2016; Haun et al. 2017)? Are the foveal vision and peripheral vision equivalent? What is, if any, the effect of expectation on conscious experience? In these situations, objects are difficult to compare in two conditions directly.

The indirect approach of the Yoneda lemma is especially effective in these situations. What is particularly powerful is that it makes an explicit prediction about our phenomenology. For example, if similarity relationships between object A and others are the same as object B and others, then A and B should be experienced as equivalent. And the prediction is possible to test empirically through experimentation. Category theory, indeed, is not just a conceptual framework to summarize what we already know. Its power originates from its predictions as we demonstrated in a preliminary way in. Researchers can make meaningful predictions about various outcomes in other situations where contextual effects play a key role, for example. Contextual modulatory effects are one of the essential features of conscious experiences in any modalities; thus, its applicability is likely to be vast.


Conclusion

In this paper, we intentionally limited most of our examples into cases where up to one arrow can exist from one object to the other (preorder category). However, it is easy to extend our category Q to have multiple arrows between objects, such as “nearly indistinguishable in terms of X,” where X can be color, shape, size, location, etc. The richer the arrows, the better the structure of the category can be understood. In addition to what we introduced in this paper, there are many more tools in category theory, which are likely to be illuminating in consciousness research. Some of these conceptual tools will clarify complex theoretical concepts about consciousness, which have been discussed by philosophers and psychologists for long. Such conceptual clarification will inspire further theoretical and empirical research ideas to come in the near future.


Stage 2 Registered Report: Metacognitive asymmetries in visual perception

Matan Mazor, Rani Moran, Stephen M Fleming — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8524176, CC BY 4.0.

Representing the absence of objects is psychologically demanding. People are slower, less confident and show lower metacognitive sensitivity (the alignment between subjective confidence and objective accuracy) when reporting the absence compared with presence of visual stimuli. However, what counts as a stimulus absence remains only loosely defined. In this Registered Report, we ask whether such processing asymmetries extend beyond the absence of whole objects to absences defined by stimulus features or expectation violations. Our pre-registered prediction was that differences in the processing of presence and absence reflect a default mode of reasoning: we assume an absence unless evidence is available to the contrary. We predicted asymmetries in response time, confidence, and metacognitive sensitivity in discriminating between stimulus categories that vary in the presence or absence of a distinguishing feature, or in their compliance with an expected default state. Using six pairs of stimuli in six experiments, we find evidence that the absence of local and global stimulus features gives rise to slower, less confident responses, similar to absences of entire stimuli. Contrary to our hypothesis, however, the presence or absence of a local feature has no effect on metacognitive sensitivity. Our results weigh against a proposal of a link between the detection metacognitive asymmetry and default reasoning, and are instead consistent with a low-level visual origin of metacognitive asymmetries for presence and absence.

Keywords: absence, presence, metacognition


Introduction

At any given moment, there are many more things that are not there than things that are there. As a result, and in order to efficiently represent the environment, perceptual and cognitive systems have evolved to represent presences, and absence is implicitly represented as a default state (Oaksford and Chater 2001; Oaksford 2002). One corollary of this is that presence can be inferred from bottom-up sensory signals, but absence is never explicitly represented in sensory channels and must instead be inferred based on top-down expectations about the likelihood of detecting a hypothetical signal, had it been present. Experiments on human subjects accordingly suggest that representing absence is more cognitively demanding than representing presence, even in simple perceptual tasks, as is evident in slower reactions to stimulus absence than stimulus presence in near-threshold visual detection (Mazor et al. 2020), in a general difficulty to form associations with absence (Newman et al. 1980), and in the late acquisition of explicit representations of absence in development (e.g. Sainsbury 1971; Coldren and Haaf 2000; for a review on the representation of nothing, see Hearst 1991).

An overarching difficulty in representing absence may reflect the metacognitive nature of absence representations; to represent something as absent, one must assume that they would have detected it had it been present. In philosophical writings, this form of higher-order, metacognitive inference-about-absence is known as the ‘argument from epistemic closure’ or ‘argument from self-knowledge’ (“If it was true, I would have known it”; De Cornulier 1988; Walton 1992). Strikingly, quantitative measures of metacognitive insight are consistently found to be lower for decisions about absence than for decisions about presence. When asked to rate their subjective confidence following near-threshold detection decisions, subjective confidence ratings following “target absent” judgments are commonly lower and less aligned with objective accuracy, than following “target present” judgments (Kanai et al. 2010; Kellij et al. 2021; Mazor et al. 2020; Meuwese et al. 2014).

Metacognitive asymmetries have not only been observed for judgments about the presence or absence of whole physical objects and stimuli but also for the presence or absence of cognitive variables such as memory traces. For instance, in recognition memory, subjects typically show poor metacognitive sensitivity for judgments about the absence of memories (such as when judging that they have not seen a study item before; Higham et al. 2009). Unlike the absence of a visual stimulus, the absence of a memory is not localized in space and does not correspond with a specific representation of “nothing.”

One way of conceptualizing these findings is that absence asymmetries emerge as a function of default reasoning—absences are considered the default, and information about perceptual or mnemonic presence is accumulated and tested against this default. For instance, an asymmetry may emerge in recognition memory because the presence of memories is actively represented, and the absence of memories is assumed as the default unless evidence is available for the contrary. In the same way, other visual features that are not typically treated as presences or absences may still be coded relative to a default, assuming one state unless evidence is available for the contrary (e.g. assuming that a cookie is sweet rather than salty). However, whether a metacognitive asymmetry in processing presence and absence generalizes to these more abstract violations of default expectations remains unknown. Here, we set out to map out the structure of absence representations by testing for metacognitive asymmetries in the presence and absence of attributes at different levels of representation—from concrete objects, to visual features, to violations of default expectations.

Our choice of stimuli draws inspiration from visual search—a field where asymmetries are observed for a variety of stimulus types and features. In visual search, participants typically take longer to search for a target that is marked by the absence of a distinguishing feature, as compared to searching for a target that is marked by the presence of a feature relative to distractors (Treisman and Souther 1985; Treisman and Gormican 1988). Interestingly, search asymmetries have been demonstrated not only for the absence or presence of concrete physical features but also for the presence or absence of deviations from a more abstract default state, which can be based on experience, culture, and contextual expectations (see the Methods section; Frith 1974; Von Grünau and Dubé 1994; Wang et al. 1994; Gandolfo and Downing 2020). Of special interest for our study are these latter asymmetries due to expectation violations and their relation with asymmetries induced by the presence or absence of local and global features. Observing a metacognitive asymmetry for expectation violations as well as for the presence and absence of object features would support a strong link between the representation of absence and default reasoning, where differences in metacognitive sensitivity reflect differences in the processing of information that agrees or contrasts with the expected default state.

While traditional accounts interpreted visual search asymmetries as reflecting a qualitative advantage for the cognitive representation of presence (affording a parallel search in the case of feature-present search only; Treisman and Gormican 1988), other models attribute the asymmetry to differences in the distributions of perceptual signals already at the sensory level (Dosher et al. 2004; Vincent 2011). Similarly, in the case of metacognitive asymmetries, the idea that decisions about absence are qualitatively different from decisions about presence has been challenged by an excellent fit of simple models that assume unequal variance for the signal-present and signal-absent sensory distributions, a model that does not assume any qualitative difference between the two decisions (Kellij et al. 2021). Deciding between these model families is beyond the scope of this project. However, identifying metacognitive asymmetries for abstract cognitive variables such as familiarity could help refine these models, for instance, by revealing that representing deviations from a default state is an overarching principle of cognitive organization, one that goes beyond specific features of visual perception.


Methods

We report how we determined our sample size, all data exclusions (if any), all manipulations, and all measures in the study. The full registered protocol is available at osf.io/ed8n7.

We ran six experiments that were identical except for the identity of the two stimuli and (and of the stimulus used for backward masking; see the “Deviations from pre-registration” section for details). Our choice of stimuli for this study was based on the visual search literature. For some stimulus pairs and, searching for one among multiple s is more efficient than searching for one among multiple s. Such search asymmetries have been reported for stimulus pairs that are identical except for the presence and absence of a distinguishing feature. Importantly, distinguishing features vary in their level of abstraction, from concrete local features (finding a Q among Os is easier than the inverse search; Treisman and Souther 1985), through global features (finding a curved line among straight lines is easier than the inverse search; Treisman and Gormican 1988), and up to the presence or absence of abstract expectation violations (searching for an upward-tilted cube among downward-tilted cubes is easier than the inverse search, in line with a general expectation to see objects on the ground rather than floating in space; Von Grünau and Dubé 1994). We treat these three types of asymmetries as reflecting a default-reasoning mode of representation, where the absence of features and/or the adherence of objects to prior expectations is tentatively accepted as a default by the visual system, unless evidence is available for the contrary (Treisman and Souther 1985; Treisman and Gormican 1988). In this study, we test for metacognitive asymmetries for two stimulus features in each category, in six separate experiments with different participants. For each of the following stimulus pairs, searching for among multiple instances of has been found to be more efficient than the inverse search:

Local feature: Addition of a stimulus part. Q and O were used as and, respectively (Treisman and Souther 1985).

Local feature: Open ends. C and O were used as and, respectively (Treisman and Souther 1985; Treisman and Gormican 1988; Takeda and Yagi 2000).

Global feature: Orientation. Tilted and vertical lines were used as and, respectively (Treisman and Gormican 1988).

Global feature: Curvature. Curved and straight lines were used as and, respectively (Treisman and Gormican 1988).

Expectation violation: Viewing angle. Upward- and downward-tilted cubes were used as and, respectively (Von Grünau and Dubé 1994).

Expectation violation: Letter inversion. Flipped and normal N were used as and, respectively (Frith 1974; Wang et al. 1994).

The experiments quantified participants’ metacognitive sensitivity for discrimination judgments between and.


Participants

The research complied with all relevant ethical regulations and was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of University College London (study ID number 1260/003). Participants were recruited via Prolific and gave informed consent prior to their participation. They were selected based on their acceptance rate (>95%) and for being native English speakers. For each of the six experiments, we aimed to collect data until we reached 106 included participants (after applying our pre-registered exclusion criteria). The entire experiment took 10–15 minutes to complete. Participants were paid between £1.25 and £2 for their participation, maintaining a median hourly wage of £6 or higher.


Procedure

Experiments were programmed using the jsPsych and P5 JavaScript packages (De Leeuw 2015; McCarthy 2015) and were hosted on a JATOS server (Lange et al. 2015).

After instructions, a practice phase, and a multiple-choice comprehension check, the main part of the experiment started. It comprised 96 trials separated into 6 blocks. Only the last five blocks were analyzed.

On each trial, participants made discrimination judgments on masked stimuli and rated their subjective decision confidence on a continuous scale. After a fixation cross (500 ms), the target stimulus (or) was presented in the center of the screen for 50 ms, followed by a mask (100 ms). Stimulus Onset Asynchrony (SOA) was calibrated online in a 1-up-2-down procedure (Levitt 1971), with a multiplicative step factor of 0.9 and starting at 30 ms. Participants then used their keyboard to make a discrimination judgment. Stimulus-key mapping was counterbalanced between participants. Following responses, subjective confidence ratings were given on an analog scale by controlling the size of a colored circle with the computer mouse. High confidence was mapped to a big, blue circle, and low confidence to a small, red circle. We chose a continuous (rather than a more typical discrete) confidence scale in order to ensure sufficient variation in confidence ratings within the dynamic range of individual participants. This variation is useful for the extraction of response conditional type 2 Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves. The confidence rating phase terminated once participants clicked their mouse but not before 2000 ms. No trial-specific feedback was delivered about accuracy. In order to keep participants motivated and engaged, block-wise feedback was delivered between experimental blocks about overall accuracy, mean confidence in correct responses, and mean confidence in incorrect responses. Online demos of the experiments can be accessed at matanmazor.github.io/asymmetry.


Randomization

The order and timing of experimental events were determined pseudo-randomly by the Mersenne Twister pseudorandom number generator, initialized in a way that ensures registration time-locking (Mazor et al. 2019).


Data analysis

We used R (Version 3.6.0; R Core Team 2019) and the R-packages BayesFactor (Version 0.9.12.4.2; Morey and Rouder 2018), broom (Version 0.5.6; Robinson and Hayes 2020), cowplot (Version 1.0.0; Wilke 2019), dplyr (Version 1.0.4; Wickham et al. 2020), ggplot2 (Version 3.3.1; Wickham 2016), lmerTest (Version 3.1.2; Kuznetsova et al. 2017), lsr (Version 0.5; Navarro 2015), MESS (Version 0.5.6; Ekstrøm 2019), papaja (Version 0.1.0.9997; Aust and Barth 2020), pracma (Version 2.2.9; Borchers 2019), pwr (Version 1.3.0; Champely 2020), and tidyr (Version 1.1.0; Wickham and Henry 2020) for all our analyses.

For each of the six stimulus pairs, we tested the following hypotheses:

Hypothesis 1: Subjective confidence is higher for responses than for responses.

For each of the six stimulus pairs, we tested the null hypothesis that subjective confidence for responses is equal to or lower than subjective confidence for the S2 responses.

Hypothesis 2: Metacognitive sensitivity, measured as the area under the response conditional type 2 ROC curve, is higher for responses than for responses.

For each of the six stimulus pairs, we tested the null hypothesis that metacognitive sensitivity for responses is equal to or lower than metacognitive sensitivity for responses.

Hypothesis 3: Metacognitive sensitivity, measured as the area under the response conditional type 2 ROC curve, is higher for responses than for responses, to a greater extent than expected from an equivalent equal-variance Signal Detection Theory (SDT) model.

For each of the six stimulus pairs, we tested the null hypothesis that difference between metacognitive sensitivities for and responses is lower than the difference expected from an equivalent equal-variance SDT model (where is the expected area under the rc-ROC curve (auROC2) under an equal variance SDT model with equal sensitivity, criterion, and distribution of confidence ratings in incorrect responses).

Hypothesis 4: responses are faster on average than responses.

For each of the six stimulus pairs, we tested the null hypothesis that log-transformed response times for responses are equal to or higher than log-transformed response times for responses.

Hypotheses 1 and 2 correspond to the effects of stimulus type on metacognitive bias and metacognitive sensitivity, respectively. Although these two measures are theoretically independent, both bias and sensitivity are found to vary between detection “yes” and “no” responses.

Based on pilot data and previous experiments examining near-threshold perceptual detection and discrimination, we did not expect a response bias (such that the probability of responding is significantly different from 0.5 across participants). However, such a response bias, if found, may bias metacognitive asymmetry estimates as measured with response conditional type 2 ROC curves. Hypothesis 3 was designed to confirm that metacognitive asymmetry is higher than that expected from an equivalent equal-variance SDT model with the same response bias, sensitivity, and distribution of confidence ratings in incorrect responses as in the actual data. We interpreted conflicting results for Hypotheses 2 and 3 as evidence for a metacognitive asymmetry that is driven or masked by a response bias.

Hypothesis 4 is motivated by two observations from previous studies. First, detection “yes” responses are faster than detection “no” responses (Mazor et al. 2020). Second, when participants are not under strict time pressure, reaction time inversely scales with confidence (Henmon 1911; Pleskac and Busemeyer 2010; Moran et al. 2015; Calder-Travis et al. 2020). Based on these findings, if and responses are similar to detection “yes” and “no” responses not only in explicit confidence judgments but also in response times, we should also expect a response time difference for these stimulus pairs.


Dependent variables and analysis plan

Response conditional type 2 ROC curves were extracted by plotting the empirical cumulative distribution of confidence ratings for correct responses against the same cumulative distribution for incorrect responses. This was done separately for the two responses and, resulting in two curves. The area under the response conditional type 2 ROC curve is a measure of metacognitive sensitivity (Fleming and Lau 2014). The difference between the areas for the two responses is a measure of metacognitive asymmetry (Meuwese et al. 2014). This difference was used to test Hypothesis 2.

In order to test Hypothesis 3, SDT-derived response conditional type 2 ROC curves were plotted in the following way. For each response, we plotted the empirical cumulative distribution for incorrect responses on the x-axis against the cumulative distribution for correct responses that would be expected in an equal-variance SDT model with matching sensitivity and response bias on the y-axis. The difference between the areas of these theoretically derived response conditional type 2 ROC curves was compared against the difference between the true response conditional type 2 ROC curves.

For visualization purposes only, confidence ratings were divided into 20 bins, tailored for each participant to cover their dynamic range of confidence ratings.

For each of the six experiments, Hypotheses 1–4 were tested using a one-tailed t-test at the group level with. The summary statistic at the single-subject level was difference in mean confidence between and responses for Hypothesis 1, difference in area under the response conditional type 2 ROC curves between and responses for Hypothesis 2, difference in between true confidence distributions and SDT-derived confidence distributions for hypothesis 3, and difference in mean log response time between and responses for Hypothesis 4.

In addition, a Bayes factor was computed using the BayesFactor R package (Morey et al. 2015) and using a Jeffrey–Zellner–Siow (Cauchy) Prior with an rscale parameter of 0.65, representative of the similar standardized effect sizes we observe for Hypotheses 1–4 in our pilot data.

We based our inference on the resulting Bayes factors.


Statistical power

Statistical power calculations were performed using the R-pwr packages pwr (Champely 2020) and PowerTOST (Labes et al. 2020).

Hypothesis 1 (mean confidence): With 106 participants, we had a statistical power of 95% to detect effects of size 0.32, which is less than the standardized effect size we observed for confidence in our pilot sample.

Hypothesis 2 (metacognitive asymmetry): With 106 participants, we had a statistical power of 95% to detect effects of size 0.32, which is less than the standardized effect size we observed for metacognitive sensitivity in our pilot sample.

Hypothesis 3 (metacognitive asymmetry: control): With 106 participants, we had a statistical power of 95% to detect effects of size 0.32, which is less than the standardized effect size we observed for metacognitive sensitivity, controlling for response bias, in our pilot sample.

Hypothesis 4 (response time): With 106 participants, we had a statistical power of 95% to detect effects of size 0.32, which is less than the standardized effect size we observed for response time in our pilot sample.

Finally, in case that the true effect size equals 0, a Bayes factor with our chosen prior for the alternative hypothesis will support the null in 95 out of 100 repetitions and will support the null with a higher than 3 in 79 out of 100 repetitions. In a case where the true effect size is sampled from a Cauchy distribution with a scale factor of 0.65, a Bayes factor with our chosen prior for the alternative hypothesis will support the alternative hypothesis in 76 out of 100 repetitions, support the alternative hypothesis with a higher than 3 in 70 out of 100 repetitions, and support the null hypothesis with a higher than 3 in 15 out of 100 hypotheses (based on an adaptation of simulation code from Lakens 2016).


Rejection criteria

Participants were excluded for performing below 60% accuracy, for having extremely fast or slow reaction times (below 250 ms or above 5 s in more than 25% of the trials), and for failing the comprehension check. Finally, for type-2 ROC curves to be generated, some responses must be incorrect, and for them to be informative, some variability in confidence ratings is necessary. Thus, participants who committed less than two of each error type (e.g. mistaking a Q of O and mistaking an O for Q) or who reported less than two different confidence levels for each of the two responses were excluded from all analyses.

Trials with response time below 250 ms or above 5 s were excluded.


Deviations from pre-registration

Stimulus used for backward masking: We planned to use the same stimulus (the letter Z) for backward masking in all six experiments. This mask was effective in Experiments 1 and 2, but in Experiment 3, overly high accuracy levels indicated that for these stimuli the mask was not salient enough. For a subset of participants in Experiment 3, an overlay of all seven stimuli from Experiments 3–6 (vertical, tilted, and curved lines, upward-tilted and downward-tilted cubes, and normal and flipped Ns) was used. For the remaining participants and experiments, we used four dollar signs as our mask. See for depictions of the three masks.

Rejection criteria: In our pre-registration, we explain that informative response conditional type 2 ROC curves can only be generated if participants make errors. When analyzing the data, we came to realize that an additional prerequisite for response conditional type 2 ROC curves to be informative is that the variance in confidence ratings is higher than zero, otherwise the curve is diagonal. We therefore required that participants report at least two different confidence levels for each response. Participants who did not meet this additional criterion were excluded from all analyses.

Monetary compensation: For some of the experiments, we noticed that participants completed the experiment more quickly than what we had originally estimated. We therefore reduced our offered payment for some of the experiments, while maintaining a median hourly wage of £6 or higher.


Results

A summary of the results from all six experiments is available in the “Experiments 1–6: summary” and in.


Experiment 1: Q versus O

In Experiment 1, we examined discrimination judgments between the two letters Q and O. Based on a search asymmetry for these letters (Qs are found faster than Os than vice versa; Treisman and Souther 1985), we hypothesized that a similar asymmetry would emerge in subjective confidence judgments, such that metacognitive sensitivity for Q responses will be higher than for O responses. We used the letter Z as our backward mask.

Two hundred and five participants were recruited from Prolific for Experiment 1.

Median completion time was 13.12 minutes. Mean accuracy was 0.74. Participants reported seeing an O on 47% of trials. In a deviation from our pre-registration, we excluded nine participants for having zero variance in their confidence ratings for at least one of the two responses (see the “Deviations from pre-registration” section). Overall, we excluded 71 participants based on our exclusion criteria, leaving 134 participants for the main analysis. Due to a technical error in data collection, this figure is higher than that specified in our preregistration document (n = 106). Going forward, only data from included participants are analyzed.

Mean accuracy among the included participants was, 95% CI,. Mean SOA in the last trial was, 95% CI,. Participants showed no consistent bias in their responses (quantified as the probability of a Q response minus 0.5; 95% CI). On a scale of 0–1, mean confidence level was, 95% CI,. Confidence was higher for correct than for incorrect responses (95% CI, p < 0.001).

Hypothesis 1: In line with our hypothesis, confidence was generally higher for Q (feature present) responses than for O (feature absent) responses (p < 0.001; Cohen’s d = 0.65; BF10; see, panel 1).

Hypothesis 2: In order to measure metacognitive asymmetry, we extracted the response conditional type 2 ROC (rc-ROC) curves for the two responses (Q and O) in the discrimination task. This was done by plotting the cumulative distribution of confidence ratings (high to low) for correct responses against the same distribution for incorrect responses. The auROC2 was then taken as a measure of metacognitive sensitivity (Kanai et al. 2010; Meuwese et al. 2014). In line with our hypothesis, auROC2 for Q responses (95% CI) was higher than for O responses (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 0.26; BF10; see, panel 1), similar to the documented metacognitive asymmetry for detection judgments.

Hypothesis 3: Metacognitive asymmetry was not significantly higher than what is expected based on an equal-variance SDT model with the same response bias and sensitivity as the subjects (Cohen’s d = 0.08). A Bayes factor indicated that our results are more likely under a model that assumes no additional metacognitive asymmetry (BF01).

Hypothesis 4: In line with our hypothesis, Q responses were faster on average than O responses by 37 ms (Cohen’s d = 0.26; BF10; see, panel 1).

In summary, in Experiment 1, we found that Q responses were faster and accompanied by higher subjective confidence, in line with a processing advantage for feature-presence. Metacognitive asymmetry however did not go beyond what is expected from an equal-variance SDT model for these stimuli, taking into account response biases.


Experiment 2: C versus O

In Experiment 2, we examined discrimination judgments between the two letters C and O. Based on a search asymmetry for these letters (Cs are found faster among Os than vice versa; Treisman and Souther 1985; Treisman and Gormican 1988; Takeda and Yagi 2000), we hypothesized that a similar asymmetry would emerge in subjective confidence judgments, such that metacognitive sensitivity for perceiving a C will be higher than for perceiving an O. We used the letter Z as our backward mask.

One hundred and forty-three participants were recruited from Prolific for Experiment 2.

Median completion time was 12.80 minutes. Mean accuracy was 0.75, and participants reported seeing an O on 43% of trials. In a deviation from our pre-registration, we excluded eight participants for having zero variance in their confidence ratings for at least one of the two responses (see the “Deviations from pre-registration” section). Overall, we excluded 37 participants, leaving 106 participants for the main analysis. Going forward, only data from included participants are analyzed.

Mean accuracy 47% of trials among included participants was, 95% CI,. The mean SOA of the last trial was, 95% CI,. Participants showed a consistent bias toward reporting a C rather than an O (95% CI). On a scale of 0–1, mean confidence level was, 95% CI,. Confidence was higher for correct than for incorrect responses (95% CI).

Hypothesis 1: In line with our hypothesis, confidence was generally higher for C (feature present) responses than for O (feature absent) responses (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 0.35; BF10; see, panel 2).

Hypothesis 2: Opposite to our prediction, auROC2 for C responses (95% CI) was lower than for O responses (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 0.34; see, panel 2). Bayes factor strongly supported the alternative (BF10). Note that our prior on effect sizes was symmetric around zero, such that support for the alternative is obtained for negative, as well as positive effects.

Hypothesis 3: Metacognitive sensitivity for C responses was still higher than for O responses after controlling for bias (Cohen’s d = 0.49; BF10).

Hypothesis 4: Contrary to our hypothesis, response times for C and for O responses were highly similar, with a median difference of 6 ms (Cohen’s d = 0.00; BF01; see, panel 2).

In summary, in Experiment 2, we found a dissociation between our two confidence-related measures. As we hypothesized, participants were generally more confident in their C (feature present) responses, but their metacognitive sensitivity was higher following O (feature absent) responses. We found no reliable difference in response times between these two responses.


Experiment 3: tilted versus vertical lines

In Experiment 3, we examined discrimination judgments between tilted and vertical lines. Based on a search asymmetry for these stimuli (tilted lines are found faster among vertical lines than vice versa; Treisman and Gormican 1988), we hypothesized that a similar asymmetry would emerge in subjective confidence judgments, such that metacognitive sensitivity for perceiving a tilted line will be higher than for perceiving a vertical line. As described in the “Deviations from pre-registration” section, overly high accuracy in the first few participants led us to change our masking stimulus, first to an overlay of all stimuli and then to four dollar signs. We present here the combined results from these last two cohorts of participants (94 and 210 participants, respectively). The results were qualitatively similar in the two cohorts.

Three hundred and four participants were recruited from Prolific for Experiment 3. Due to shorter than expected completion times in the first 94 participants, the remaining participants were paid £1.25, equivalent to an hourly wage of £6.

Median completion time was 12.43 minutes. Mean accuracy was 0.86, and participants reported seeing a vertical line on 44% of trials. In a deviation from our pre-registration, we excluded 14 participants for having zero variance in their confidence ratings for at least one of the two responses (see the “Deviations from pre-registration” section). Overall, we excluded 198 participants, leaving 106 participants for the main analysis. Going forward, only data from included participants are analyzed.

Mean accuracy 47% of trials among included participants was, 95% CI,. The mean SOA of the last trial was, 95% CI,. Participants showed a consistent bias toward reporting a tilted rather than a vertical line (95% CI). On a scale of 0–1, mean confidence level was, 95% CI,. Confidence was higher for correct than for incorrect responses (95% CI).

Hypothesis 1: In line with our hypothesis, confidence was generally higher for tilted lines (feature present) responses than for vertical lines (feature absent) responses (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 0.70; BF10; see, panel 3).

Hypothesis 2: Contrary to our prediction, Bayes factor analysis did not provide evidence for or against a difference in auROC2 between reports of seeing a tilted line (95% CI) and reports of seeing a vertical line (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 0.18; BF01; see, panel 3.). A difference in metacognitive sensitivity was however significant in a standard t-test. With a sample size of 106, a one-tailed t-test is significant for observed effect sizes of 0.16 standard deviations or higher. In contrast, for our choice of a scale factor, a Bayes factor is higher than 3 for observed standardized effect sizes of standard deviations or higher. Effect sizes that fall between 0.16 and are then significant in a t-test, with no conclusive evidence in a Bayes factor analysis. A robustness region analysis revealed that no scale factor would have led to the conclusion that auROC2s for the two responses are different with. See Supplementary Fig. S1 for a full Robustness Region plot (Dienes 2019).

Hypothesis 3: A Bayes factor analysis did not provide evidence for or against metacognitive asymmetry when controlling for response bias and sensitivity (Cohen’s d = 0.07; BF10).

Hypothesis 4: In line with our hypothesis, response times for “tilted” responses were faster than response times for “vertical” responses, with a median difference of 68 ms (Cohen’s d = 0.56; BF10; see, panel 3).

In summary, in Experiment 3, we found that “tilted” (feature present) responses were faster and accompanied by higher subjective confidence than “vertical” (feature absent) responses, with no difference in metacognitive sensitivity between the two responses.


Experiment 4: curved versus straight lines

In Experiment 4, we examined discrimination judgments between curved and vertical lines. Based on a search asymmetry for these stimuli (curved lines are found faster among vertical lines than vice versa; Treisman and Gormican 1988), we hypothesized that a similar asymmetry would emerge in subjective confidence judgments, such that metacognitive sensitivity for perceiving a tilted line will be higher than for perceiving a vertical line. We used four dollar signs ($$$$) as our mask.

Two hundred and eleven participants were recruited from Prolific for Experiment 4. Due to shorter than expected completion times in previous experiments, participants were paid £1.25, equivalent to an hourly wage of £6.

Median completion time was 12.08 minutes. Mean accuracy was 0.84, and participants reported seeing a straight line on 44% of trials. In a deviation from our pre-registration, we excluded 11 participants for having zero variance in their confidence ratings for at least one of the two responses (see the “Deviations from pre-registration” section). Overall, we excluded 104 participants, leaving 107 participants for the main analysis. Going forward, only data from included participants are analyzed.

Mean accuracy among included participants was, 95% CI,. The mean SOA of the last trial was, 95% CI,. Participants showed a consistent bias toward reporting a curved rather than a vertical line (95% CI). On a scale of 0–1, mean confidence level was, 95% CI,. Confidence was higher for correct than for incorrect responses (95% CI).

Hypothesis 1: In line with our hypothesis, confidence was generally higher for curved lines (feature present) responses than for straight lines (feature absent) responses (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 0.80; BF10; see, panel 4).

Hypothesis 2: Contrary to our prediction, auROC2 for reports of seeing a curved line (95% CI) was similar to auROC2 for reports of seeing a straight line (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 0.03; BF01; see, panel 4).

Hypothesis 3: (The lack of) metacognitive asymmetry was not different from what would be expected based on an equal-variance SDT model with the same response bias and sensitivity (Cohen’s d = 0.19; BF01).

Hypothesis 4: In line with our hypothesis, response times for “curved” responses were faster than response times for “straight” responses, with a median difference of 51 ms (Cohen’s d = 0.42; BF10; see, panel 4).

In summary, similar to Experiment 3, “curved” (feature-present) responses were faster and accompanied by higher subjective confidence than “straight” (feature absent) responses. However, similar to the results of Experiment 3, here also we did not find a metacognitive asymmetry for these stimuli.


Experiment 5: upward-tilted versus downward-tilted cubes

In Experiment 5, we examined discrimination judgments between upward-tilted and downward-tilted cubes. Based on a search asymmetry for these stimuli (upward-tilted cubes are found faster among downward-tilted cubes than vice versa, in line with an expectation to see objects on the ground and not floating in space; Von Grünau and Dubé 1994), we hypothesized that a similar asymmetry would emerge in subjective confidence judgments, such that metacognitive sensitivity for perceiving an upward-tilted cube will be higher than for perceiving a downward-tilted cube. We used four dollar signs ($$$$) as our mask.

One hundred and sixty-two participants were recruited from Prolific for Experiment 5.

Median completion time was 13.30 minutes. Mean accuracy was 0.79, and participants reported seeing a downward-tilted cube on 51% of trials. In a deviation from our pre-registration, we excluded 11 participants for having zero variance in their confidence ratings for at least one of the two responses (see the “Deviations from pre-registration” section). Overall, we excluded 56 participants, leaving 106 participants for the main analysis. Going forward, only data from included participants are analyzed.

Mean accuracy among included participants was, 95% CI,. The mean SOA of the last trial was, 95% CI,. Participants showed no consistent response bias (95% CI). On a scale of 0–1, mean confidence level was, 95% CI,. Confidence was higher for correct than for incorrect responses (95% CI).

Hypothesis 1: Contrary to our hypothesis, confidence was similar for upward-tilted (feature present) responses and downward-tilted (feature absent) responses (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 0.01; BF01; see, panel 5).

Hypothesis 2: Contrary to our hypothesis, a Bayes factor analysis did not provide evidence for or against a difference in auROC2 for reports of seeing an upward-tilted cube (95% CI) and reports of seeing a downward-tilted cube (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 0.22; BF10; see, panel 5). In contrast, a t-test revealed a significant metacognitive asymmetry, with a higher metacognitive sensitivity for perceiving an upward-tilted (default-violating) cube. See Supplementary Fig. S1 for a full Robustness Region plot (Dienes 2019).

Hypothesis 3: (The lack of) metacognitive asymmetry was not different from what would be expected based on an equal-variance SDT model with the same response bias and sensitivity (Cohen’s d = 0.22; BF10). Here also, frequentist and Bayesian analyses conflicted, with a t-test revealing a significant metacognitive advantage for upward-tilted (default violating) responses when controlling for bias.

Hypothesis 4: Contrary to our hypothesis, response times for “upward-tilted” responses were similar to response times for “downward-tilted” responses with a median difference of 9 ms (Cohen’s d = 0.08; BF01; see, panel 5).

In summary, in Experiment 5, we found no sign of processing asymmetry between upward- and downward-tilted cubes in response times and confidence. A significant metacognitive asymmetry was observed when using null-hypothesis significance testing but was not supported by our Bayes factor analysis. In accordance with our pre-registered plan to commit to the Bayes factor analysis in interpreting the results, in what follows we interpret these findings as providing no support for a metacognitive asymmetry for upward- and downward-tilted cubes.


Experiment 6: flipped versus normal letters

In Experiment 6, we examined discrimination judgments between flipped and normal N stimuli. Based on a search asymmetry for these stimuli (flipped Ns are found faster among normal Ns than vice versa; Frith 1974; Wang et al. 1994), we hypothesized that a similar asymmetry would emerge in subjective confidence judgments, such that metacognitive sensitivity for perceiving a flipped N will be higher than for perceiving a normal N. We used four dollar signs ($$$$) as our mask.

One hundred and twenty-seven participants were recruited from Prolific for Experiment 6. Due to shorter than expected completion times in previous experiments, participants were paid £1.25, equivalent to an hourly wage of £6.

Median completion time was 12.76 minutes. Mean accuracy was 0.74, and participants reported seeing a normal N on 50% of trials. In a deviation from our pre-registration, we excluded four participants for having zero variance in their confidence ratings for at least one of the two responses (see the “Deviations from pre-registration” section). Overall, we excluded 21 participants, leaving 106 participants for the main analysis. Going forward, only data from included participants are analyzed.

Mean accuracy among included participants was, 95% CI,. The mean SOA in the last trial was, 95% CI,. Participants showed no consistent response bias (95% CI). On a scale of 0–1, mean confidence level was, 95% CI,. Confidence was higher for correct than for incorrect responses (95% CI).

Hypothesis 1: Contrary to our hypothesis, confidence was lower for flipped (feature present) responses than for normal (feature absent) responses. This result was in the opposite direction to what we had expected, so was not significant in a one-tailed t-test (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 0.32). However, a Bayes factor favored the alternative over the null BF10 (see, panel 6).

Hypothesis 2: Contrary to our hypothesis, auROC2 for reports of seeing a flipped N (95% CI) was similar to auROC2 for reports of seeing a normal N (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 0.01; BF01; see, panel 6).

Hypothesis 3: (The lack of) metacognitive asymmetry was not different from what would be expected based on an equal-variance SDT model with the same response bias and sensitivity (Cohen’s d = 0.03; BF01).

Hypothesis 4: Contrary to our hypothesis, response times for “flipped” responses were slower than response times for “normal” responses, with a median difference of 30 ms (Cohen’s d = 0.27; BF10; see, panel 6).

In summary, in Experiment 6, we found a difference in response speed and subjective confidence in the opposite direction to what we expected, with a processing advantage for the default-complying stimulus (N) compared to the default-violating stimulus (flipped N). We found no metacognitive asymmetry for these stimuli.


Experiments 1–6: summary

Overall, the pattern of results from Experiments 1–6 only partly matched our hypotheses in some cases and stood in direct contrast to them in other cases. A reliable metacognitive asymmetry was observed only in Experiment 2, and this asymmetry was in the opposite direction to what we had predicted, with a metacognitive advantage for O (feature absent) over C (feature present) responses. A metacognitive advantage for reporting Q over Os (Exp. 1) was not reliably above what is expected based on an equal-variance signal detection model.

For both local and global visual features (Experiments 1–4), we observed differences in mean confidence and response times that were consistent with our hypothesis of a processing advantage for the representation of the presence compared to the absence of visual features. In Experiments 5 and 6, we tested more abstract expectation violations. In Experiment 5, discrimination between upward-tilted and downward-tilted cubes showed no asymmetry in response time and confidence. In Experiment 6, participants were less confident and slower in their reports of seeing a flipped N, contrary to our prediction that default-violating signals should be easier to perceive. We found no evidence for or against a difference in metacognitive sensitivity in either of the experiments.


Experiment 7 (exploratory): grating versus noise

Results from Experiments 1–6 revealed that search asymmetry is not always accompanied by an asymmetry in metacognitive sensitivity. Given that we did not observe a true metacognitive asymmetry in the expected direction for any of our stimulus pairs, we were concerned that our experimental design may have been unsuitable for detecting classical metacognitive asymmetries in detection, for example, due to an insufficient number of trials, the masking procedure or the confidence report scheme. As a positive control, we collected data for an additional experiment that more closely resembled typical detection experiments. In this experiment, participants discriminated between two stimuli: random noise and a noisy grating (presented to participants as a “zebra” stimulus;). In a previous lab-based study, similar stimuli produced a robust metacognitive asymmetry between target-absent (noise) and target-present (noisy grating) responses (Mazor et al. 2020). We used black and white concentric circles as a mask. Apart from the choice of stimuli and mask, the procedure was identical to that of our pre-registered experiments.

One hundred and twenty-seven participants were recruited from Prolific for exploratory Experiment 7. For this positive control, all four hypotheses were fulfilled.

Median completion time was 10.70 minutes. Mean accuracy was 0.73, and participants reported seeing a grating on 48% of trials. Overall, we excluded 36 participants, leaving 105 participants for the main analysis. Going forward, only data from included participants are analyzed.

Mean accuracy among included participants was, 95% CI,. The mean SOA of the last trial was, 95% CI,. Participants showed no consistent response bias (95% CI). On a scale of 0–1, mean confidence level was, 95% CI,. Confidence was higher for correct than for incorrect responses (95% CI).

Hypothesis 1: In line with our hypothesis, confidence was higher for reports of target presence than for reports of target absence (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 1.37; BF10; see, right panel).

Hypothesis 2: In line with our hypothesis, auROC2 for reports of target presence (95% CI) was higher than for reports of target absence (95% CI, Cohen’s d = 0.51; BF10; see, left panel).

Hypothesis 3: In line with our hypothesis, this metacognitive asymmetry was stronger than what is expected based on an equal-variance SDT model with the same response bias and sensitivity (Cohen’s d = 0.34; BF10).

Hypothesis 4: In line with our hypothesis, reports of target presence were faster than reports of target absence, with a median difference of 124 ms (Cohen’s d = 0.86; BF10; see, right panel).


Exploratory analysis


zROC analysis

In a signal-detection framework, metacognitive asymmetry appears when the signal distribution has both a higher mean and a higher variance than that of the noise distribution. This unequal variance setting produces a higher metacognitive sensitivity for judgments of signal presence, compared to judgments of signal absence. A direct measure for the ratio between the variances of the two distributions is the slope of the type-1 zROC curve. A zROC curve is constructed by applying the inverse of the normal cumulative density function to false alarm and hit rates for different confidence thresholds. The slope of the zROC curve equals 1 exactly when the variance of the signal and noise distributions is equal. In detection experiments, the slope is often shallower than 1, indicating a wider signal distribution. Indeed, in our positive control experiment (Experiment 7), the median zROC slope was 0.86 and significantly shallower than 1 (for a t-test on the log-slope against zero). Measuring the slope of the zROC curve in our six pre-registered experiments, we asked whether our “feature-present” distributions had higher variance than our “feature-absent” distributions. We used the standardized effect size obtained from Experiment 7 as a scaling factor for the prior distribution over effect sizes, reflecting a belief that a difference in slopes should be similar in magnitude to what is observed in a detection task. zROC slopes were numerically shallower than one in Experiments 1 (Q versus O; median slope = 0.95), 3 (line tilt; median slope = 0.94), 4 (line curvature; 0.97) and 5 (cube orientation; 0.95). This was significant only in Experiment 5. In agreement with the results of our rc-ROC analysis, the zROC slope in Experiment 2 (‘C’ versus ‘O’) was significantly higher than 1, suggesting that the representation of the letter ‘O’ was more variable than that of the letter ‘C’ (median slope = 1.09). A Bayes factor analysis did not provide support for or against the null hypothesis for any of the six experiments (all Bayes factors between 1/3 and 3).

Previous studies reported similar variance structures for these stimuli when presented in visual search arrays. For example, confidence in a vertical/tilted visual search task revealed a higher variance in the representation of tilted (feature positive) compared to vertical (feature negative) stimuli (Vincent 2011). Similarly, reverse correlation analysis revealed a higher variance in the representation of Q (feature positive) compared to O (feature negative) stimuli (Saiki 2008). Finally, and in agreement with our results, variance in the representation of O (feature negative) was found to be higher than in the representation of C (feature positive) (Dosher et al. 2004). Note that for the case of line tilt and Q versus O, finding a high-variance target among low-variance distractors is easier than finding a low-variance target among high-variance distractors. However, the opposite is true for C versus O, where a low-variance target (C) renders the search easier. This last observation challenges the suggestion that variance structure is the determining factor for visual search asymmetries (Treisman and Gormican 1988; Dosher et al. 2004; Saiki 2008; Vincent 2011).


Inter-subject correlations

Across experiments, asymmetry in mean confidence (Hypothesis 1) and in response time (RT; Hypothesis 4) was mostly aligned. This is consistent with previous reports of a negative correlation between response times and confidence across trials within participants (Henmon 1911; Pleskac and Busemeyer 2010; Moran et al. 2015; Calder-Travis et al. 2020). To test if this was the case across participants too, and not only across experiments, we fitted a mixed-effects regression model to data from all seven experiments with experiment as a random effect. The association between confidence and RT effects was significant in this model (see; upper panel). In contrast, metacognitive asymmetry (difference between the area under the response conditional type 2 ROC curves, controlling for response bias) was not significantly associated with asymmetry in either confidence ratings (see; lower panel) or reaction time.


Discussion

In perceptual detection, judgments about the presence or absence of a target stimulus differ in several ways. First, participants are more confident in stimulus presence than in stimulus absence (e.g. Meuwese et al. 2014; Kellij et al. 2021). Second, confidence ratings in judgments of stimulus presence are more aligned with objective accuracy (Meuwese et al. 2014; Kellij et al. 2021; Mazor et al. 2020). Finally, participants are faster to report stimulus presence (Mazor et al. 2020). In our positive control detection experiment (Experiment 7), we replicated these detection asymmetries. We found a mean difference of 20% confidence between decisions about the presence or absence of a grating, a metacognitive asymmetry of 0.07 in area under the curve (AUC) units (ranging from 0 to 1), and a median difference of 124 ms in response time between reports of target presence and absence.

In six pre-registered experiments, we focused on these three behavioral signatures of decisions about the presence and absence of a stimulus and asked whether they extend to discrimination tasks where stimuli are distinct in the presence or absence of sub-stimulus features such as the presence of an additional line in a letter, the curvature of a line, or, more abstractly, the presence of a surprising default-violating signal. Our six stimulus pairs have been shown in previous studies to produce asymmetries in visual search, potentially reflecting differences in the processing of presences and absences of visual features and of default-complying versus default-violating stimuli. If detection asymmetries also reflect differences in the abstract processing of presences and absences, or of default-complying versus default-violating sensory input, one would expect to find detection-like asymmetries in response time, confidence, and metacognitive sensitivity for discrimination between stimuli that produce asymmetries in a visual search task.

Starting from the end, Experiments 5 and 6 provide evidence against the proposal that asymmetries in confidence, reaction time, and metacognitive sensitivity emerge for default-violating signals at all levels of representation. Stimulus pairs in Experiments 5 (cube orientation) and 6 (letter inversion) produced response conditional type 2 ROC curves that were more consistent with the absence of metacognitive asymmetry than with our prior distribution on effect sizes (see the “Dependent variables and analysis plan” section for the specifics of our Bayesian hypothesis testing, including our prior on effect sizes). Given that these stimuli have been shown to produce reliable asymmetries in visual search (Frith 1974; Von Grünau and Dubé 1994; Wang et al. 1994; Malinowski and Hübner 2001; Shen and Reingold 2001), we can safely conclude that not all default violations that produce an asymmetry in visual search also produce an asymmetry in metacognitive sensitivity.

Moreover, in Experiment 6, default-complying N responses were faster, and accompanied by higher levels of subjective confidence, than default-violating flipped-N responses. This is in contrast to our prediction of a processing advantage for default-violating signals and in line with previous reports of a processing advantage for familiar over unfamiliar stimuli in the context of face perception and reading. For example, in a breaking continuous flash suppression paradigm, inverted faces took longer to break into awareness than upright faces (Stein and Peelen 2021). A similar processing advantage for familiar stimuli has been documented for the perception of words (Albonico et al. 2018) and Chinese letters (Xue et al. 2006). One possibility is that the perception of highly familiar stimuli such as letters and faces is supported by specific expert brain systems, affording a processing advantage beyond the general superior processing of default-violating signals (Yovel and Kanwisher 2005; Xue et al. 2006). Indeed, Experiment 6 was the only experiment in which we observed a processing advantage for familiar over unfamiliar stimuli.

Next, in Experiments 3 and 4, we looked at two features that have a global effect on stimulus appearance: tilt and curvature. Based on visual search asymmetries, Treisman and Gormican (1988) proposed that tilt and curvature are represented as positive features in the visual system. This takes us one step closer to typical detection experiments: participants now detect the presence or absence of a basic visual feature. In agreement with our Hypotheses 1 and 4, participants were more confident in identifying tilted and curved lines (mean differences of 0.12 and 0.12 on a 0–1 confidence scale) and were faster in giving these responses (mean differences of 67.67 and 50.57 ms). However, we did not find evidence for or against a metacognitive asymmetry for these global visual features.

Our strongest candidate for a stimulus pair for which we expected to find a presence-absence asymmetry was Q versus O (Experiment 1). The difference between these two letters is the presence of an additional line stroke: a concrete stimulus part that is localized in space and is independent of the rest of the stimulus. Theoretically, participants could approach this task as a detection task: ignore the common denominator (O) and focus on the presence or absence of the distinctive feature (“,”). As we hypothesized, participants were more confident in their Q responses (mean difference of 0.11 on a 0–1 confidence scale). Participants were also faster in their Q responses (median difference of 37 ms). However, unlike a stimulus-level detection, a small difference of 0.04 units in the area under the response conditional ROC curves was not different than what is expected based on a null SDT model.

Finally, In Experiment 2, we looked at discrimination between C and Os based on evidence from the visual search that open edges are represented as a positive feature in the visual system (Treisman and Souther 1985; Treisman and Gormican 1988; Takeda and Yagi 2000). As we hypothesized, C responses were accompanied by higher levels of subjective confidence (mean difference of 0.05 on a 0–1 confidence scale) and were delivered faster than O responses (with a modest but significant difference of 6 ms between the two responses). However, in striking contrast to our original hypothesis, metacognitive sensitivity was lower for C responses (mean difference of 0.05 AUC units), even when controlling for response bias. This result strongly supports different underlying mechanisms behind search and metacognitive asymmetries. Furthermore, the results of Experiment 2 suggest distinct factors mediate the processing advantage for presence over absence (as reflected in shorter response times and higher confidence for C responses) and the metacognitive asymmetry between presence and absence (as reflected in improved metacognitive sensitivity for O responses).

C and O are unique in that the difference between them corresponds to two contrasting notions of presence and absence. On the one hand, C is marked by the presence of one additional feature—open edges (Treisman and Souther 1985; Treisman and Gormican 1988). On the other hand, it is marked by the absence of a piece: there is simply less of it relative to O. These two notions of presence and absence are typically coupled in detection. For example, the presence of a grating on a screen corresponds to the presence of additional features (such as orientation, contrast, and phase) as well as of more “visual stuff,” relative to the blank background. A compelling interpretation of the results of Experiment 2 is that it is the presence or absence of visual features such as open edges that is driving the difference in confidence and response time, whereas a more quantitative notion of presence or absence (the amount of “visual stuff” presented) is driving the metacognitive asymmetry between these two responses. We note however that based on this interpretation, we would expect a metacognitive sensitivity to operate also in Experiment 1, where O is missing a piece relative to Q. As described above, Experiment 1 provided no evidence for such a metacognitive asymmetry beyond what is expected from an equal-variance signal-detection model.

Notably, not one of the six pre-registered experiments produced a metacognitive asymmetry in the expected direction. This was in contrast to Experiment 7 (grating versus noise), where metacognitive sensitivity for reporting noise was lower than for reporting a noisy grating (with a difference of 0.07 auROC2 units, BF10). Positive control Experiment 7 was also the only experiment in which we found a higher variance for stimulus S1 than for stimulus S2 (with a median variance ratio of 0.86). These two observations are likely to be related: across participants, metacognitive asymmetry and variance ratio were highly correlated (95% CI). Indeed, previous theoretical work has pointed out that response-dependent asymmetries in metacognition may be driven by an underlying unequal-variance SDT model and, vice versa, that findings of unequal variance might be due to a response-dependent metacognitive asymmetry. These two perspectives are interchangeable (Maniscalco and Lau 2014). However, a correlation between metacognitive asymmetry and variance structure, both estimated from confidence ratings, is not a satisfactory answer for why noise and gratings should exhibit a unique asymmetry in metacognitive sensitivity or in a variance structure. More theoretical and experimental work is needed to identify the sources of this asymmetry, perhaps focusing on the role of stimulus complexity and perceptual uncertainty as potential drivers of this effect.

When interpreting our findings in a broader context, it is useful to note that in all six experiments we used backward masking for controlling the visibility level of our stimuli. Different visibility manipulations have been shown to affect detection metacognitive sensitivity in different ways. For example, whereas metacognitive sensitivity in detection of “no” responses is at chance when backward masking is used, it is significantly higher than chance when the attentional blink is used to control the stimulus visibility (Kanai et al. 2010). Similarly, phase scrambling but not attentional blink produces a metacognitive advantage for “yes” responses (Kellij et al. 2021). While our positive control (Experiment 7) produced a reliable metacognitive asymmetry between judgments of target presence and absence, it was also the only experiment where stimulus visibility was controlled with low contrast, in addition to backward masking (for the purpose of compatibility with previous experiments;). Based on our findings alone, we cannot rule out the possibility that using other visibility manipulations may reveal metacognitive asymmetries for the presence or absence of abstract default violations. Furthermore, it is possible that some of the observed asymmetries for low-level features may reflect asymmetries in the joint perception of target stimulus and backward mask, rather than in the perception of the target stimulus by itself (Kahneman 1968; Jannati and Di Lollo 2012).

Together, our findings weigh against our original proposal that metacognitive asymmetries in perceptual detection are a signature of higher-order default reasoning. Unlike search asymmetries that extend to abstract levels of representations such as familiarity (Wang et al. 1994; Wolfe 2001) and even social features such as ethnicity and gender (Levin and Angelone 2001; Gandolfo and Downing 2020), metacognitive asymmetries in visual discrimination are grounded in concrete visual processing. Furthermore, we provide evidence for a dissociation between asymmetries in metacognition and in response time and confidence, where the latter is linked to activation of basic feature detectors, for example, of orientation, open ends, or curvature.


Conclusion

In a set of six experiments, we sought to test the proposal that a metacognitive asymmetry between the representation of stimulus presence and absence is one instance of a more general asymmetry between the representation of default states and default-violating surprises. Our findings provide evidence against this idea. A metacognitive asymmetry was not observed in near-threshold discrimination between stimulus pairs that differ in their alignment with default expectations. This was the case even in pairs that showed substantial asymmetries in response time and overall confidence levels. Results from our pre-registered set of analyses are most consistent with a narrow interpretation of the presence/absence metacognitive asymmetry in visual detection, that is limited to concrete, spatially localized presences. Furthermore, a metacognitive asymmetry between Cs and Os in the opposite direction to what is observed in visual search indicates that different cognitive and perceptual mechanisms underlie these two apparently similar phenomena.


Contributor Information

Matan Mazor, Institute of Neurology, Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London WC1N 3BG, UK.

Rani Moran, Institute of Neurology, Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London WC1N 3BG, UK; Institute of Neurology, Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, London WC1B 5EH, UK.

Stephen M Fleming, Institute of Neurology, Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London WC1N 3BG, UK; Institute of Neurology, Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, London WC1B 5EH, UK; Department of Experimental Psychology, University College London, London WC1H 0AP, UK.


Code availability

All analysis code is openly shared on the study’s GitHub repository: https://github.com/matanmazor/asymmetry. For complete reproducibility, the RMarkdown file used to generate the final version of the manuscript, including the generation of all figures and extraction of all test statistics, is also available on our GitHub repository.


Conflict of interest statement

None declared.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

All raw data are fully available on OSF and on the study’s GitHub respository: https://github.com/matanmazor/asymmetry.


‘Consciousnessoids’: clues and insights from human cerebral organoids for the study of consciousness

Andrea Lavazza — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8557395, CC BY 4.0.

Human cerebral organoids (HCOs) are an in vitro three-dimensional model of early neural development, aimed at modelling and understanding brain development and neurological disorders. In just a few years, there has been a rapid and considerable progress in the attempt to create a brain model capable of showcasing the structure and functions of the human brain. There are still strong limitations to address, including the absence of vascularization that makes it difficult to feed the central layers of organoids. Nevertheless, some important features of the nervous system have recently been observed: HCOs manifest electrical activity, are sensitive to light stimulation and are able to connect to a spinal cord by sending impulses that make a muscle contract. Recent data show that cortical organoid network development at 10 months resembles some preterm babies’ electroencephalography (EEG) patterns. In the light of the fast pace of research in this field, one might consider the hypothesis that HCOs might become a living laboratory for studying the emergence of consciousness and investigating its mechanisms and neural correlates. HCOs could be also a benchmark for different neuroscientific theories of consciousness. In this paper, I propose some potential lines of research and offer some clues and insights so as to use HCOs in trying to unveil some puzzles concerning our conscious states. Finally, I consider some relevant ethical issues regarding this specific experimentation on HCOs and conclude that some of them could require strict regulation in this field.


Introduction

The search for neural correlates of consciousness (NCCs) is a difficult undertaking, so far pursued in many ways and in many directions. One of the greatest difficulties (together with that of having a clear and shared definition of what consciousness is) generally derives from the fact that consciousness can only be detected indirectly, primarily through systematically collected verbal reports in human beings. The NCCs can be inferred from the correlation or even better from the identification of direct causation between the verbal reports that accompany subjective states and neuronal activity (Goldman 2000; Koch et al. 2016).

In the perspective I wish to develop here, one of the main problems of the search for NCC is the current impossibility to use one of the typical experiments of science, that of reproducing the phenomenon at hand. We know that every day in the world almost 400 000 children are born, who have the potential, and the vast majority of them do, to develop the consciousness that we recognize in a healthy adult human being. However, we are not able to understand how from the union of the two egg cells that give rise to the new organism including the brain the phenomenon of consciousness appears in the interaction of individuals with their environment. We do not know precisely what the necessary and sufficient elements and/or conditions are, and the goal of all the scientific community working on human consciousness is precisely discovering those elements and conditions.

The scientific study of the emergence of the phenomenon of consciousness from foetal brain development and in the perinatal phase is very complex and is not necessarily fundamental for understanding the functioning of consciousness (or at least we do not know if it is the case). Recent studies have started recording neural activations of the foetus related to, for example, a sound stimulus. Moser et al. (2019) investigated whether information-based metrics (measures of entropy, compressibility and fractality) of neural activity [detected using foetal magnetoencephalography (MEG) in human foetuses and neonates] are a useful tool for the quantification of consciousness before and shortly after birth. However, we are still in a preliminary methodological stage. Many obstacles (technical but also ethical, as we will) seem to be overcome to get a better understanding of brain development in the human being connected to consciousness starting from conception to the early stages after birth, although certainly great steps forward have been made.

Now, a recent development in biomedical research, ‘organoids’, aimed at obtaining models for the study of many diseases and potentially to have parts of the organism to be transplanted without the problems of immune rejection, seems to be able to pave the way for a new and complementary approach to study consciousness and its neural correlates. The so-called organoids are stem cell–derived three-dimensional (3D) culture systems capable of recreating the architecture and physiology of human (and not only humans) organs in very good detail (Kim et al. 2020). More precisely, organoids are cell cultures grown in the laboratory that can mimic the spatial morphology, structural features and physiological responses of the represented organ of origin, as well as some of its key cell types. The first published landmark study on intestinal organoids dates back to 2009 (Sato et al. 2009). The first study reporting that cerebral organoids were grown was published in 2013 (Lancaster et al. 2013; Lancaster and Knoblich 2014).

Human cerebral (or brain) organoids (HCOs) have so far been grown and studied in order to have brain surrogates that can replace two-dimensional cultures and provide models for the study of pathologies and for the understanding of cellular mechanisms. In the making of the studies, further clues have emerged on the morphogenesis of the human nervous system, but the idea of creating from scratch a perfectly functioning human brain is not on any researcher’s agenda. The possible awareness of HCOs has only begun to be talked about by neuroethicists within a perspective that includes the precautionary principle (Cheshire 2014; Farahany et al. 2018; Lavazza and Massimini 2018a).

The goal of this paper is to bring to the attention of the community of consciousness experts the state of the art of HCO studies as regards the features that may affect the NCC search and to provide some first clues and insights concerning some possible strands of research on consciousness starting from HCOs. This does not mean that cerebral organoids are conscious today or that they necessarily will be in the future. At the current state of the techniques available for the growth of HCOs, we cannot even say with certainty that from the development and functioning of cerebral organoids we might understand the origin of human consciousness, although HCOs are brains grown in the laboratory that we can manipulate in an unprecedented way.

The Human Brain Project, whose aim is to replicate the working of the brain on a computer, has long been surrounded by scepticism: the in vivo study of the brain is unlikely to be replaced with in silico simulations. In the same way, it can be expected that the use of organoids in the laboratory will not be able to completely replace non-invasive experiments on humans. However, cerebral organoids could also become a first direct test bed for neuroscientific theories on consciousness currently on the market, and yet, we cannot exclude that HCOs may turn out to be unique entities from the point of view of consciousness.

Finally, some ethical issues concerning the research of NCC in HCOs will be discussed. In particular, based on the precautionary principle, it would be very ethically disputable to manipulate human organoids that are suspected of being or becoming partially conscious, thanks to new and more effective biomedical technologies. It might therefore be advisable to rather work on the cerebral organoids of primates. However, also this line of research might be objectionable by people who are against the use of animals for experimentation (Beauchamp and DeGrazia 2019). Indeed, cerebral organoids of primates could become conscious and feeling pain or distress as well as HCOs.

The structure of the article is as follows. In the ‘Physiology of cerebral organoids’ section, I describe the rapid progress that has led researchers to obtain small-sized cerebral organoids with high structural and functional complexity, the main features of current HCOs that are relevant to the study of consciousness and the potential that HCOs may have in this field in the short term and the medium term. In the ‘Cerebral organoids and consciousness’ section, I describe potential ways of measuring the spontaneous activity of cerebral organoids; I also provide some examples of how organoid research can aid NCC research, potentially shedding light on the origin of consciousness in the human brain, and I introduce the possibility of creating ‘consciousnessoids’ by assembling separately grown brain regions. In the ‘Ethics of consciousnessoids’ section, I consider potential ethical issues that might arise from using HCOs to study the mechanisms of consciousness. Some of these issues seem to be particularly challenging and could constitute a major limitation to research. In the ‘Conclusion’ section, I recapitulate the main points touched upon in the article with a look to the future.


Physiology of cerebral organoids

Starting from embryonic stem (ES) cells or induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, it is possible to generate 3D in vitro cultures that mimic the developmental process and organization of the developing human brain (Arlotta and Paşca 2019; Setia and Muotri 2019). These HCOs have immediately provided a unique, physiologically relevant in vitro model system for the study of human neurological development and diseases. In general, organoids contain many different types of cells specific to the organ in which they are induced to develop, in order to reproduce the functionalities of the organ itself. This is achieved by using appropriate signalling factors that mimic the signalling environment typical of organ development in the human body. For this reason, organoids display a complex architecture similar to that observed in vivo: for example, HCOs have an appropriate cellular stratification.

Organoids have quickly found a wide variety of applications, from basic research to translational and industrial uses. First, organoids are providing important information on the development of the tissue that they model. Secondly, they also represent relevant models for studying cell biology, which includes tissue regeneration mechanisms and interactions with bacteria, viruses and cells from other tissues. From an experimental point of view, organoids add up the advantages of high complexity of cell cultures with the absence of confounding variables typical of animal models and the ease of in vitro handling and lower costs in terms of resources and time.

For this reason, in many cases (although not all), they can already complement or replace in vitro experiments that today use primary cells or immortalized cells and animal experimentations. The fact that organoids are genetically stable, i.e. they maintain the genotype and phenotype of the tissue of origin, allows them to be used as reliable models for the study of diseases and their mechanisms and progression. Organotypes are also being used to predict a patient’s specific response to a certain drug treatment. At least for some organs, it is possible to envision reaching, one day, the goal of what is considered the holy grail of biomedical research, namely the production of organs grown in the laboratory that can be transplanted into the body of a patient with full biological and immune compatibility, without needing a living donor.

An HCO is grown in the laboratory starting from an embryoid (tissue that has some embryonic features) obtained from ES or iPS cells. In the first experiment, ‘a combination of embedding in Matrigel as a polymerized gel, optimized media transitions and agitation of tissues led to the formation of cerebral organoids with various brain regions identities and discrete progenitor zones’ (Lancaster et al. 2013).

In general, the nervous system grows from the ectoderm layer of an embryoid. Ectodermal cells are placed into matrigel droplets (which provide nutrients) and floated in a nutrient broth in a rotating bioreactor. After 10 days, the organoid develops neurons. After 30 days, it displays regions similar to parts of developing brains in foetuses. Lacking vascularization and consequently blood and nutrient supply, brain organoids can reach about 4–5 mm across and remain vital for a year or even more, but they tend to have necrosis in the core due to hypoxia. For different scientific purposes, scientists grow 3D cell cultures systems of different complexity. They range from neurospheres (small clusters grown in suspension) to neural aggregates (based on pluripotent stem cells by first forming an embryoid body), up to cortical spheroids (containing only cortical neurons and astrocytes) and cerebral organoids or whole-brain organoids that are models derived from pluripotent stem cells capable of producing organized structures resembling those of the human brain.

By adding signalling and patterning factors [such as transforming growth factor- $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\beta$\end{document}$ (TGF- $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\beta$\end{document}$), bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), Wingless and Int-1 (WNT), fibroblast growth factor (FGF), sonic hedgehog (SHH), retinoic acid (RA) and extracellular matrix (ECM)], one obtains models of specific regions (e.g. the forebrain), while without patterning factors one obtains a complex structure representing multiple brain regions. In this sense, organoid protocols can be now classified as directed or guided and undirected or intrinsic. ‘Brain organoids recapitulate many features of the foetal human brain, including cytoarchitecture, cell diversity and maturation’ (Chiaradia and Lancaster 2020). Even though HCOs seem to recapitulate brain development up to 24 weeks, they lack endothelial cells and the co-presence of all the glial cell types.

This technique developed by Lancaster and colleagues and advanced also by other research groups (Velasco et al. 2019; Giandomenico et al. 2021) has already been used for the study (and treatment) of many diseases, starting from microcephaly and Zika virus to Angelman’s disease and Hungtington’s disease (Schwartz et al. 2015; Li et al. 2016; Qian et al. 2016, Yin et al. 2016; Pacitti et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2019; Grenier et al. 2020).

These important clinical applications go hand in hand with the possibility of studying the brain in all its development stages in unprecedented ways. Brain organoids that have been grown for many months have reached important levels of differentiation and cellular activity. The small spheres that initially appeared to be only a 3D transposition of the cultures of nerve cells on the Petri dish have begun to show important functionalities, and new advances may soon improve elements or features of organoids that still cannot be grown in the laboratory.

For example, Xiang et al. (2019) engineered human embryonic stem cells (hESC)s to ectopically express human ETS variant 2 (ETV2). ETV2-expressing cells in HCOs contributed to forming a complex vascular-like network. Importantly, the presence of vasculature-like structures resulted in enhanced functional maturation of organoids (Xiang et al. 2019). Pellegrini et al. (2020) managed to establish human ChP organoids with a selective barrier and cerebrospinal fluid–like secretion in self-contained compartments. This is another relevant advance in growing HCOs that are more similar to in vivo brains.

Many features of HCOs are central in many neuroscience subfields, but we are here interested in what is mostly related to consciousness study. As summed up by Chiaradia and Lancaster (2020), ‘the hallmark of neuronal maturation is the acquisition of spontaneous firing activities and the emergence of dendritic spines and synaptic contacts, enabling the transmissions of nerve impulses along the network. Both inhibitory and excitatory synapses have been observed in brain organoids, together with functionally relevant presynaptic vesicles’.

Just to name a few, Birey et al. (2017) produced ‘three-dimensional spheroids from human pluripotent stem cells that resemble either the dorsal or ventral forebrain and contain cortical glutamatergic or GABAergic neurons’, thus showcasing the saltatory migration of interneurons in the foetal forebrain. They also showed that after migration, interneurons functionally integrate with glutamatergic neurons to form a microphysiological system. ‘Spheroids cells were remarkably similar with those from corresponding regions of humans’ fetal brain’, with ‘both excitatory and inhibitory neuronal activity’ (Camp and Treutlein 2017; cf. Pacitti et al. 2019).

It is said that without inputs and outputs, the HCO’s neural networks cannot reach maturity, but the issue is open because ‘transcriptional analysis and comparison to the developing human brain have revealed that hCSs after 2.5 months resembled the mid-fetal prenatal brain (19–24 post-conception weeks). Cortical neurons were accompanied by a network of nonreactive astrocytes and were synaptically connected’ (Paşca et al. 2015; Paşca 2018). Today, laboratory-made cerebral organoids already ‘acquire structural traits of mature neurons, including dendritic spine-like structures’, and researchers have recorded excitatory spikes in organoids grown for 8 months, where monosynaptic connections were detected with high-density silicon microelectrodes (Quadrato et al. 2017). These findings ‘suggest that brain organoids establish neuronal networks that can support self-organized patterns of activity’ (Quadrato et al. 2017).

Also, HCOs show the differentiation of photoreceptor-like cells endowed with proteins for light responsiveness. These photosensitive cells ‘can respond to non-invasive, light-based sensory stimulation’ (Quadrato et al. 2017). Very recently, optic vesicle-containing brain organoids (OVB) have been grown (Gabriel et al. 2021). These HCOs are engineered to define primordial eye fields and progressively develop bilaterally symmetric optic vesicles and neural and non-neural cell types. Importantly, they are light-sensitive, and ‘various light intensities could trigger photosensitive activity of OVB-organoids (...). Thus, brain organoids have the intrinsic ability to self-organize forebrain-associated primitive sensory structures in a topographically restricted manner’ (Gabriel et al. 2021). These steps forward indicate that it is possible to transmit afferent stimulations to cerebral organoids, and this has important implications, since so far one of the main limitations in the development of HCOs has been precisely the fact that they do not have any sensory communication with their environment. A further step forward has been made with new methods of cultivation of cerebral organoids (air–liquid interface) that have allowed to generate diverse nerve tracts with functional outputs (Giandomenico et al. 2019). In this way, ‘these cultures exhibit active neuronal networks, and subcortical projecting tracts can innervate mouse spinal cord explants and evoke contractions of adjacent muscle in a manner dependent on intact organoid-derived innervating tracts’ (Giandomenico et al. 2019). In other words, cerebral organoids have proved capable of inducing movement, although not yet of a purpose-oriented kind.

A recent study showed for the first time that cortical organoids generated from iPS cells can spontaneously develop periodic and regular oscillatory network electrical activity that resembles the electroencephalography (EEG) patterns of preterm babies (Trujillo et al. 2019). This means that, even in the absence of external or subcortical inputs, 10-month-old HCOs can develop according to a specific genetic program, like all human beings, and manifest a complex brain activity recorded with multi-microelectrode array (MEA). ‘The spontaneous network formation displayed periodic and regular oscillatory events that were dependent on glutamatergic and GABAergic signaling’ (Trujillo et al. 2019). The firing rate, up to 2 or 3 per second, and the kind of waves—gamma, alpha and delta—are all a hallmark of a vital human brain. Indeed, a machine-learned model based on a preterm newborn’s EEG (ranging from 24 to 38 weeks) features was able to predict the organoid culture’s age based on the electrical activity of the organoid itself. In other words, the software found no significant differences in EEG between patterns of preterm babies and patterns of HCOs. These results, although very relevant, do not mean the recorded patterns of activity give rise to the same subjective states as that can be believed to have originated in preterm babies, such as pain sensations that foetuses after 24 weeks can likely experience.

In another study (Sakaguchi et al. 2019), researchers have managed to visualize in cortical spheroids synchronized and non-synchronized activities in networks and connections between individual neurons. They managed to detect dynamic changes in the calcium ion activity and find comprehensive activities among cells capable of organizing themselves into clusters and form networks with other nearby clusters. The manifestation of a synchronized neural activity can be the basis for various relevant brain functions, including memory. Another important element brought to light by research is that neurons grown in vitro fire spontaneously, which is one of the ways neurons grow and create new connections.

It is known that neural activity in cortico-striatal circuits of the forebrain and projections from it are central in coordinating motivated behaviours and movement and that the ventral striatum has been considered as a relevant region for consciousness (Slagter et al. 2017). To enable the study of the human cortico-striatal pathway, Miura et al. (2020) developed a method to convert human pluripotent stem cells into region-specific brain organoids that resemble the developing human striatum and include electrically active medium spiny neurons. The group led by S. P. Paşca succeeded in assembling striatum organoids with cerebral cortical ones in 3D cultures to form cortico-striatal assembloids. ‘Using viral tracing and functional assays in intact or sliced assembloids, we show that cortical neurons send axonal projections into striatal organoids and form synaptic connections. Medium spiny neurons mature electrophysiologically following assembly and display calcium activity after optogenetic stimulation of cortical neurons’ (Miura et al. 2020).

Indeed, a specific technology (Marton and Paşca 2020) allows to combine organoids resembling distinct areas into assembloids and can be used to model aspects of interactions that occur between regions in the human brain. Organoids can also be supplemented with non-central nervous system-derived cell types, including microglia and endothelial cells, to study the interplay of nervous system cells with immune cells and blood vessels (cf. also Xiang et al. 2019).

Recently, Paşca and his group succeeded in deriving organoids resembling the cerebral cortex or the hindbrain/spinal cord and assemble them with human skeletal muscle spheroids to generate 3D three-component cortico-motor assembloids (Andersen et al. 2020). First, the components of a cortico-motor circuit were grown separately and then functionally integrated, thanks to the connections that region-specific spheroids form when they are assembled. In this way, neurons of the cerebral cortex were connected through descending pathways to the hindbrain and the spinal cord to activate muscles and generate movement via motor neurons.

Importantly, Fair et al. (2020) investigated the developmental trajectory of electrophysiological properties (EPs) in whole-brain HCOs and correlated these properties with developmentally linked morphological and cellular features. The authors used a 64-channel MEA platform to detect and record spontaneous extracellular field potential change activity. They noted a gradual evolution of EP features in HCOs within 5 months in cultures. ‘Maturation of electrical features correlated with dynamic changes in the development of cell types within COs, such as the emergence of astrocytes and diverse neuronal populations. Last, as COs transition into increased cellular and morphological complexity, we observed activation of the neurotrophin (NTR)/TRK receptor signaling pathway’ (Fair et al. 2020).

The study seems to show that HCOs have ‘a gradual evolution of EP properties over development that resembles hallmark features of the developing neonatal brain’ (Fair et al. 2020). Furthermore, an increase in the cellular diversity of HCOs and a correlation with their EP trajectories have been observed, where the presence of inhibitory neurons in late-stage HCOs can indicate the maturation (also at the protein and transcriptome levels) of local cortical circuitry within neural networks. Another relevant element is the presence of GABAergic neurons and a diversity of apical and basal radial glial subtypes.


Cerebral organoids and consciousness

Some of the most promising advances in organoid technology have been published in the last 30 months, showcasing a notable acceleration, thanks to the possibility of creating living assembloids. Also, several research institutions are working and investing in brain organoids. Research on HCCs can therefore be said to be on the fast rise, and we can easily guess that we will have increasingly ‘perfected’ organoids in the near future. Bioengineering (Garreta et al. 2021) promises to overcome some well-known shortcomings organoids still exhibit, such as lack of specificity with regard to cell-type compositions, uncontrolled size, shape heterogeneity, absence of proper vascular and immune components and organ-specific morphological features, and absence of some kinds of genetic expression.

Obviously, we do not know if the vascularization problem, which is the key to having larger HCOs through oxygen and nutrients supplementation, will be solved and possibly when, while the possibility of inducing well-organized regional identities seems closer (Mansour et al. 2018; Çakir et al. 2019; Garreta et al. 2020). Useful tools could be 3D printers, microfluidic devices, bioreactors and robotic devices. Even optogenetics will be a technique that will allow the neuronal activity of brain organoids to be finely guided as in humans for safety reasons it is not yet possible (Shiri et al. 2019; Yoon et al. 2019). New 3D interfaces will allow one to study HCOs with the highest precision (Park et al. 2021).

However, it should be emphasized that so far research has focused on qualitative aspects, so to speak, of brain organoids, that is, we have tried to obtain specific regions or specific functions so to try to find the origin of disorders or diseases or to try to understand the specific stages or moments of neurogenesis. In order to study the emergence of consciousness, it will probably be necessary to focus on whole-brain organoids and also on quantitative aspects (we are talking about some hundreds million-neuron brains grown in the laboratory versus an 86 billion-neuron adult brain). The overall size and total number of neurons could certainly be decisive at least below a certain threshold. On the other hand, if we believe that consciousness comes in degrees, we might think that the qualitative and quantitative development of the brain allows us to move from mere sentience (awareness consciousness) to the ability to experience affective states of specific valence (phenomenal consciousness) up to self-consciousness.

But this hypothesis could be falsified precisely by empirical studies on HCOs, as thinking that the ontogenesis of the nervous system simply summarizes phylogeny is probably a mistake that comes from outdated theories. In any case, identifying a threshold of neural development in terms of size, cellular differentiation, connectivity and activity of specific circuits could be a pivotal turning point itself and for the ethical and pragmatic implications.

In the light of current knowledge on HCOs, I would like to show here only some potential strands of research, although some of them could soon turn out to be dead ends (cf. Bayne et al. 2019). The aim is to elicit more insights and to foster a theoretical debate and an expansion of experiments with HCOs so as to include the basic study of consciousness mechanisms. This expansion of the experiments should be accompanied by a high sensitivity to ethical issues.

In subsection ‘Assessing cerebral organoid activity’, I present a method to infer the potential presence of consciousness in laboratory-grown cerebral organoids. This may allow the advancement of research on consciousness even on the basis of systematically negative results. In subsection Organoid properties relevant to understand consciousness, I introduce some aspects related to the organoid properties that could be potentially relevant to understanding consciousness. In subsection Cerebral organoids as potential ‘consciousnessoids’, I propose some ideas for specific experiments that could provide new insights into the emergence and functioning of consciousness.


Assessing cerebral organoid activity

The first step to advance in the study of consciousness through cerebral organoids is to record their spontaneous and induced activity. As we have seen, adequate EEG equipment is already available in this sense. The analysis of the tracing thus obtained can provide interesting, but not conclusive, elements for the assessment of possible forms of sentience/consciousness (cf. Trujillo et al. 2019). A more complex and promising type of analysis is the Perturbational Complexity Index (PCI), a metric that is inspired by the main postulate of Integrated Information Theory (IIT), that is, that consciousness relies on the joint presence of integration and differentiation in neural circuits (cf. Tononi and Sporns 2003; Tononi 2008; Tononi and Koch 2015; Tononi et al. 2016).

Calculating PCI involves locally perturbing the cerebral cortex through transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and measuring the complexity of the electrical response of the rest of the brain with electroencephalography (Massimini et al. 2009; Casali et al. 2013; Gosseries et al. 2014; Sarasso et al. 2014). The rationale is that PCI should be low if interactions among neural elements are reduced due to the loss of integration, because the response engaged by TMS is spatially restricted; PCI is also low if many interacting areas react to the perturbation in a stereotypical way due to loss of differentiation, because in this case the resulting response is large but simple. PCI should reach high values only if the initial perturbation is transmitted to a large set of neural elements that react in a differentiated way (cf. Lavazza and Massimini 2018a).

Being based on general theoretical principles, PCI is totally independent of sensory processing, executive functions or motor behaviours and can be graded. Since brain-injured, unresponsive patients are fully inaccessible and do not provide any reliable evidence about their state of consciousness to be used on them, PCI had to be first validated and calibrated on a large benchmark population of subjects who could confirm the presence or absence of conscious experience through reports. Despite some individual variability within this large sample, PCI was lower in all unresponsive subjects who did not report any conscious experience on awakening from non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep or midazolam, xenon and propofol anaesthesia and was invariably higher in conditions in which consciousness was present (Casarotto et al. 2016).

An advanced version of PCI, possibly using finer stimulation and recording techniques (a combination of optogenetic stimulation and calcium imaging), may be developed in the future for cerebral organoids—a version adapted for in vitro cortical slices has been tested already (D’Andola et al. 2018). Clearly, the problem would still be how to validate this new index and identify a valid operational cut-off above which we could establish that the cerebral organoid has some capacity for consciousness. As for PCI, the cut-off determination process would, however, need to start from some known points of reference, for example, the values exhibited in the brain of an adult human being across different states (wakefulness, sleep, dreaming, anaesthesia and brain injury) and then gradually move to more challenging cases, such as newborns, primates, rodents and finally organoids. To the extent that the proposed measurement (a potential novel index of network complexity) is good enough to be generalized across species and types of brain circuits, it could at least allow for a coarse comparison on a common scale.

Although initially inspired by the Integrated Information Theory of consciousness (which is not unanimously considered a sound theory, e.g., Merker et al. 2021), the PCI index is recognized as a potential general indirect measure of the presence of consciousness. If properly developed and validated, PCI would make it possible not only to ascertain the presence of consciousness in HCOs but also to advance research by working on negative results. In fact, on studying the different development degrees of brain organoids, one would be able to either ascertain or exclude that consciousness emerged at a given stage and/or under given conditions. As the assembloids progress and the sensory and effector channels mature, PCI would allow us to assess the progressive degrees of integration of the overall activity of brain organoids, enabling us to understand the relative contribution of the various regions involved at different development stages and at different degrees of complexity of the HCOs analysed.

Very recently, Ankeny and Wolvetang (2021) proposed that

the most fruitful strategy to benchmark human brain organoids will be to apply technologies and measures currently used to assess levels of consciousness in comatose human patients and non-human animals. Since consciousness is strongly correlated with irregular low-amplitude electroencephalographic (EEG) activity in the 20–70 Hz range as well as gamma wave synchrony between different brain regions, measuring these parameters in organoid and combinoids with multi-electrode arrays would be an important first step.

In addition, they advocated ‘assessing whether the bispectral index (BIS), which combines different features of the EEG to gauge anesthetic depth in anesthetized patients (Myles et al. 2004), can be performed in human brain organoids and would be useful, complemented with other types of analyses that mimic protocols increasingly used to measure stimulus-evoked activity in vegetative and minimally conscious patients’. Also, MEG could be a good method for making a comparison between magnetic fields generated by the electrical activity in cerebral organoids and those in the brains of foetuses or comatose patients (Gross 2019).


Organoid properties relevant to understand consciousness

At this stage, one can wonder what type of study is required when it comes to organoids, and why it is relevant to our understanding of consciousness. A potential path in this sense is shown by Silva et al. (2020). In their opinion, ‘physical constraints imposed on the brain can guide the analyses, an interpretation of experimental data and the construction of mathematical models that attempt to make sense of how the brain works and how cognitive functions emerge. Development of these mathematical models for human-derived brain organoids offers an opportunity for testing new hypotheses about the human brain’.

If the computational space is finite, it is limited by the physical constraints imposed on the brain. All theoretical or computational models should take into account a fundamental structure–function constraint, which is the result of interaction between anatomical structure and signalling dynamics: ‘It is a constraint produced by the way the brain is wired, and how its constituent parts necessarily interact’ (Silva et al. 2020).

In this vein

Human-derived brain organoids reflect a personalized model of the brain unique to each individual. Because of this, they could provide an opportunity to bridge biological experiments and computational models with behavioral, cognitive, and clinical studies in humans that no other experimental model is able to achieve. Organoids derived from neurotypical individuals or patients can be experimentally studied in parallel with cognitive experiments or clinical trials being carried out in the same individuals. They can potentially put molecular, cellular and physiological scale experiments distinct to each individual in context with cognitive and clinical studies that the subjects or patients are participating in. This would be invaluable for the investigation of physiologically complex genetically based neurodevelopmental and neurological disorders such as autism spectrum disorder and epilepsy (Silva et al. 2020).

Accordingly, some relevant neuroscientific issues might be addressed. For instance, consider the connectivity structure of the brain, which is strongly linked to genetic make-up. Is it formed in a stochastic way or is it wired purposefully? As for the neural dynamics of consciousness, a more pertinent observation is that in artificial simulations of a biological network, the wrong kind of geometry and connectivity can easily destroy the dynamic activity of the network (Buibas and Silva 2011).

This perspective of experimental testing on HCOs also encompasses computational theories of consciousness, such as Higher-Order Thought theories, or the Higher-Order Syntactic Thoughts approach, which aims to ‘identify the computations that are linked to consciousness, and to analyze the neural bases of those computations’ (Rolls 2020). Another related theory in this sense is the Global Neuronal Workspace Model, when used as a computational theory of conscious processing (Dehaene et al. 2014).

On the other hand, some cellular mechanisms of conscious processing have recently been highlighted. These are the first candidates for a study that moves from animal models to human brain models consisting of HCOs. In particular, the research carried out by Aru and colleagues has noted the importance of the biophysical properties of pyramidal cells. The latter are believed to constitute ‘gates that control the evolution of global activation patterns’, within the thalamocortical system. Aru proposed a Dendritic Information Theory, which is a neurobiological theory of consciousness, whose hallmark ‘is the flexible integration of bottom-up and top-down data streams at the cellular level’ (Aru et al. 2020).

The study of the effects of anaesthesia has led to the inference that cortical pyramidal neurons may play a key role in the mechanisms of consciousness, although the latter is thought to be a property of activity patterns distributed over large brain networks. L5p cells have distinct functional compartments that facilitate the segregation and recombination of multiple input streams. The middle compartment, called ‘coupling compartment’, mediates interaction between the apical and basal compartments. In unconscious states, the apical compartment seems to be unable to influence basal compartments and this decoupling effect might be what triggers the loss of consciousness (specifically in anaesthesia; Suzuki and Larkum 2020).

The dual-stream information flow gated by L5p neurons is compatible with computational theories such as predictive coding based on the principle of free energy minimization (Friston et al. 2017). However, these theories still need to be tested and, as mentioned, brain organoids lend themselves to providing the right physical constraints to do so. In general, some of the claims of the Dendritic Integration Theory and the questions that its proponents raise for future studies (Aru et al. 2020) could find experimental answers through the use of specific human brain models consisting of organoids. In particular, the non-invasive manipulation and measurement of decoupling is extremely complex in animal models and currently impossible in the brains of adult human volunteers. In this sense, organoid research on consciousness could represent a major breakthrough.


Cerebral organoids as potential ‘consciousnessoids’

When it comes to directly probing or using HCOs as a platform for consciousness research, one of the first steps may be to exclude from the analysis brain areas and patterns of neural activity that in the typically developing brain have turned out to be probably unrelated to the emergence of consciousness. Secondly, the issue of dimensions and the lack of sensory inputs should be considered. Regarding the first aspect, the Global Neuronal Workspace Theory (Dehaene and Naccache 2001; Dehaene et al. 2006, Dehaene 2014) posits that one becomes conscious of something only if unconscious brain activity in sensory areas spreads to a larger network of neurons throughout the brain via long-distance connectivity with specific cortico-cortical architecture. Regarding the second aspect, approaches such as the Temporo-Spatial Theory of consciousness proposed by Northoff presuppose an integration of sensory stimuli as a basic element of human consciousness (Northoff and Huang 2017; cf. Zilio 2020).

If it makes no sense to directly test theories on consciousness, which have very specific assumptions concerning an adult human brain in interaction with its environment, one potential way is precisely the engineering of neural systems that reproduce the features of structure and connectivity considered as necessary for the emergence of consciousness (Varrault et al. 2019). For example, regarding global workspace theory, creating assembloids (see ‘Physiology of cerebral organoids’ section) capable of mimicking the network deemed to constitute the minimum necessary NCCs would allow a new and more precise kind of experimentation. But one should not forget that these potential ‘consciousnessoids’ would have the limit of not being able to give a behavioural (nor obviously verbal) output based on which to verify the correlation between NCCs and experienced subjective states. And yet, as will be said further on, an assembloid that also has rudimentary effectors does not seem impossible to grow.

Another line of research is that which uses firing patterns and connectivity benchmarks believed to be reliably correlates of conscious or unconscious states to test different neural signatures (Dehaene and Changeux 2011). In this case, if strong similarities were discovered, inferences of scientific interest could be made, although there would still be no direct evidence on the presence of consciousness in the brain organoids examined. Some recent studies that can provide insights for studies on the activity in organoids concerns specific patterns of neural activation detected in altered states of consciousness and in different phases of sleep.

The findings in Pigorini et al. (2015) ‘suggest that the intrinsic tendency of cortical neurons to fall into a down-state after a transient activation (i.e., bistability) prevents the emergence of stable patterns of causal interactions among cortical areas during NREM [sleep]. Besides sleep, the same basic neurophysiological dynamics may play a role in pathological conditions in which thalamo-cortical information integration and consciousness are impaired in spite of preserved neuronal activity’. Another well-known study investigated potential confounding factors concerning physiological variables which change when subjects pass from wakefulness states to sleep. Nieminen et al. (2016) found evidence which seems to show that variations in the level of consciousness within the same physiological state are associated with changes in the underlying bistability in cortical circuits.

Subsequently, Siclari et al. (2018), stated that ‘in both NREM and REM sleep, reports of dream experience were associated with local decreases in low-frequency activity in posterior cortical regions. High-frequency activity in these regions correlated with specific dream contents. Monitoring this posterior “hot zone” in real time predicted whether an individual reported dreaming or the absence of dream experiences during NREM sleep, suggesting that it may constitute a core correlate of conscious experiences in sleep’.

In this sense, the first step could be to compare the functional activity that can be recorded in cerebral organoids (for example both with MAE techniques and with calcium-imaging-based methods to have the maximum possible resolution both in space and time) with benchmarks of conscious activity of human beings in different stages of the development of the nervous system both in specific states of consciousness (based on the age of development) and in states of altered consciousness (anaesthesia, coma, vegetative states).

The inferences that could be drawn from this comparison should obviously extend from the electrical activity to the architecture of the circuit that generates it up to the analysis of genes that are specifically expressed in the neural activations considered (Tanaka et al. 2020). Concerning these features, an automated multiscale comparative analysis dubbed SCOUT was recently proposed. This ‘integrated technology platform can rapidly clear, label, and image intact organoids. Algorithmic- and convolutional neural network-based image analysis extract hundreds of features characterizing molecular, cellular, spatial, cytoarchitectural, and organoid-wide properties from fluorescence microscopy dataset’ (Albanese et al. 2020).

Any overlap between activity recorded in the cerebral organoids and the chosen benchmarks would in any case not give confirmation of glimpses of consciousness in the absence of interaction with the environment but would still give important preliminary information. Subsequently, one could begin to think of first attempts at experimentation on organoids aimed directly at testing aspects at least potentially related to consciousness. Given that the possibility of growing HCOs that are sensitive to light stimulation has already been ascertained, one could think of evaluating the type of neural activity that is elicited by different wavelengths, corresponding to different colours and comparing this activity with the preference for different colours manifested by a control group of infants and with the mean neuronal activity corresponding to each colour in the control group.

In the strand of studies on assembloids, one could try to combine a cortico-motor assembloid with another component that includes pain sensitive sensors, also of animal origin, and evaluate whether the administration of generally painful stimuli, such as strong heat, can trigger a specific activity at the motor level (however you want to interpret it). Nerve terminations sensitive to stimuli and rudimentary effectors that give feedback in terms of peculiar neural activation could be the first tests carried out directly on cerebral organoids.

On a different level, in the debate on the brain-likeness of HCOs, it has been interestingly proposed to consider memory as something that is specific to the nervous system, for which there is biological evidence, the mechanisms of which are rationally explainable and measurable (Lunshof 2021). The questions that we could then ask ourselves in the laboratory are as follows: ‘does HCOs possess the neurobiological features necessary for extant memories?’ and ‘can we endow an engineered cerebral organoid with memories?’. Memory can be a proxy of the presence of consciousness, but it seems to be linked to the ability to receive sensory inputs. In any case, even the manifestation of a behaviour guided by information retrieved from the memory does not necessarily show the presence of consciousness, as this behaviour can be ‘automatic’ or otherwise controlled by subpersonal processes.

A recent experiment can be considered in this sense. Vetere et al. (2019) managed to form a memory in the absence of experience, thanks to optogenetics. Since ‘memory is coded by patterns of neural activity in distinct circuits’, it is feasible to reverse engineer a memory by artificially creating specific patterns of activity directly affecting the neuronal activation. In the experiment conducted on mice, ‘in olfactory conditioning, an odor conditioned stimulus (CS) is paired with an unconditioned stimulus (US, for example, a footshock), and the resulting CS–US association guides future behavior’.

We replaced the odor CS with optogenetic stimulation of a specific olfactory glomerulus and the US with optogenetic stimulation of distinct inputs into the ventral tegmental area that mediate either aversion or reward. In doing so, we created a fully artificial memory in mice. In a similar way to a natural memory, this artificial memory depended on CS–US contingency during training, and the conditioned response was specific to the conditioned stimulus and reflected the unconditioned stimulus valence. Moreover, both real and implanted memories engaged overlapping brain circuits and depended on basolateral amygdala activity for expression Vetere et al. (2019).

From this experiment, we can deduce that the brain does not need an external experience to create a memory, although obviously we are talking about a very simple association between a sensory datum and a pleasant or painful stimulation. Somehow, we now know that brains in a vat are not just a logical possibility, being the reference to the thought experiment made famous by philosopher Putnam (1981), about the eventuality that our entire life is a simulation experienced by a brain immersed in a bath of nutrients and connected by cables to a computer.

An intervention of the type described by Vetere could also be produced on a cerebral organoid of adequate size, in order to verify whether it is possible to reproduce the same or similar neuronal pathways and the same or similar activations, thanks to the use of optogenetics, which turns out to be the ideal tool for experiments of this kind also in HCOs. Provided it can be agreed that having the memory of an unpleasant experience has some effect on the mouse, its behavioural response seems to confirm the effect of this sensation. In the case of the cerebral organoid, this check could not be obtained directly, but if the circuit of a memory could be created in the absence of experience, the need for sensory input to the nervous system and probably also for a body would disappear. In fact, if the memory of the unpleasant experience is stored in the engram without the need for sensitivity to the external environment, then it can also be relived as unpleasant without a body and afferent nervous pathways.

The obvious objection is that the activation of the circuit that produces aversion to a certain environment in the mouse based on the unpleasant memory may not produce any conscious sensation in the cerebral organoid. A possibility is using the above-mentioned PCI to verify what degree of integration is recorded when the aversion is manifested. However, whatever the result of the PCI test, it would not warrant that the memory created in the organoid will be a conscious one.


Ethics of ‘consciousnessoids’

Is it possible that HCOs may show a form of sentience or a more advanced degree of consciousness? The overwhelming majority of scientists believe this is currently not the case. However, a number of neuroethicists have begun to consider this possibility, generally based on two types of consideration (Lavazza and Massimini 2018b; Hostiuc et al. 2019; Lavazza 2019, Sawai et al. 2019; Lavazza and Pizzetti 2020). The first is the factual observation that the development of scientific research on HCOs is progressing at a very fast pace, and many typical functions of the brain of a human being start being detected in brain surrogates grown in the laboratory. The second consideration concerns the precautionary principle, ‘which states that in situations of some types of uncertainty, a decision-maker should refrain from actions or policies that run the risk of causing harm to the public or to the environment, even if the harmfulness of these actions or policies has not been scientifically established beyond reasonable doubt’ (Żuradzki 2021).

In this vein, Birch and Browning (2021) claimed that ‘if an organoid contains structures or mechanisms that any serious and credible theory of the human NCCs posits to be sufficient for conscious experience, we should take proportionate measures to regulate research on that organoid. In practice, this sets the evidential bar for taking precautions at an intentionally low level with the specific qualities typical of the human being in the growth phase’. Greely (2021) chose an intermediate position and stated that ‘when we avoid unethical research by making living models of human brains, we may make our models so good that they themselves deserve some of the kinds of ethical and legal respect that have hindered brain research in human beings. If it looks like a human brain and acts like a human brain, at what point do we have to treat it like a human brain—or a human being?’.

On the contrary, Koplin and Savulescu (2019) have proposed to make the use of HCOs proportionate to some critically important purposes or sufficiently great expected benefits of the research. This view implies the lawfulness of using both ‘conscious or potentially conscious brain organoids (equivalent to 20 weeks’ in vivo brain development or more)’ and ‘brain organoids with the potential to develop advanced cognitive capacities (e.g., mature brain organoids capable of interacting with the outside environment)’. This framework to regulate the use of HCOs capable of developing higher consciousness and cognitive abilities is based on a consequentialist perspective that seems to admit a limited exploitation of HCOs in exchange for great expected benefits related to biomedical research. Hyun et al. (2020) take a very similar stance and do not consider cerebral organoids currently endowed with consciousness and that they should not therefore be attributed a moral status of some kind.

The moral consequentialist view taken by those who believe that research and destructive experiments on brain organoids are legitimate is based on their use in the biomedical field. If research on HCOs can save lives, it is said, it is certainly legitimate to exploit them for this purpose, whether or not they have a minimum degree of sentience, in other words, a sensitivity to pleasure and pain. In this article, I have instead dealt with a specific research that could be conducted with HCOs and that up to now has not yet been undertaken, namely that on NCCs.

In such a case, we would be faced with an unprecedented situation, as pointed out by Greely (2021). If we use HCOs to study consciousness and manage to make them grow so that they begin to show some form of consciousness, we should address a particularly difficult moral dilemma. As Lavazza (2020) pointed out: ‘Even considering HCOs as entities with a unique ontological status that needs to be clarified, they certainly share two convergent criteria for the attribution of moral status: the fact of potentially having a rudimentary form of consciousness and the fact of being part of the human species’.

And specifically

the use of cerebral organoids—if developed to very advanced stages precisely to study the emergence of human consciousness and its mechanisms— would end up violating Kant’s humanity formula in the extended formulation proposed here, which requires not using certain entities as means but only as ends. In this sense, even the mere culture of HCOs in the laboratory to do research on human consciousness would amount to a similar violation. In fact, even the recognition of a minimal form of moral status combined with Kant’s proviso induces to spare such an entity forms of suffering that it could experience as a sentient being (Lavazza 2020).


Conclusion

In this paper, possibly for the first time, an attempt has been made to present some clues and insights that organoid research could provide in the search for the neural mechanisms and correlates of consciousness. HCOs are part of an expanding field, but until now they have been mainly used as a model for the study of neurological diseases and neurodevelopment. After describing some relevant features of the currently available organoids, I suggested that some recent findings and the development of new techniques could allow for extending the use of HCOs also to the study of consciousness.

In particular, first, I proposed the application of the PCI as a candidate for a suitable strategy to test the presence of proxies of conscious activity in HCOs. This route may allow research to progress even on the basis of systematically negative results. Second, I introduced some aspects related to the various organoid properties that are relevant to the understanding of consciousness, considering firstly the physical constraints and the structure–function approach and secondly some specific cellular mechanisms of conscious processing, namely pyramidal neurons. Then, I noted that the progress of assembloids and technologies aimed not only at growing organoids but also at engineering specific circuits and connections could lead to the creation of ‘consciousnessoids’. These organoids would be capable of mimicking the features of a neural system displaying the characteristics that various theories of consciousness take to be the minimum NCC for the emergence of conscious states. At that point, HCOs could become unprecedented living laboratories for the study of consciousness.

Finally, I have highlighted an important ethical issue. If HCOs manifested some form of consciousness or it could be indirectly assumed that they possess it, this would call for consideration of whether HCOs should be given a moral status and what limitations should be introduced to regulate research with HCOs. I proposed that using HCOs that were conscious would be a violation of the requirement not to use sentient beings of human origin as pure means.

In this vein, when the stage of minimally conscious HCOs was reached, a recommended step could be to study consciousness through brain organoids derived from non-human animals, looking for the developmental processes underlying the neurophysiological mechanisms that correlate with sentience in healthy adult animals (Kanton et al. 2019). In this case too, however, one might ask what ethical issues would be raised by those experiments, given non-human animals too deserve to bear the minimum suffering possible.

It therefore seems that research on consciousness thanks to cerebral organoids opens up extremely interesting potential new avenues but raises ethical issues that will not be easily solved.


Neural oscillations are a start toward understanding brain activity rather than the end

Keith B. Doelling, M. Florencia Assaneo — PLoS Biology, 2021. PMC8121326, CC BY 4.0.

Does rhythmic neural activity merely echo the rhythmic features of the environment, or does it reflect a fundamental computational mechanism of the brain? This debate has generated a series of clever experimental studies attempting to find an answer. Here, we argue that the field has been obstructed by predictions of oscillators that are based more on intuition rather than biophysical models compatible with the observed phenomena. What follows is a series of cautionary examples that serve as reminders to ground our hypotheses in well-developed theories of oscillatory behavior put forth by theoretical study of dynamical systems. Ultimately, our hope is that this exercise will push the field to concern itself less with the vague question of “oscillation or not” and more with specific biophysical models that can be readily tested.


Introduction

Neural oscillations are a critical phenomenon in neuroscience. For a century, their implication and role have been studied in nearly every cognitive domain and species. Why is research on oscillations so pervasive throughout the field? First, because oscillatory behavior seems to be one of those exceedingly illusive universals of brain function. While these rhythms may occur at different timescales, their presence across brain regions and species is more the rule than the exception. Second, oscillatory dynamics are extremely well studied. Engineers and physicists have studied oscillators to build and understand physical phenomena long before neuroscientists grew interested in them. A close look at their work could guide neuroscience toward an explanation of neural function and its consequences.

Despite the potential advantages, it seems that at least a portion of the field is stuck in a loop, debating whether neural oscillations are or are not a useful concept worthy of study. On the one hand, there is a tendency to doggedly look for (and often find) oscillations everywhere (perhaps even where they are not). On the other hand, there exists a reactive trend invoking words like “epiphenomenon,” “evoked response,” and “exhaust fumes” which seeks to explain away any oscillative finding (perhaps even when they are). The result is that more effort is spent on debating an oscillation’s presence than profiting from its advantages. It is our feeling, as researchers who have certainly contributed to this debate, that the discussion no longer provides any tangible benefits to the field. This is because it focuses the field on determining the presence of an oscillation as being a satisfying end goal of a research program, while, instead, it is only a starting point.

An example of this kind of dialog persists in the domain of speech and sound perception. In this field, a wealth of data provides evidence for rhythmic activity approximately 4 Hz in the auditory cortex that tracks the rhythms in sound. These papers propose a neural oscillator in the auditory cortex entrained to acoustic stimuli to support a number of important cognitive functions in audition such as attention, prediction, and segmentation. And yet, the input itself is rhythmic. Perhaps the data can be explained by a passive system whose seeming rhythmicity only reflects the rhythm of the input. This passive system relies on some added mechanisms (such as the contingent negative variation, e.g.) to support higher-order processes. What predictions can we use to tease these hypotheses apart, particularly, when the predicted neural recordings are so similar?

We suggest that the question itself is ill-posed. Oscillations may be generated by any number of means. Presumably, the goal of our research is to study not the phenomena but their underlying mechanisms. A basic analysis of how oscillations are generated will reveal 2 important points: (1) the line between oscillation and not is blurred—a leaky integrate-and-fire model is both an oscillator and a model of evoked responses—and (2) there is great heterogeneity in their possible mechanisms, each leading to different behaviors and predictions.

Our goal is not to decide whether oscillators do or do not play a critical role in brain function nor to discuss the advantages of such a mechanism. Instead, we seek to reground ourselves in dynamic systems theories that have studied oscillations in detail and to ensure that the predictions and assessment criteria that we agree upon as a field are adequately justified. We do so by first providing a grounded definition of an oscillator, both generally and by means of simple mathematical equations that can be used to generate valid predictions of its behavior. We then use this mathematical model to test (and often reject) certain commonly assumed predictions. Finally, we provide a framework for refocusing questions away from the presence of an oscillation and toward an ever greater specificity of the kinds of nonlinear dynamics which could yield the neural and behavioral data that we study.


What is an oscillator?

The word “oscillator” is widely used but loosely defined in the cognitive neuroscience field. Using ambiguous nomenclatures to extensively describe different behaviors is far from optimal. Instead, we propose to redirect our efforts to understand the mechanisms underlying such behaviors by building biophysical models capable of explaining—and/or predicting—experimental observations. For the sake of this argument, we define an oscillator as “a system capable of generating sustained rhythmic behavior by itself.” Here, we refer to a system in the dynamical sense, meaning that the behavior of a set of variables can be described by a set of differential equations adjusted by a set of parameters. Therefore, acknowledging that different parameters may yield different behaviors, we include systems for which self-generating rhythmic behavior occurs within a restricted parameter space. Lastly, we highlight that the oscillator can generate the rhythm by itself; note that we preclude, therefore, a linear system which only oscillates when it receives rhythmic input.

From a mathematical perspective, there are 4 different ways in which a two-dimensional system begins, or ceases, to oscillate—for a detailed analysis on how oscillations can arise, we invite the reader to study more detailed and complete analyses, e.g.,. Here, we will only focus on the most famous one: the Hopf–Andronov (HA) bifurcation. In a set of equations describing the dynamics of 2 coupled variables, an HA bifurcation takes place when, by continuously increasing or decreasing a parameter, the system switches from a damped oscillatory regime to sustained oscillations. For example, in the equations shown in, this qualitative change in behavior takes place at λ = 0: For λ<0, the system decays to a stable equilibrium, while for λ > 0, it keeps oscillating.

These equations comprise the Stuart–Landau model, which represents the simplest mathematical description of an HA bifurcation, referred to in the dynamical systems field as a normal form. By applying the correct mathematical manipulations, any system that goes through an HA bifurcation can be reduced (within a region of parameter space close to the bifurcation point) to this normal form.

Others have provided a more comprehensive and detailed description of the Stuart–Landau model than we could hope to achieve. Therefore, in the following sections, we will use these equations to illustrate part of an oscillator’s behavioral repertoire. We will show that oscillator behavior should not be constrained by beliefs about how it should behave but rather by a specific mathematical instantiation of the system. For this reason, we have framed the next section in terms of what an oscillator is not, in order to refute commonly held beliefs. In some cases, a more accurate statement might be something akin to “what an oscillator does not have to be,” whereas other rules are more strict. There may well be certain conditions, equations, or parameters under which some of these commonly held beliefs are true. In that case, the authors who put forth these claims must clearly state what these conditions are to clarify exactly what hypotheses are being tested.


What an oscillator is not

First, some disclaimers. We do not mean to suggest that the points highlighted below are entirely our own. Many other researchers in neuroscience and dynamical systems have discussed these points previously in detail. Some readers may find these points to be trivial, others, highly controversial. Our aim is to counteract a growing trend in the field to deviate away from these tenets and reground the search for neural mechanisms in perception into quantifiable predictions. In what follows, we present some concrete examples on how common beliefs, not grounded on precise biophysical models, can lead to misleading interpretations. We hope it will inspire future research to assess the downstream consequences of specific biophysical models on cognition.


Oscillators are not echos

Previous work suggests that strong evidence for an oscillator requires not only rhythmic activity during stimulation but also after. In line with this proposal, a number of studies have looked for “ringing out” effects where the frequency modulation persists beyond the stimulation period. However, the behavior of an oscillator (as for any dynamic system) depends on its current state, on its own dynamics, and on the interaction with upcoming inputs. Which is all to say that it is not necessarily dependent on the frequency of past inputs.

Here, we show that the expectation that an oscillation should ring out at the same frequency as previous stimulation for several cycles after a stimulus input has turned off is not justified—even though oscillator behavior is often tested in such a way. We adopted a model in which the neural oscillator, represented by the equations in, receives rhythmic stimulation as input. Simulations run with such a model demonstrate that the oscillator returns to its natural state as soon as the external stimulation ceases, without any of the expected reverberant behavior.

From the perspective of the cognitive neuroscientist then, we should not expect an oscillator, at least not in its simplest form, to predict much beyond one cycle after stimulus offset, unless the stimulus is already very close to the oscillator’s spontaneous frequency. If we expect a neural mechanism to extend for many cycles beyond this, more specifics are required regarding the nature of the particular oscillator.

Many papers have sought out “ringing out” effects, and not all of them are out of line in doing so. By virtue of receiving an external input, the phase of any oscillator will most likely be shifted by some nonzero amount, and therefore will be altered by the input. This phase shift could result in higher intertrial phase coherence several cycles after the stimulus ceases. Indeed, some studies have found shifts in phase on this basis. However, as shows, poststimulus, the oscillator reverts to its intrinsic (spontaneous) frequency. Therefore, searching for phase shifts at the stimulus frequency will lead to subpar results.


Oscillators are not shape invariant

This point has not often been considered in perceptual neuroscience, but it is an important one if we are to test the viability of an oscillator as a perceptual principle. In general, when considering how an oscillator might synchronize to a rhythmic input, one often assumes that the behavior should be similar across many different input shapes: whether the signal is a smooth violin note, a sharp pure tone, or something in between like speech. However, this feature has not been considered in enough detail regarding how it should affect the neural ability to synchronize to it. And yet, it can make a big difference.

For example, consider the simulations run with the same model as in the previous subsection, which show that the neural response depends on the specific shape of the rhythmic stimulation. When the system is forced with a sinusoidal stimulus, it immediately synchronizes to the external frequency. However, when the stimulus has the same period (i.e., frequency) and max amplitude but a pulsatile shape, the entrainment becomes unstable. We should note here that these simulations represent only an example and that the sinusoidal stimulus is an arbitrary choice. A pulsatile stimulus can also generate stable synchrony, particularly if it is closer to the input’s natural frequency. Similarly, some sine waves, depending on their frequency, may also generate unstable behavior. One should conclude from these simulations that oscillatory behavior is not invariant to input shape and that its response will depend heavily on the oscillator’s phase response curve: the amount of phase shift produced by a unit of input as a function of the ongoing phase (see “Oscillators are not phase invariant” for more details).

From the cognitive perspective, the study of how stimulus shape affects neural synchronization and temporal perception is understudied—however, see work on steady-state visual evoked potentials. Any theoretical models of oscillatory synchrony to perceptual input should also take these dynamics into account, perhaps by defining some preprocessing steps which might normalize the input shape before it is fed into the oscillator. For example, previous works in the auditory domain have considered such preprocessing, showing that the sharpness of the acoustic envelope, also called acoustic edges, may be a key feature represented in the auditory cortex.


Oscillators are not tireless

Using the definition of an oscillator that we began with (a system that is capable of self-generating oscillations), we can see quickly that consistent spontaneous oscillations are not a requirement. In general, dynamic models of neural function are often studied near bifurcations whereby a small shift in the parameters can create topologically distinct behaviors. In that sense, a system which starts out at rest can reach a limit cycle (i.e., an oscillatory regime) during stimulation, which is then destroyed when the stimulus is turned off. The capacity to oscillate does not require the oscillation to continue endlessly.

From a neural perspective, brain regions are not isolated; it is through their interaction that a neural system reaches complex behaviors. Thus, a valid assumption is that some of the parameters in the equations in could be modulated through the activity of other brain areas and/or by presence or absence of the stimulus itself. For example, a top-down mechanism could push the system across a bifurcation point, bringing the system into an oscillatory regime when it detects an external input. As soon as the stimulus disappears, the system goes back to its non-oscillatory regime by progressively decreasing the oscillation’s amplitude back toward rest.

Alternatively, from a bottom-up perspective (i.e., for a fixed λ value) a rhythmic external input can also elicit oscillations from the system. In contrast to the previous example, where the system oscillates at its natural frequency, here, during the stimulation phase, the frequency is determined by the rhythmic features of the stimulus. Once the stimulation ceases, the system goes back to rest, oscillating at its natural frequency and progressively decreasing its amplitude toward zero.

All in all, these simulations exemplify how, through different mechanisms, a quiescent system at rest can turn into an oscillatory regime during stimulus input and back again.

The implication here then is that studies searching for ongoing fluctuations prior to the stimulus as proof of an oscillator may indeed be misguided. While the presence of rhythmic fluctuation in the baseline period may well be indicative of oscillatory behavior, the absence of these fluctuations does not indicate the absence of an underlying oscillator. Instead, oscillatory behavior should be defined by how the mechanism interacts with the stimulus while the stimulus is present, as we have sought to do in this essay.

A corollary of the above is that stimulus input can change oscillator amplitude. The belief that an oscillator must constantly oscillate could invite the prediction that oscillators will maintain the same amplitude before and during stimulation and only shift in phase. Therefore, a change in amplitude would be indicative of an evoked response. Each of our simulations refute this concept: Amplitude change with stimulus input is a common feature of oscillatory behavior.


Oscillators are not phase invariant

An oscillator does not respond uniformly even to the same input at different moments in time. How an oscillator’s phase shifts in response to input is a function of its ongoing phase: a phenomenon typically known as the phase response curve or phase resetting curve (PRC; see. The PRC has been considered at the level of circadian rhythms and of single cell and circuits but remains understudied at the human cognitive level.

Proposed oscillations, as presented in cognitive science papers, often ignore this point, assuming for the sake of simplicity that each input adjusts the phase by the same amount, or not at all, (e.g., Fig 1; Fig 1; Fig 1A) or that the phase will always be totally reset to 0 (e.g., Fig 1B; Fig 1). Many of these examples present oscillators in this fashion as simplifications for didactic purposes. We do not suggest that the authors are unaware of this phenomenon. However, we feel that these simplifications are in danger of being taken too literally. The sensitivity of the PRC can have important consequences to the adaptability of an oscillator. The degree (and the direction) to which the phase is modified depends on the phase at the time of the arrival of the stimulus. Critically, an oscillator’s phase response function will depend on the specific oscillator. Here, we show again the same exemplar oscillator to illustrate this point.

In, a single pulsatile stimulus, applied at 2 distinct phases, yields 2 very different phase adjustments. In the first case, by stimulating the oscillator during its downward phase, the oscillator’s “natural progression” is inhibited resulting in a positive phase lag. In the second case, by stimulating the oscillator during its upward phase, the oscillator’s progression is facilitated resulting in a phase advancement. This kind of flexible response is a feature—and not a bug—of the oscillator, because it allows for precise computation based on the timing of the input: The system can speed up or slow down depending on when the stimulus arrives.


Oscillators are not metronomes

Nikolić and colleagues wrote a spotlight article entitled “Gamma oscillations: precise temporal coordination without a metronome.” We too invoke the metronome metaphor to emphasize a similar point. Oscillations are not sine waves, and their flexibility is a crucial aspect of their utility. To drive this final point home, we created a brief simulation using the same Stuart–Landau model from the previous simulations to show an example of how the model behaves in response to quasi-rhythmic stimuli. Each unit of stimulation is drawn from a Gaussian distribution, each centered in rhythmic fashion so that the expected locations of each tone would yield a perfectly rhythmic stimulus. The example stimulus shown in demonstrates that despite the deviations in timing of each stimulus from rhythmicity, the oscillator still peaks at the expected time of what would be the next tone.

We extracted the phase at this expected time and ran this simulation 500 times, each with a new stimulus drawn from the same distributions. shows that the oscillator phase at the expected time across these simulations is highly concentrated around 0 and therefore that the oscillator phase carries information about the expected timing of upcoming inputs. In this sense, the oscillator can speed up or slow down depending on the deviations from rhythmicity that it receives.


Not all that oscillates is oscillator

The above examples show the potential and flexibility of oscillators, but their bounds are not limitless. Here, we run some simulations to exemplify how an oscillator can be distinguished from a non-oscillator system. For the oscillator, in line with the previous sections, we adopted the Stuart–Landau model. For the non-oscillator, we chose a linear damped system. The linear system is more akin to a resonant system which has a preferred frequency of stimulation but is not self-generative (see for a detailed description of a resonant system). One divergence between the models’ predictions is that, when forced with an external rhythmic signal, the linear model follows the external rhythm regardless of the forcing frequency (with reductions in amplitude as the stimulus frequency moves further away from the preferred), while the oscillator, instead, synchronizes only if the forcing frequency is within a range around its natural rhythm. To distinguish between these quantitatively different behaviors, a useful analysis is to compute the phase difference between the output of the system and the forcing signal. If the empirical observation shows that when presented with an isochronous stimulus the phase difference between the stimulus and the brain signal remains constant, regardless of the external rhythm, the simplest model should be adopted. Since the linear model predicts the observations, there would be no justification to increase the complexity of the model by adding a nonlinearity. In this direction, we can point to several studies assessing the oscillator-like properties of the neural system using this kind of analysis.

In general, the behavior of a neural oscillator will depend on the specific features of the dynamical system defining it and on the mechanisms through which it interacts with the external world—bottom-up, like, and/or top-down, like, where an internal parameter of the oscillator is modified by the external stimulus.


Not all oscillators are alike

Each oscillator oscillates in its own way, the way that each nonlinearity is nonlinear in its own way. Therefore, the claim that some neural system oscillates is akin to calling the system nonlinear: useful information but hardly a complete explanation. More specifics are required to meaningfully advance the field forward. Conversely, by ruling out any of the behaviors discussed here, an experimentalist has constrained the kind of oscillator, or other dynamical system, that could have performed this function. This is an important contribution. Still, we caution the field against ruling out one behavior and throwing out all possible oscillators along with it. Doing so may ultimately harm progress in the field.

How then should the field move forward? We believe that rather than concerning ourselves with supporting or refuting neural oscillators, a more useful framework would be to focus our attention on the specific neural dynamics we hope to explain and to develop candidate quantitative models that are constrained by these dynamics. Furthermore, such models should be able to predict future recordings or be falsified by them. That is to say that it should no longer be sufficient to claim that a particular mechanism is or is not an oscillator but instead to choose specific dynamical systems to test. In so doing, we expect to overcome our looping debate and to ultimately develop—by means of testing many model types in many different experimental conditions—a fundamental understanding of cognitive processes and the general organization of neural behavior.


Review of machine learning methods for RNA secondary structure prediction

Qi Zhao, Zheng Zhao, Xiaoya Fan, Zhengwei Yuan, Qian Mao, Yudong Yao, Shi-Jie Chen — PLoS Computational Biology, 2021. PMC8389396, CC BY 4.0.

Secondary structure plays an important role in determining the function of noncoding RNAs. Hence, identifying RNA secondary structures is of great value to research. Computational prediction is a mainstream approach for predicting RNA secondary structure. Unfortunately, even though new methods have been proposed over the past 40 years, the performance of computational prediction methods has stagnated in the last decade. Recently, with the increasing availability of RNA structure data, new methods based on machine learning (ML) technologies, especially deep learning, have alleviated the issue. In this review, we provide a comprehensive overview of RNA secondary structure prediction methods based on ML technologies and a tabularized summary of the most important methods in this field. The current pending challenges in the field of RNA secondary structure prediction and future trends are also discussed.


Introduction

Since its discovery, for a long time, RNA was regarded solely as a message carrier between DNA and protein. However, we are now beginning to understand its important roles, as increasing numbers of noncoding RNAs (ncRNA) are being discovered. According to the latest report, less than 2% of the human genome comprises protein-coding regions. The majority of the remaining genome portions encode ncRNAs, which are involved in translation, catalysis, RNA stability, RNA modification, gene expression regulation, protein synthesis, and protein degradation. The enormous importance of ncRNAs in various human diseases, such as cancer, diabetes, and atherosclerosis, is also being recognized.

ncRNA molecules often fold into higher-order structures, and functionally important ncRNA structures are typically conserved during evolution. Similar to protein, the ncRNA function is usually closely related to its structure. Currently, a wide variety of ncRNA sequences are publicly available, and their numbers keep dramatically increasing. By contrast, most of their structures remain unknown, which hinders the inference of their function. Hence, efficient determination of ncRNA structure is of great value to research.

Unlike the global folding of protein driven by hydrophobic forces, the RNA folding process is hierarchical. Specifically, the RNA secondary structure, composed of base pairs, forms rapidly from linear RNA (primary structure), with a large energy loss, while the formation of a complex tertiary structure (or 3D structure) is usually much slower. The RNA secondary structure is very stable and abundant in the cell, which is important for ncRNA function. Even without the knowledge of the higher-order structure, RNA secondary structure is sufficient to infer function and for other practical applications.

Computational predictions are mainstream approaches for identifying RNA secondary structure. A number of prediction methods have been developed since the 1970s. Most of these methods attempt to identify a structure with a minimum free energy (MFE), in agreement with the hypothesis that an RNA molecule is likely to exist in an MFE state, just like protein. Many prominent software applications have been developed incorporating these methods. However, in the last 10 years, the accuracy of prediction failed to significantly improve, and neither did the calculating speed. An alternative approach, the machine learning (ML)-based methodology, was proposed to improve the predictions of RNA secondary structure. However, such methods did not receive much attention because of the limited accuracy. That was mainly because of the small size of the training datasets and the limitations of simple ML models. As a result of the recent explosion of RNA sequence data and the improvement of ML techniques, especially deep learning (DL) techniques, the latest ML-based methods supersede the current mainstream methods in terms of accuracy and applicability. We believe that these ML-based methods will inspire the next generation of prediction tools in the near future.

In this paper, we provide a comprehensive overview of ML-based methods for RNA secondary structure prediction, with a thorough discussion of their advantages and disadvantages. We also provide a tabularized summary of the most important models in the field, and a perspective on the future promising directions, with a special emphasis on DL models. Although several review papers have been published on the topic of RNA secondary structure prediction, reviews with an emphasis on ML techniques are lacking. We believe that this review will enable researchers to understand the key issues that remain to be solved and facilitate further advances in predicting the RNA secondary structures based on ML.


RNA secondary structure: The basics

The RNA molecule is an ordered sequence of nucleotides that contain 1 of the 4 bases: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and uracil (U), arranged in the 5′ to 3′ direction. Pairing (via hydrogen bonds) of these 4 bases within an RNA molecule gives rise to the secondary structure. Typically, each base pairs with at most one other base. The canonical base pairs include the Watson–Crick base pairs (A–U and G–C) and the wobble base pair (G–U). These base pairs often result in the formation of a nested structure, in which multiple stacked base pairs form a helix, and one or multiple unpaired base pairs form a loop.

It has to be noted that 3 kinds of special base pairs commonly occur in the native RNA secondary structures, i.e., noncanonical base pairs, base triples, and pseudoknots. Noncanonical base pairs are the base pairs other than A–U, G–C, and G–U, and they make up 40% of all base pairs in structured RNAs. Base triples are the cluster of 3 bases interacting, which can stabilize many RNA tertiary interactions. Base triples also occur widely in RNA structures. A pseudoknot occurs when bases in different loops pair with each other, forming a nonnested structure between 2 bases that are located apart from each other. Pseudoknots represent a small fraction of base pairs in known RNA secondary structures but often play an important role in RNA function.

Typically, the secondary structure of an RNA molecule with a length n can be regarded as:

A set of base pairs {(i,j),1≤i<j≤n}, where (i,j) indicates a base pair formed between the i-th and j-th nucleotide in the RNA sequence; or a set of compatible helixes.

A contact table (CT table), i.e., a square matrix, with elements in the i-th row and j-th column representing the interaction between the i-th and j-th nucleotides in the RNA sequence.

A graph, where nodes represent nucleotides and edges represent base pairing relationships.

A labeled sequence with the length n, e.g., “dot-parenthesis” notation, with matching parentheses for paired bases and dots for unpaired bases.

A parse tree derived from context-free grammars, of which the leaf nodes comprise the RNA sequence.

The above definitions form the basis of both traditional and ML-based RNA secondary structure prediction methods.


Traditional methods of detecting or predicting RNA secondary structure

RNA structure determination is a fast-evolving topic. Many different methods have emerged in the last 20 years. They can be divided into 2 categories, i.e., wet lab experimental approaches and computational predicting approaches.


Wet lab experiments

X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) are the most accurate approaches for determining RNA structures, both of which can offer structural information at a single base pair resolution. However, both methods are characterized by high experimental cost and low throughput, limiting their wide usage. In addition, RNA molecules are highly unstable and difficult to crystallize. Although many methods have been developed to infer the state of nucleotides (paired or unpaired) in an RNA molecule using enzymatic or chemical probes coupled with next-generation sequencing, most of them can only be used to capture the RNA secondary structure in vitro. The obtained structure may differ markedly from the in vivo conformation. In fact, to date, the structure of only a very small percentage (<0.001%) of known ncRNAs has been determined experimentally. Hence, predicting the RNA secondary structure using computational methods is an important alternative to wet lab–based approaches.


Traditional computational methods

Comparative sequence analysis is the most accurate computational method for determining the RNA secondary structure. This method is based on the assumption that the RNA secondary structure is evolutionarily conserved to a greater extent than the RNA sequence. This method usually finds the base pairs that covary to maintain Watson–Crick and wobble base pairs (compensatory mutations) of a given sequence using a set of homologous sequences. Han and Kim designed the first comparative sequence analysis algorithm based on the phylogenetic comparative analysis. This algorithm predicts a common secondary structure conserved in the given homologous sequence set with a high time complexity (O(n3), n being the RNA sequence length). To reduce the running time, Tahi and colleagues implemented another algorithm DCfold with time complexity O(n2 log n). DCfold searches for helices based on their lengths and mutation rates using a “divide and conquer” approach. Comparative sequence analysis can also predict the structures with pseudoknots; however, the accuracy is very limited. In addition, comparative sequence analysis can be combined with score-based methods, e.g., RNAalifold, KnetFold, and ILM. One great limitation of this method is that it requires a large set of homologous sequences. However, only thousands of RNA families are currently known, which makes it impossible to obtain homologous sequences for all RNAs. Therefore, most methods for RNA secondary structure prediction are score based, where only a single RNA sequence is required as the input.

Score-based methods are the most widely used methods and have dominated the field of RNA secondary structure prediction in the last 4 decades. These methods assume that the native RNA structure is a structure with a minimum/maximum total score, depending on the hypothesis of RNA folding mechanism or its simplification. Hence, the problem of RNA secondary structure prediction is transformed into an optimization problem. Since the RNA secondary structure can be recursively broken down into smaller elements with independent score contributions, the dynamic programming (DP) algorithm is often employed to identify the optimal structure. Evaluation of the score for structure elements requires a score scheme of many parameters. Nussinov and Jacobson proposed the first, and also the simplest, DP algorithm for finding the maximum-matching structure. The authors proposed to assign one point to each matched base pair and assumed that the native structure is the structure with the maximum score among all the possible conformations. Zuker and Stiegler proposed a more realistic scoring scheme based on free energy, the nearest neighbor model (NN model). It is based on Tinoco’s hypothesis (see Section 4.1). The NN model can be used for the calculation of energy changes of any structure of a given RNA molecule, and the DP algorithm can be also employed to efficiently find the MFE structure. A number of slightly different variations of this method were also proposed. For predicting the structure with noncanonical base pairs, some other score schemes were employed as scoring functions, such as nucleotide cyclic motifs score system or equilibrium partition function. In addition, several score-based methods were developed to predict RNA secondary structures with pseudoknots, where the structure search scope or input RNA length is limited or the types of pseudoknots are restricted to lower the time complexity in general.

However, the folding mechanism hypotheses of score-based methods do not always hold, e.g., the RNA molecule often folds into locally stable structural domains. Furthermore, almost all score-based methods use virtually the same DP algorithm to find the best-scoring structures. However, the running time of the DP algorithm is usually O(n3) (where n is the RNA sequence length), neglecting the special base pairs and weak interactions. Hence, the computational cost is not acceptable, especially when analyzing an RNA molecule longer than 1,000 nucleotides. Moreover, predicting the special base pairs in RNA structures is still a difficult task. Since an RNA structure with special bases pairs is not a nested structure in general, score-based methods have to employ sophisticated algorithms to capture these special base pairs at the cost of higher time complexity. However, the performance of these methods needs to be further improved.

In fact, it is extremely difficult to fully understand the RNA folding mechanism. ML methods, in contrast, are data driven and requiring no knowledge of such mechanism. These methods can learn the underlying folding patterns from large amount of training data. In the last few decades, ML methods have been used for many aspects of RNA secondary structure prediction methods to improve the prediction performance (see Section 4). However, they did not replace the mainstream score-based methods with respect to accuracy and generalization. This situation has been changing in the last 2 years because of the development of ML techniques, especially DL.


ML-based methods

The ML-based methods for RNA secondary structure prediction can generally be divided into 3 categories according to the subprocess that ML participates in, i.e., score scheme based on ML, preprocessing and postprocessing based on ML, and prediction process based on ML. All the ML-based methods in these 3 categories trained their models in a supervised way. These models learn functions that map inputs (features) to outputs by adjusting model parameters based on the known input–output pairs. Many of them employ free energy parameters, encoded RNA sequences, sequence patterns, or evolutionary information as key features, and their outputs can be classification labels (such as paired or unpaired) or continuous values (such as free energy). When a new input is fed to the trained model, the model can classify a corresponding label or predict a corresponding value.


Score scheme based on ML

Early ML-based methods usually train an ML model that can generate a new score scheme and replace the score scheme used in the traditional methods. According to the meaning of the score, ML-based score schemes can be further divided into 3 categories, i.e., the free energy parameter-refining approach, weighted approach, and probabilistic approach. Although ML-based methods are used for parameter estimation in the score schemes to improve the prediction accuracy, the structure prediction is still formulated as an optimization problem, where the estimated parameters are used for the evaluation of the scores of possible conformations.


Free energy parameter refining based on ML

Considering the score schemes, the free energy–focused approach is the most popular approach. Ever since Tinoco and colleagues put forward their hypothesis for free energy calculation (that the free energy of a secondary structure is the sum of the free energy values of its elements), many studies have been devoting their efforts to the problem of assigning free energy values to the elements of RNA molecules. Turner’s NN model is the most popular approach and provides a considerably accurate approximation of the RNA free energy. However, the multiple thermodynamic parameters of the NN model have to be based on a large number of optimal melting experiments. These experiments are time and labor consuming, however, and not all free energy changes in structural elements can be measured because of the associated technical difficulties.

Some ML techniques were adopted to refine the parameters in the energy model. These techniques can employ subtle models to estimate the scores for a richer and more accurate feature representation using known thermodynamic data or RNA secondary structure data. Xia and colleagues first trained a linear regression model using known thermodynamic data to infer some of the thermodynamic parameters and expanded the NN model into a more accurate model, i.e., the INN-HB model. This model provides an improved fit for the known experimental data. A disadvantage of this approach, however, is that the parameters for some structural elements are fixed before other parameters are calculated, which limits the range of possibilities considered for the overall parameter set. To overcome this problem, Andronescu and colleagues proposed a constraint generation approach to estimate free energy parameters. This method uses different types of constraints to ensure that the energies of reference structures are low relative to the alternatives for the same sequence. Trained on large sets of structural and thermodynamic data, this method achieves 7% higher F-measure than the standard Turner parameters. Subsequently, the authors further modified the method and proposed a loss-augmented max-margin constraint generation model and Boltzmann-likelihood model using a larger dataset. The constraints imposed on parameters ensure that the more inaccurate the structure, the greater the margin between its free energy and that of the reference structure in the training set.

Of note, the parameters determined by the above free energy parameter-refining approaches are thermodynamic and can be used directly in the algorithms embedded by the same energy model, such as miRNA target prediction and RNA folding kinetics simulation.


Weighted approaches based on ML

While ML-based free energy parameter approaches successfully improved the accuracy of the RNA secondary structure prediction, the energy model is still far from ideal. Actually, the above methods for the estimation of ML-based parameters can only substitute for some wet lab experiments geared toward obtaining the energy parameters. However, it is entirely possible to obtain an improved score scheme independent of free energy based on ML techniques. Several weighted approaches were proposed that consider the parameters of RNA structure elements as weights instead of free energy changes. By removing the thermodynamic meaning, the weighted approach can utilize ML models to determine thousands of weights for more comprehensive RNA structure elements instead of obtaining a few energy parameters from a large number of wet lab experiments.

By combining a discriminative structured-prediction learning framework with an online learning algorithm, Zakov and colleagues greatly increased the number of weights to approximately 70,000 by examining more types of structural elements with more numerous sequential contexts, using thousands of training datasets. Based on these weights, the ContextFold tool was proposed, marking a significant improvement in the prediction accuracy. Akiyama and colleagues integrated the thermodynamic approach with a structured support vector machine (SSVM) to obtain a large number of weights for detailed structure elements, of which l1 regularization was used to relieve overfitting. Then, MXfold was built by combining ML-based weights with experimentally determined thermodynamic parameters, achieving better performance than a model based on thermodynamic parameters or ML-based weights alone. Most recently, MXfold2 was proposed by Sato and colleagues They trained a fairly deep neural network using the max-margin framework with thermodynamic regularization, which made the folding scores predicted by MXfold2 and the free energy calculated by the thermodynamic parameters were as close as possible. This method showed a robust prediction on both sequence-wise and family-wise cross-validation. These studies suggest that ML-based weights can complement the gaps in the thermodynamic parameter approach.

An advantage of the weighted approach is that it decouples structure prediction from energy estimation, which is potentially beneficial for both tasks. However, learned weights are not explainable, partly because of the black-box attribute of ML algorithms. Hence, the obtained scores cannot be used to compute the partition function, base pair binding probabilities, or centroid structures, etc.


Probabilistic approaches based on ML

Stochastic context-free grammars (SCFGs) are an important alternative for predicting RNA structures. SCFGs specify formal grammar rules and induce a joint probability distribution over possible RNA structures for a given sequence. In particular, an SCFG model specifies a probability parameter for each production rule in the grammar and thus assigns a probability to each sequence it derives. The probability parameters are learned from datasets of RNA sequences annotated using known secondary structures, without the need for external laboratory experiments.

Sakakibara and colleagues first applied SCFGs to tRNA secondary structure prediction. The probability parameters in their SCFG model were learned using an expectation–maximization (EM) method. Knudsen and Hein improved the SCFG model by combining the evolutionary information, and, subsequently, the robust and practical tool Pfold was developed. Sato and colleagues proposed a nonparametric Bayesian extension of SCFGs with the hierarchical Dirichlet process to find an optimal RNA grammar from the training dataset. Using another ML model, the conditional log-linear model (CLLM), Do and colleagues identified probability parameters that are most likely to discriminate correct structures from incorrect ones. CLLM is a flexible probabilistic ML model that generalizes upon SCFGs; the parameters are easily estimated, and arbitrary features can be incorporated in the model. CONTRAfold has achieved the highest single-sequence prediction accuracy to date, compared with the currently available probabilistic models. However, CLLM is very slow, which prevents its application to large training sets, and the estimated parameters have no intrinsic biological meaning. Finally, to take full advantage of the substantial numbers of RNA sequences with unknown structures, Yonemoto and colleagues proposed a semi-supervised learning algorithm to obtain probability parameters in a probabilistic model that combines SCFG and a conditional random field.

However, the probabilistic approach cannot replace MFE methods for secondary structure prediction, as the accuracy of the currently best SCFG has yet to match those of the best free energy–based models. In addition, SCFG cannot describe all RNA structures, e.g., a structure containing special base pairs.


Preprocessing and postprocessing based on ML

ML can be also used in pretreatment, for selecting an appropriate prediction method or a group of appropriate parameters. A tool based on a support vector machine (SVM) was proposed by Hor and colleagues for selecting the prediction method, based on the notion that different RNA sequences have different features and different prediction methods work best with specific RNA species. In another study, Zhu and colleagues assumed that different RNA sequences follow different folding rules. The authors consequently proposed an SCFG model to identify the most probable folding rules before RNA secondary structure prediction.

Since different prediction methods return several different structures, the ML model can provide a means of determining the most likely structures among the outcomes. Combined with the graph theory, Haynes and colleagues used trees to represent RNA graphical structures (edges as helices, and verticals as loops or bulges). They then trained a multilayer perceptron (MLP) model to distinguish whether a structure is RNA-like or not, using graphical invariants as input features. Assuming that a larger secondary structure is formed upon bonding of 2 smaller secondary RNA structures, Koessler and colleagues also used an MLP model to predict the RNA-like probability of a structure using a special feature vector extracted from the merged trees.


Predicting process based on ML

ML techniques are also directly used to predict RNA secondary structure in an end-to-end fashion or combined with other algorithms as constraints, base state detector, or structure selector. The general framework is shown in Figs and.


End-to-end approach

To the best of our knowledge, the ML technique was first introduced into the RNA secondary structure predicting process by Takefuji and colleagues. The authors built on Nussinov and Jacobson’s hypothesis (see Section 3.2) and attempted to obtain a near-maximum independent set (MIS) from an adjacent graph (where the vertices represent base pairs, and the edges connect the incompatible vertices) using a system composed of m interactional neurons (m is the number of edges). Liu and colleagues enhanced Takefuji’s work by considering the energy contribution of possible base pairs, and a Hopfield neural network (HNN) was employed to obtain MIS. However, HNN is easily trapped in local minima, limiting the accuracy of this method. To avoid this problem, Steeg and Evan made use of the mean field theory (MFT) networks to identify the optimal structure, which was coupled with a sophisticated objective function with additional biological constraints. The inputs into the MFT networks are the 4 types of bases in an RNA sequence encoded in a one-hot fashion, and the output is in a format similar to CT table. Subsequently, Apolloni and colleagues further developed Steeg’s method, especially with respect to the computation speed, so that it could be applied to slightly longer RNA sequences. In addition, this model uses mean field approximation to update the node in both the learning phase and the instant resolution phase. In another study, Qasim and colleagues modified Takefuji’s work by building a novel MLP model to obtain MIS. This model contains h neurons in the hidden layer, whose activation function is based on the Kolgomorov’s theorem (h is the number of possible base pairs in an RNA sequence).

However, because of the relatively poor performance of the above ML models and a small amount of the available data, ML-based RNA secondary structure prediction models can only process tRNAs, with relatively low accuracy. Currently, the use of DL techniques is rising rapidly, and they are dramatically changing these circumstances. Singh and colleagues proposed the first end-to-end DL model, SPOT-RNA, to predict RNA secondary structure. SPOT-RNA treats the RNA secondary structure as a CT table and employs an ensemble of ultradeep hybrid networks of ResNets and 2D-BLSTMs for the prediction. Of these, the former captures the contextual information from the whole sequence, and the latter is effective for the propagation of long-range sequence dependencies in RNA structure. Transfer learning is used to train SPOT-RNA to effectively utilize limited sample numbers. SPOT-RNA showed superior performance with several RNA benchmark datasets, greatly outperforming the best score-based methods and SCFG-based methods. Recently, the SPOT-RNA2 model was proposed by the same research group. This model employed evolution-derived sequence profiles and mutational coupling as inputs and outperformed SPOT-RNA for all types of base pairs using the same transfer learning approach. E2Efold is another DL model for RNA secondary structure prediction, proposed by Chen and colleagues. It integrates 2 coupled parts, i.e., a transformer-based deep model that encodes sequence information, and a multilayer network based on an unrolled algorithm that gradually enforces the constraints and restricts the output space.

In addition to the encoded RNA sequences being used as the input, other information can also be incorporated into the DL model. Calonaci and colleagues trained an ensemble model based on a combination of SHAPE data, co-evolutionary data (DCA), and RNA sequence data. Their model consists of a convolutional neural network (CNN) subnetwork and an MLP subnetwork to predict penalties based on SHAPE and DCA data, respectively, with an RNAfold module to generate structures using RNA sequences and penalties.


Hybrid approach

Alternatively, ML can be combined with other methods for a hybrid approach for RNA secondary structure prediction. Consequently, the ML model is usually considered as a scoring machine, mapping a score to each (pair of) base(s) in an RNA sequence, whose output is then passed to an independent filter to identify a reasonable structure.

Bindewald and Shapiro combined an ML model and a filter to predict the consensus structure for a group of aligned RNAs. The authors chose a hierarchical network of k-nearest neighbor model to predict the possibility score for each pair of alignment columns and defined the filter by a set of rules derived from native RNA structures. Considering structure prediction as a sequence-labeling question, Lu and colleagues and Wu and colleagues employed a more powerful DL model, Bi-LSTM, to predict the state of each base in an RNA sequence, using a similar rule-based filter to deal with conflicting pairing. Differently from the above studies, Bi-LSTM was used as a structure filter in DpacoRNA, and a parallel ant colony optimization method was used to predict the most probable structures. Another type of an ML-based hybrid approach combines ML models and optimization methods. Liu’s group used a CNN model to predict the status distribution of each base in an RNA sequence, and a DP algorithm was employed to find the maximum probability structure. The same group also used the Bi-LSTM model instead and another optimization algorithm, similar to that used in. Instead of developing a new optimizer, Willmott and colleagues utilized an existing SHAPE-directed method (SDM) as the optimizer, which can predict optimal structure from SHAPE data, and trained a Bi-LSTM model to generate SHAPE-like data (i.e., determine the state of each nucleotide) of an RNA sequence as the inputs of SDM.

Compared with the end-to-end approach, the performance of the hybrid approach is relatively poor, perhaps because of a bias between the training objective of the ML part and the overall system objective. Most methods in the hybrid approach are trained and tested using small-scale datasets. Hence, generalization of their abilities requires further verification.


Discussions

It is well known that transcript abundance helps to identify transcripts of interest under different conditions, while the RNA structure helps to explain how these transcripts function. An excellent RNA structure prediction method is not only important for inferring RNA function, but also relates to many downstream studies, including ncRNA detection, folding dynamics simulations, hybridization stability assessment, and oligonucleotide or drug design. It is worth noting that RNA secondary structure prediction is also a useful tool for studying viruses, such as the SARS-CoV-2 virus responsible for the current pandemic.


The advantages of ML-based methods

Compared with comparative sequence analysis and traditional score-based methods, ML-based methods have some advantages. First, ML-based methods do not necessarily rely on the biological mechanism, which is usually difficult to thoroughly understand. Instead, they can utilize the information contained in various types of data, and, therefore, performance limitation caused by the mechanism hypothesis can be circumvented. ML-based methods can also be easily coupled with known biological mechanisms. Further, in terms of prediction performance, where a large amount of data is available, models with no or little knowledge of biological mechanisms usually perform better than mechanism-dependent ones. This also suggests that the assumed mechanism of RNA folding may be incomplete or not accurate. Second, in contrast to traditional score-based methods, the end-to-end DL methods do not need to consider the difficulties caused by base matching rules. Traditional score-based methods employ sophisticated algorithms to satisfy base matching rules at the cost of high time complexity. However, without the constraint of these rules, end-to-end models can train and predict all the base pairs in RNA structures, regardless of whether the base pairs associate with secondary or tertiary interactions. Third, compared with traditional methods, the ML-based methods can be considerably flexible. The inputs of ML-based models can be either one-dimensional or multidimensional, extracted features or encoded bases, and homogeneous data or heterogeneous data, and the outputs can be CT tables, labeled sequences, nucleotide states, or free energy values. In addition, the construction of the ML models is diverse, from simple Hopfield networks to complex ensemble deep neural networks. Fourth, once the model training is completed, the ML-based end-to-end prediction methods run very fast. Unlike DP algorithm, the time complexity of ML models is independent of the input scale, which is advantageous when dealing with long RNAs.


Datasets and their impacts on ML-based methods

Today, many public RNA structure databases and other related datasets are available online, which provide abundant data for model training. Generally, these databases can be classified into 2 types, i.e., comprehensive databases and dedicated databases. A comprehensive database often consists of RNA structures with different conformations and in different RNA species, for example, RNA Strand (4,666 RNAs available), RCSB Protein Data Bank (PDB, 4,962 RNAs available), and bpRNA-1m (102,348 RNAs available). Some of these databases (e.g., PDB) collect tertiary structures obtained by wet lab experiments, while others obtained data using comparative sequence analysis method (less accurate than those obtained by wet lab experiments, e.g., pbRNA-1m). Dedicated databases generally involve only a single RNA species (tRNA, rRNA, or tmRNA databases) or a single type of RNA structure (such as loop, pseudoknot, or noncanonical base pair) generally. Based on these dedicated databases, some public benchmark datasets were established, such as ArchiveII and RNAStralign. These datasets are generally composed of tens of thousands of RNAs in different RNA species (rRNA, tRNA, SRP, tmRNA, etc.). In addition, other databases used in ML-based methods are Rfam and NNDB, which provide RNA family information and thermodynamic parameters, respectively.

Data are extremely important for building ML-based RNA secondary prediction models, especially DL-based models with a large number of parameters. One of the reasons that the recent DL-based methods outperform the traditional ML-based models is the improvement of the quality and quantity of the training sets. It is worth noting that the performance of DL-based methods may be overestimated due to the data similarity between the training and test set. Most of studies only ensured that the RNAs in test sets of these methods were not so similar (80% similarity as a cutoff typically) to those in the training sets, but RNAs from the same families were not explicitly excluded from the testing set. The sequences and structures in the same RNA family are similar, resulting that the model performance obtained on testing sets is better than reality.

Another issue that may affect the model performance is the imbalanced RNA families in training sets, e.g., thousands of 16S rRNAs but only a small number of telomerases occur in one dataset. When the length of the input RNA is comparable, trained models tend to perform better on the RNA species that are more prevalence in the training set. How to deal with unbalanced data is an active topic in the ML community. Study adopted an up-sampling strategy to balance the RNAs in different families, and their model performance was further improved.

Generally, the enhancement of predictive ability is associated with the relatively large scale of the ML model, which requires large amounts of data for parameter training. Although a large number of RNA structure data in various formats is available, these are insufficient in terms of training large-scale DL models, especially with respect to the availability of high-accuracy data. Hence, questions on how to effectively utilize the limited data and cope with overfitting of a large-scale DL model are also important issues that remain to be resolved.


Current pending challenges

Enormous progress has been made toward predicting RNA secondary structure by using ML-based methods. These methods are state of the art when considering most indices of prediction performance. However, some issues still require resolving.

First, the accuracy of prediction should be improved further. Sato and colleagues used the RNAs in the newly discovered RNA families to form an independent test set (not used in all the tested methods), and based on this dataset, a rigorous test was performed among 6 most accurate RNA secondary structure prediction methods. The test results showed that, among these methods, the highest positive predictive value (PPV) is 0.636 (achieved by TORNADO), the highest sensitivity is 0.720 (achieved by RNAfold), and the highest F value is 0.632 (achieved by MXfold2). Using another independent dataset collected from PDB, Singh and colleagues performed a comprehensive comparison among 27 kinds of well-known RNA secondary structure prediction methods. Their results showed when homologous sequences were available, the highest F value and sensitivity achieved were 0.774 and 0.727, respectively (both by SPOT-RNA2). These results objectively show that there is still much room for improvement in RNA secondary structure prediction. Moreover, many traditional methods neglect special base pairs to avoid a large number of false positives or to limit computational complexity. While some methods can predict RNA secondary structures containing pseudoknots or noncanonical base pairs, none of them can predict both. Although the recently proposed ML-based methods can predict all kinds of special base pairs, the special base pair prediction accuracy is still limited.

The RNA sequence length limitation is another intractable issue, which becomes quite problematic with the recently discovered long (1,000 to 10,000 nt) ncRNA. Although ML-based methods do not suffer from high time complexity as most score-based methods do, they are unable to effectively capture such long-range interactions within an RNA sequence. On the other hand, training an ML model with such a large-scale input consumes a huge amount of computational resources and is often unrealistic.

For ML-based RNA secondary structure prediction models, overfitting is a very important issue, especially for DL-based models with a large number of parameters. The overfitted models perform well on the test RNAs similar to that in the training data but generalize poorly on dissimilar ones. It seems that they only memorize the secondary structure of RNAs in the training data, rather than actually learn the folding mechanism from them. A result in paper showed that E2Efold outperformed many traditional methods on the dataset ArchiveII but performed poorly on the RNAs from newly discovered RNA families. This suggested that E2Efold might suffer from a heavy overfitting. Similarly, another paper reported that the F score of ContextFold also lowered by 24% when testing on a set of structurally dissimilar RNAs to the training set. Although most DL-based methods take many precautions to alleviate overfitting by many techniques (such as using regularization, enlarging dataset, adding constraints, or combining Turner’s nearest neighbor free energy parameters), the concerns about overfitting remain.

At last, the folding mechanisms need further exploration. Traditional RNA secondary structure prediction is based on different RNA folding mechanism hypotheses, while data-driven ML-based methods can learn such mechanism implicitly from known data based on different RNA sequences or sequence features. However, to the best of our knowledge, few folding mechanisms have been revealed from the established ML-based models, although great advances have been made in terms of prediction accuracy. Part of the reason is that the interpretability of DL models is still a challenge today.


Future trends of development

Currently, RNA secondary structure prediction is successfully shifting toward ML-based approaches, away from traditional score-based methods, and DL will surely continue to improve the prediction performance. The subtle structure of the DL model is a prerequisite to this end. Since the DL model is being rapidly developed in the natural language processing and image processing fields, using mature DL blocks from these fields, or combining them in such fields constitutes a feasible way to generate an excellent DL model for RNA secondary structure prediction.

Further, using a DL model to predict the free energy parameter is an inevitable trend for more accurate energy estimations, when additional wet lab experimental data become available. However, these parameters may not improve RNA secondary prediction accuracy because they have to be combined with traditional score-based methods. On the other hand, combing an ML-based method and an optimization method is a promising approach for improving prediction performance.


Conclusions

RNA structure is one of the central pieces of information for understanding biological processes, and determining RNA secondary structure will continue to be a hot topic in the computation and biology fields. In this review, we focused on ML-based methods, which involve many aspects of RNA secondary structure prediction. ML techniques have greatly improved the performance of prediction methods, including accuracy, applicability, and running speed. However, to thoroughly resolve the RNA secondary structure prediction problem, a more subtle ML model is still needed. At the moment, ML-based methods cannot be used as substitutes for wet lab experiments for obtaining high-resolution structures. Nonetheless, the advent of DL technologies and high-performance hardware will foster a new generation of RNA secondary prediction tools with an improved accuracy and running speed.


Funding Statement

This work was supported in part by the Fundamental Research Funds of Northeastern University (N181903008 - Q.Z.); the Research Start-up Fund for Talent of Dalian Maritime University (02500348 - Z.Z.); the Doctoral Scientific Research Foundation of Liaoning Province of China (2019-BS-108 - Q.M.); the Youth Seedling Project of Educational Department of Liaoning Province of China (LQN202002- Q.M.); the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (82232019 - X.Y.F.); and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62002056 - Q.Z., 31801623 - Q.M., 81871219 - Z.W.Y). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.


Out of the blue: understanding abrupt and wayward transitions in thought using probability and predictive processing

Caitlin Mills, Andre Zamani, Rebecca White, Kalina Christoff — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2020. PMC7741073, CC BY 4.0.

Thoughts that appear to come to us ‘out of the blue’ or ‘out of nowhere’ are a familiar aspect of mental experience. Such thoughts tend to elicit feelings of surprise and spontaneity. Although we are beginning to understand the neural processes that underlie the arising of such thoughts, little is known about what accounts for their peculiar phenomenology. Here, we focus on one central aspect of this phenomenology—the experience of surprise at their occurrence, as it relates to internal probabilistic predictions regarding mental states. We introduce a distinction between two phenomenologically different types of transitions in thought content: (i) abrupt transitions, which occur at surprising times but lead to unsurprising thought content, and (ii) wayward transitions, which occur at surprising times and also lead to surprising thought content. We examine these two types of transitions using a novel approach that combines probabilistic and predictive processing concepts and principles. We employ two different probability metrics—transition and occurrence probability—to characterize and differentiate between abrupt and wayward transitions. We close by discussing some potentially beneficial ways in which these two kinds of transitions in thought content may contribute to mental function, and how they may be implemented at the neural level.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Offline perception: voluntary and spontaneous perceptual experiences without matching external stimulation’.

Keywords: spontaneous thought, thought transitions, mind-wandering, predictive processing, phenomenology


Introduction

There are many colloquial expressions that are used to describe the peculiar experience of a thought catching us by surprise as it surfaces into awareness. Such thoughts are accompanied by a feeling of spontaneity in their arising and appear to come ‘out of the blue’ or ‘out of nowhere’. This compelling sense of out-of-nowhere-ness arises because we cannot immediately tell, at the subjective level, why this thought with its particular contents should have occurred at that particular moment of time. This experience is quite distinct from the many other thoughts we experience, whose sources are readily traceable to something in the preceding stream of thought or our environment.

Such surprising, spontaneity-eliciting thoughts are an important and familiar feature of our mental experience. Although we are beginning to understand the neural processes that underlie the arising of such thoughts, we know relatively little about the sources behind their phenomenology: why do we experience these mental arisings as surprising and spontaneous, and what makes these thoughts (but not others) elicit those feelings?

Here, we offer a close examination of this out-of-nowhere-ness phenomenology in an attempt to answer these questions. Although such thoughts may be related to other mental phenomena such as mind-wandering, we do not conflate these complex and mutually interrelated phenomena. Mind-wandering encompasses a broad range of mental experiences that can include mental content with a readily identifiable stimulus-related or goal-related source, and do not necessarily elicit feelings of surprise or spontaneity. A detailed discussion of mind-wandering and its relationship to the spontaneous thought is outside the scope of the current paper but can be found elsewhere.


The experience of spontaneity

Let us start by considering two different phenomenological experiences that are examples of surprise-inducing thought transitions. First, imagine the following scenario. You are listening to a lecture when suddenly your attention is captured by an unexpected thought: you wonder if your dog has been alone at home for too long that day. This thought has arisen without any deliberate intention on your part, you did not anticipate its arising and you wonder why you should think of this at that particular time. Here, we refer to this change in thought content as abrupt transition—the arising of a thought that is not deliberately generated but nonetheless has an elevated probability of occurrence owing to underlying affects, motivations, goals or current concerns. The fact that you care about your dog makes thoughts about your dog occur with increased frequency, although you cannot necessarily predict exactly when they will arise. The moment when the transition occurs is surprising, but the content of the thought is not.

Now, imagine a second scenario. You are listening to the same lecture when you suddenly find yourself thinking about a playground you used to play at in your childhood. Like the example above, this thought is not deliberate and feels unexpected. However, even though you try, you cannot see any reason why you should think about this at that particular point. You do not have any strong feelings about this playground, and you have not thought about it for decades. We refer to this change in thought content as wayward transition. The moment the transition occurs is surprising and so is the content it leads to.

There is a convergence between abrupt and wayward transitions at the phenomenological level: both elicit the experience of surprise and are often experienced as spontaneous mental events. One cannot predict exactly when either type of thought transition will occur. They are both also likely to be unintentional and task-unrelated—a commonly used but debated definition of mind-wandering.

There is also, however, a key point of divergence between the two types of transitions: while abrupt transitions may surprise us with the timing of their occurrence, their content is not surprising once we reflect on its close connection to our emotions, motivations, goals and current concerns. By contrast, wayward transitions cannot be explained by any obvious affect, motivations, implicit goals or current concerns: the content of the thought itself is surprising, as well as the timing of its occurrence. Wayward transitions may often take the form of involuntary semantic memories—when words, images and other mental contents come to mind unexpectedly and often without any identifiable triggers. At other times, wayward transitions may arise in the form of involuntary episodic memories—when past events come to mind without an attempt at retrieval. Although involuntary episodic memories are generally more likely to have identifiable sources, they may induce surprise and spontaneity if such identifiable sources are lacking.

Because wayward transitions are more likely to feel puzzling in their origins than abrupt transitions, they may also elicit a stronger feeling of surprise and spontaneity. It is worth noting, however, that neither of these two kinds of transitions is likely to be a truly ‘spontaneous’ event at the physiological level: neural processes below the level of conscious awareness may well explain their arisings, as neuroimaging findings are beginning to suggest. Nevertheless, both wayward and abrupt transitions appear to be experienced as spontaneous at the phenomenological level and it is important to account for this phenomenological reality in our scientific accounts of mental spontaneity.

Here, we propose that the phenomenological differences between abrupt and wayward transitions may be accounted for by adopting a probability-based approach. In what follows, we first describe the application of probabilistic and predictive processing concepts and principles to understanding the phenomenology of spontaneity in thought, including how implicit statistical models may predict thought content and transitions. We also describe two different probability metrics—transition and occurrence probability—that are likely computed as part of those implicit statistical models. We then propose that these two probability metrics could help characterize and distinguish between abrupt and wayward transitions. Finally, we discuss some potentially beneficial ways in which abrupt and wayward transitions may contribute to mental function, and how they may be implemented at the neural level.


Statistical models of thought

The experience of surprise can be viewed as stemming from a breach of expectation. Such breaches of expectation are a central feature in multiple well-validated predictive processing accounts of exteroceptive and interoceptive processing. In this section, we use explanatory concepts from the predictive processing literature in an attempt to examine more closely the distinction between abrupt and wayward transitions, and to better understand how and why some thoughts elicit a feeling of surprise as they arise.


Predictive processing overview

Predictive processing posits that instead of passively receiving and interpreting the sensory and non-sensory signals it receives, the brain processes those signals actively by continuously issuing proactive predictions about what the incoming signals in each next moment will be. These predictions are formed through the brain's modelling of statistical regularities in the world. Through the issuing of these predictions, all incoming information can be processed as a match or a mismatch relative to the predictions. Predictive processing allows the brain to process the multitude of incoming signals highly efficiently, by transmitting upwards into the neural hierarchies only the unpredicted portions of these signals (the mismatches) and filtering out the predicted portions (the matches). The mismatches are known as prediction errors. Prediction errors can be used to update future predictions by propagating prediction error signals upward through the neural hierarchies. For a comprehensive and in-depth discussion of predictive processing, see. Predictive processing—including the computation of implicit statistical models, the issuing of predictions and the generation of prediction error—is generally assumed to operate outside of conscious awareness (‘consciousness’ defined as pure phenomenological experience), even though its effects may have an upstream conscious effect.

There is ample evidence that such predictive processing principles operate throughout our everyday lives. Imagine that you have just been served coffee; you take a sip expecting it to be hot, but instead it is cold. You only realize your brain had issued a prediction that the coffee would be hot once your brain generated the prediction error resulting from the violation of that expectation. You can now consciously become aware of the implicit prediction about the temperature of served coffee that your brain has formed through past experience.

We propose that these predictive processing principles can also be applied to understand how the brain constructs implicit statistical models and predictions about various aspects of our own thought stream. This would include implicit models capturing the statistical regularities in the kinds of mental transitions we tend to experience, the types of things we tend to think about and the frequency with which we tend to think about them. Although in the discussion below, we sometimes refer to ‘statistical model of thought’ in the singular, we acknowledge that it is likely not a singular mechanism.

To our knowledge, there have been two other attempts so far to examine the usefulness of statistical models at the level of thought. These pioneering accounts proposed functions for spontaneous thought that relate to predictive processing, including active inference and event models. They did not, however, address how thoughts themselves may be incorporated into implicit statistical models or how the violation of predictions about what our next thought will be can contribute to experiencing that next thought as surprising or spontaneously arising. Our account specifically addresses these latter points by proposing how statistical regularities in the thought stream may shape forward thought predictions and may contribute to the phenomenology of surprise and spontaneity in thought.


Modelling statistical regularities in thought

Thoughts are an inseparable part of conscious experience and arise frequently so much so that they sometimes appear to form a continuous, uninterrupted ‘stream of consciousness’. This ‘stream’ makes up a vast portion of our mental experience throughout most of the lifespan, providing ample opportunities for extracting statistical regularities of its various features, including different thought transitions and content frequencies, in order to form predictions about the ‘stream’.

Many of our thoughts arise in congruence with the brain's predictions for their contents and manner of arising, leading to a low degree of prediction error. Such thoughts come and go without a feeling of surprise, and are often easily attributable to elements in our internal or external environment that act as triggering cues. Some thoughts, however, do generate a high degree of prediction error as they arise. We propose that the feeling of surprise and spontaneity are phenomenological correlates of such prediction errors in thought. We also propose that different types of prediction errors may help characterize and distinguish between abrupt and wayward transitions. Both types of transitions would be associated with prediction error as to when a thought should occur. Only wayward transitions, however, would be associated with prediction error as to whether a thought should occur at all. These predictions and prediction error computations likely operate at largely unconscious levels, and may underlie the peculiar phenomenology of surprise at one's own thoughts.

The degree to which different thoughts generate prediction error would be unique to each person. Different individuals have different statistical regularities in the occurrence of their thought contents and would, therefore, have different implicit statistical models of their own thought streams. The word clouds in come from an unpublished dataset from our laboratories and illustrate this variability across different individuals. These word clouds are from three different individuals who participated in a modified think-aloud task. During this task, individuals sat at a computer with a blank screen in front of them and were told they could think about whatever they wanted. Every 2–3 min during the 30 min experimental session, they reported their most recent thought stream by typing on the computer in front of them. The word clouds show the 50 most frequently occurring content words in each individual's thought streams. Each word's font size corresponds to the number of times this word occurred in the participant's report (e.g. ‘sleep’, 3 times; ‘universe’, 4 times).

There are marked differences in thought content and frequency among these three individuals' reported thought contents. For example, Person 1 appears much more likely to think about worries such as marking, sleep, anxiety and relationships; Person 2, on the other hand, is much more likely to think about scientific concepts such as the Universe, light, carbon and hydrogen. High probability thought content for one person would appear quite unsurprising to that person. If the same thought content occurred to another person, however, it is likely to be experienced as a surprising wayward transition—for example, if Person 1 suddenly had a thought about the Universe and its nitrogen, hydrogen and carbon contents. On the other hand, each person may experience the occurrence of any of their own high probability thought contents as an abrupt transition, if it occurs at an unexpected time. Although these data provide a very limited window into these three individuals' streams of thought, they clearly demonstrate the high degree of variability in thought content across individuals.

In all likelihood, the implicit models of thought's statistical regularities span multiple timescales, serving to incorporate different contexts into predictions. In the case of an acutely stressful life event—for example, a family health problem—the statistical models would be updated so that thought content related to the health concern will have a higher predicted likelihood of occurring, with a corresponding reduced degree of prediction error generated at its onset.


A probabilistic approach: transition versus occurrence probability

The distinction between abrupt and wayward transitions can be further probed by using specific probability metrics to answer the following questions with respect to a given thought: first, what was the probability (i.e. the predicted likelihood) that this thought would occur at this particular moment? And second, what was the probability that this thought would occur at all? These questions underlie two different probability metrics: transition and occurrence probability, respectively. The distinction between transition and occurrence probability has been discussed extensively elsewhere in the context of exteroceptive processing. Here, we discuss its relevance and utility for understanding abrupt and wayward transitions in thought content.

Transition probability refers to the probability that a given thought, with its particular content and features, will occur, given that another thought with its own specific content and features has just occurred. In more technical terms, it is the conditional likelihood that thought n + 1 will occur, given that thought n has just occurred, or P(n + 1|n). The lower the transition probability of thought n + 1 is, the greater the feeling of surprise would be during its arising. Transition probabilities (also known as ‘transitional probabilities') are often used to describe implicit statistical learning processes in language development. This implicit learning is thought to occur through establishing a probabilistic model reflecting one's experience with words and sounds over time. The basic idea is that language, perhaps much like our thoughts, has a probabilistic nature: spoken utterances are rarely unpredictable, and often word n + 1 in a sentence will have some conditional dependency on word n. Learners, especially infants, develop implicit models of such dependencies by tracking statistics like overall frequencies and co-occurrence of sounds and words, as well as physical and social context, among other possible cues. The statistical regularities of such cues provide information to the learner about language and grammar structure in addition to word meanings.

Occurrence probability, on the other hand, refers to the probability that a thought will arise based upon its overall baseline frequency. It is another form of conditional probability: the conditional likelihood that a thought will arise, given the overall baseline frequency of that thought occurring at any point in the past. As the word clouds in suggest, baseline frequencies differ across different thought contents within the same individual, as well as across individuals (someone may think about their teaching assistantship duties 10% of the time, whereas another person may never think about this). Thoughts relating to current concerns, life goals, emotions and habits (recall the scenario of spontaneously thinking about one's dog during a lecture) would have higher occurrence probability. Conversely, thoughts that have lower baseline frequency would have lower occurrence probability. Such low occurrence probability thoughts may take the form of spatio-temporally distant memories with low personal significance, such as the earlier example of a childhood playground.

By considering the two metrics of transition and occurrence probability jointly, it may be possible to better characterize and distinguish between abrupt and wayward transitions. Transition probability should be low for both abrupt and wayward transitions, since neither type of transition is predicted to occur at the particular time it occurs, and prediction error would be elevated in both cases. (It is possible that low transition probability may be one of the prerequisites for the experience of surprise and spontaneity in thought in general.) Occurrence probability, on the other hand, should be different between abrupt and wayward transitions. The onset of an abrupt transition does not violate predictions about whether that thought content should occur in general; the implicit statistical models would already have estimated this content to have somewhat elevated (medium to high) occurrence likelihood owing to its higher local (context-specific) probability or its global baseline probability (content linked to goals, affect, motivations or the current environment). The onset of a wayward transition, by contrast, does violate predictions about whether that thought content should occur in general; this content would not be explainable based on goals, affect, motivations or current concerns. Because of this difference between wayward and abrupt transitions, we expect that the former would elicit a stronger feeling of surprise and spontaneity than the latter.

We also hypothesize that there would be specific phenomenological differences related to surprise and prediction error for different levels of transition and occurrence probabilities, illustrated in. The present paper focuses on wayward and abrupt transitions, both of which have relatively low transition probability. Although thought transitions with relatively high transition probability are largely beyond the scope of this paper, they are worth a brief mention. The upper-right quadrant in, with high transitional and high occurrence probability, describes conditions during which thoughts will produce little to no surprise or prediction error—perhaps the more ‘mundane’ thoughts we experience during the day or the relatively routine goal-directed problem solving we engage in. The lower-right quadrant, on the other hand, with high transition and low occurrence probability, suggests an intriguing type of thought transition where the time of transition is not suprising, but thought content is surprising. Such thought transitions may occur during states of flow, or dreaming, an important topic for future investigation that is unfortunately beyond the scope of this paper.


Surprising thoughts: a glitch or a feature?

Why do surprising transitions in thoughts occur at all? If the brain is principally concerned with reducing surprise and prediction errors, as some predictive processing accounts of brain function have proposed, it might appear maladaptive for the brain to produce thought transitions that increase rather than decrease surprise and prediction errors. The occurrence of surprise-inducing transitions in thought may appear to pose a challenge to traditional predictive processing accounts. One answer to that challenge is to regard such thoughts as a glitch in the brain's prediction error minimization functions. We suggest, however, that such surprising transitions are instead an important and highly adaptive feature of our thought streams. In our view, such thought transitions bespeak the importance of novelty seeking for predictive systems. Novelty-seeking behaviours are essential for learning and development, starting in infancy. The generation of thoughts that violate our implicit statistical predictions are likely an adaptive mechanism for testing and improving our predictive models through exploring hypothetical prediction errors and proactively adapting the models to account for them. This appears to occur through the use of mental simulations that do not rely upon immediate sensory stimuli, and may even be enhanced by the attenuation or cessation of incoming sensory signals (such as the blocking of incoming sensory signals that occurs during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep). This process could potentially reduce future prediction errors above and beyond what prediction errors based on immediate sensory signals can do. Abrupt and wayward transitions may confer distinct benefits along these lines.


Abrupt and wayward transitions: potentially distinct benefits

Abrupt transitions tend to bring about thoughts related to current concerns or unresolved goals that an organism has yet to attain. Thus, abrupt transitions may draw attention to unresolved goals by preferentially re-orienting the organism's attention to content that is relevant to such goals, thereby increasing the chance that they will be attained over time. This notion aligns well with the idea that animals, including humans, often engage in exploratory behaviours to help with goal fulfilment over time. Abrupt transitions could be an example of such exploratory behaviour.

Wayward transitions, on the other hand, are likely related, at least in part, to novelty seeking. Although both types of transitions may be linked to novel mental simulations, wayward transitions may lead to more spatio-temporally distant episodic simulations or involuntary semantic memories. These variations in our typical thought stream may help us extract important features from our experience to improve our understanding of the world through creating conditions of interleaved learning below the level of conscious awareness.

Wayward transitions may also be beneficial for updating high-level features of the statistical model by broadening the potential mental search space to include contents that may otherwise be neglected owing to their low baseline occurrence probability. For example, involuntary memories about rare occasions of sleep deprivation may be useful for updating models about the self or incorporating past experience into new decisions. Wayward transitions in thought may stem from mechanisms similar to those that drive novelty-seeking behaviours. We are able to learn from novelty even when it is only simulated in our thoughts, and we may even have evolved to welcome and enjoy such novel thoughts, given the close association between novelty seeking and dopamine.


Possible neural correlates of abrupt and wayward transitions

So far, we have suggested that abrupt and wayward transitions are distinguishable based on phenomenology, probability metrics and their potential benefits. Can they also be distinguished in terms of their underlying neural correlates? Neuroimaging research has shown that spontaneously arising thoughts are precipitated by neural activity across specific brain networks, including the hippocampus and parahippocampus. According to the Dynamic Framework of Thought, such thoughts may arise through the interactions of multiple large-scale brain networks. Below we provide some specific hypotheses as to what the similarities and differences between wayward and abrupt transitions at the neural level may be, based on previous empirical findings and theoretical work, including the Dynamic Framework of Thought.

Abrupt and wayward transitions share some phenomenological properties, such as a lack of deliberate generation and surprise at a thought content arising unexpectedly with respect to its time of arising. They likely also share a relatively sharp change in thought content relative to the immediately preceding content. These shared phenomenological properties likely correspond to at least some partially shared neural correlates. An absence of deliberate generation is likely to correlate with decreased recruitment and functional connectivity within the frontoparietal control network (FPCN), given the FPCN's well-established role in voluntary cognitive control. A sharp change in thought content may coincide with relatively rapid alterations in dynamic functional connectivity within the core component of the default network (DNCORE), a network that has been linked to the maintenance of high-level representations of information, including ongoing thought content. Such higher-order representations of ongoing thought content would require updating during abrupt and wayward transitions, and these changes will likely be reflected in dynamic alterations of functional connectivity within the DNCORE itself. The medial temporal lobe component of the default network (DNMTL) is also likely to be involved in any sharp change in thought content, given that nodes of this subnetwork such as the hippocampus appear to be a reliable internal source of spontaneously arising thought content. The involvement of the hippocampus in sharp content transitions may also be evident through increases in its associated theta rhythm power, which partially indexes the semantic distance between contiguously recalled items.

In the light of their phenomenological divergences, abrupt and wayward transitions are also likely to exhibit some distinct neural correlates. Abrupt transitions are brought about by current goals, implicit affect, motivations or current concerns. Because of this, abrupt transitions may be associated with increased salience network (SN) and ventral attentional network (VAN) recruitment and precedence of influence on overall brain dynamics, given these networks' involvement in assigning, detecting and initiating attentional orientations based on stimulus salience. Abrupt transitions may also be associated with increased recruitment of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and anterior hippocampus, owing to these brain regions' involvement in constructing future-oriented simulations that rely on prior knowledge, which may be used to fulfil goals or address current concerns.

Wayward transitions, on the other hand, do not appear to be linked to any obvious latent emotions, motivations, goals or concerns. Unlike abrupt transitions then, wayward transitions are unlikely to be associated with strong recruitment and functional connectivity within the FPCN, SN and VAN, all of which are known to mediate explicit or latent motivations, goals and concerns. Instead, wayward transitions may be linked to the generation of relatively novel content in the thought stream—content that would be experienced as novel both in terms of its transition and in terms of its occurrence probability. Wayward transitions, therefore, may be associated with greater recruitment and precedence over brain dynamics of the DNMTL, owing to this network's role in generating novel thought content and detecting and signalling novelty.

It is also likely that there are specific neural correlates underlying the computation of predictions, prediction errors, and transitional and occurrence probabilities in the thought stream. Current neuroscientific knowledge does not lend itself to making specific neural predictions in relation to these predictive processing mechanisms, but future empirical and theoretical investigations of these mechanisms will play a crucial role in expanding our scientific knowledge of surprise and spontaneity in the thought stream.


Conclusion

Thoughts that seem to come ‘out of the blue’ or ‘out of nowhere’ have puzzled us for millennia. For nearly all of human history, such thoughts—especially the most sudden, insightful and important—were almost universally attributed to the divine or other external spiritual sources. The modern and seemingly obvious view that they come from one's own mind or brain is in fact an incredibly recent perspective on their sources. Scientific understanding of spontaneous thought has progressed by leaps and bounds in recent years, but we still lack a comprehensive account of the phenomenology of this peculiar kind of mental spontaneity and of how it relates to the neural processes that give rise to it. In this paper, we have focused on two different phenomenologically distinct forms of spontaneity in thought: abrupt and wayward transitions. Mental spontaneity, however, is by no means a unitary phenomenon and in addition to abrupt and wayward transitions, there are numerous other phenomenologically, probabilistically and neurally distinct aspects of spontaneity that are important subjects for future work and discussion.

Our scientific understanding of human thought in general, and the phenomenology of mental spontaneity in particular, will benefit enormously from the expanded use of predictive processing and probabilistic principles as explanatory tools in our scientific theories. Predictive processing accounts of thought have not yet become mainstream in the scientific literature. Their development and wide-spread adoption could, however, be a crucial stepping stone towards reaching a place of clearer understanding about the origins of spontaneous thoughts. Given the enormous role that spontaneous thought plays in individual mental health outcomes and societal wellbeing more broadly, reaching that place is of great importance.


Ethics

All research practices mentioned in the article were approved by the Ethics Review Board at the University of British Columbia (H16-03211).


Data accessibility

This article has no additional data.


Authors' contributions

C.M., A.Z. and K.C. developed the idea together. C.M. and A.Z. wrote an initial draft of the manuscript with help from K.C. and R.W. K.C. and R.W. provided significant feedback and revisions throughout various stages of the manuscript; C.M. and K.C. created figures; all authors gave final approval for the submission, and agree to be held accountable for all aspects of the work.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

This article has no additional data.


The description–experience gap: a challenge for the neuroeconomics of decision-making under uncertainty

Basile Garcia, Fabien Cerrotti, Stefano Palminteri — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2021. PMC7815421, CC BY 4.0.

The experimental investigation of decision-making in humans relies on two distinct types of paradigms, involving either description- or experience-based choices. In description-based paradigms, decision variables (i.e. payoffs and probabilities) are explicitly communicated by means of symbols. In experience-based paradigms decision variables are learnt from trial-by-trial feedback. In the decision-making literature, ‘description–experience gap’ refers to the fact that different biases are observed in the two experimental paradigms. Remarkably, well-documented biases of description-based choices, such as under-weighting of rare events and loss aversion, do not apply to experience-based decisions. Here, we argue that the description–experience gap represents a major challenge, not only to current decision theories, but also to the neuroeconomics research framework, which relies heavily on the translation of neurophysiological findings between human and non-human primate research. In fact, most non-human primate neurophysiological research relies on behavioural designs that share features of both description- and experience-based choices. As a consequence, it is unclear whether the neural mechanisms built from non-human primate electrophysiology should be linked to description-based or experience-based decision-making processes. The picture is further complicated by additional methodological gaps between human and non-human primate neuroscience research. After analysing these methodological challenges, we conclude proposing new lines of research to address them.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Existence and prevalence of economic behaviours among non-human primates’.


The neuroeconomic research programme

The expected utility model was established as the standard normative model of decision-making under risk. Integrating Bernoulli's intuition about the curvature of the utility function and probability theories, von Neumann and Morgenstern demonstrated that choices based on the expected utility (i.e. the product between the utility of an outcome and its probability) satisfies four basic axioms of rationality (completeness, transitivity, continuity and independence). Historically, the neoclassical economics research programme disregarded the study of the internal processes governing economic behaviours. Keynes' animal spirits were considered unmeasurable, and economic theory was built on the assumption that the human mind as well the brain were ultimately black boxes. The ‘as-if’ hypothesis illustrates this position by endorsing an instrumentalist epistemology: theory predictive power prevails on the realism of its initial assumptions. Accordingly, it was considered acceptable to rely on unrealistic assumptions regarding the unbounded cognitive capacities or perfect knowledge of economic agents, as far as the predictions were sufficiently accurate.

However, with the accumulation of behavioural evidence against the standard normative expected utility model, it soon appeared that it had to be profoundly amended to successfully account for actual decisions under risk. Positive, descriptive, models of decision-making under risk that integrate insights from psychology, such as the notion of bounded rationality (i.e. humans display limited computational capacities), heuristics (taking computational shortcuts to make decisions) and biases (systematically distorted representations of behavioural variables) were then proposed and formalized. Among the descriptive theories of decision under risk and uncertainty, ‘prospect theory’ (PT) had a strong empirical ground and stood out. PT postulates that expected utility is calculated relative to a reference point (the frame), an asymmetric treatment of gains and losses (loss aversion), as well as a subjective weighting of probabilities (probability distortion). PT successfully explained known paradoxes (such as the Allais's paradoxes) and new ones (e.g. the Asian disease paradox, as well as a certain number of ‘real life’ irrational behaviours).

However, despite these successes, some aspects of the descriptive approach, in general, and PT, in particular, remained unsatisfactory. First, it remained difficult to ultimately arbitrate between competing descriptive theories solely based on behavioural data. For instance, alternative behavioural theories have been proposed (such as rank-dependent utility, regret and disappointment theories; see for a review) that make overlapping predictions with PT, making them hard to disentangle. Second, while making accurate predictions, PT, and other descriptive theories, do not specify which are the actual cognitive operations and how they are implemented by the brain. In terms of the Marrian analysis of modelling, PT (as other descriptive theories) is situated at the computational level that specifies which is the goal of the agent (in this case: maximizing a subjective utility that includes reference point dependence, loss aversion and probability deformation), but is silent concerning the algorithmic (i.e. what are the operations involved in the manipulation of decision variables) and implementational levels (i.e. how these operations are physically embodied and realized).

A couple of decades later the time was ripe for a group of scholars of diverse origins to seek in neuroscientific data the way to overcome the limitations of descriptive theories, developed by psychologists and behavioural economists. This was facilitated by the rapid development of non-invasive neuroimaging techniques in humans (most notably functional magnetic resonance imaging: fMRI) and improvement of single-unit electrophysiological recordings in monkeys. The hope was (and still is) that, taking advantage of neuroscientific methods and concepts, neuroeconomics (as this raising field was named), would be able to address the epistemological issues of economic theories highlighted above.

Concerning adjudicating on competing theories (our first issue), by opening the brain ‘black box’ functional neuroimaging studies would provide an additional crucial observable measure—blood oxygen level dependent signal (BOLD: an aggregate and indirect measure of neural electrical activity), to compare, falsify and ultimately refine behavioural models. We define this approach as the weak neuroeconomic agenda, as it does not involve rewriting economic descriptive theories. Coming back to our example, while making similar behavioural predictions in respect of preferences under risk, different theories postulate different utility functions that can be searched in the brain. Assuming one knows where to look for utility representation in the brain, it would be, in principle, possible to assess which model better predicts its activity (a sort of neural model comparison:). Beyond comparing different theories, the neural activity could in principle help refining a theory by fixing some of its parameters. For instance, in many circumstances, PT is silent about how the reference point should be set. Assuming one knows where to look for positive (gain) and negative (loss) utility representations in the brain, in some cases the reference point could be inferred comparing the profile of activity of the ‘gains’ and ‘losses’ areas.

Concerning building new theories (second issue), accepting the fundamental ontological tenet that (economic) decisions ultimately stem from neural activity in the brain (which is a standard materialistic and monistic solution to the mind-body problem), entails that neuroscientific methods should provide the conceptual and methodological tools necessary to develop new, neurobiologically grounded, neural models encompassing the algorithmic and implementational levels. By contrast with the previous approach, we define this approach as the strong neuroeconomic agenda, as it involves rewriting economic theories in neurobiological terms. By integrating biological constraints and cost functions, these hypothetical neurobiologically grounded economic models have the potential of explaining why human decision-making presents certain biases from a biologically (not logically or statistically) normative perspective.

The methodological requirements of the two main neuroeconomics agenda are not quite the same. The weak neuroeconomic agenda can, in principle, be fulfilled by experiments relying on aggregate and indirect measures of the neural activity, such as the BOLD signal recorded by fMRI scanners in areas encoding subjective values. Furthermore, since the goal is arbitrating between different behavioural theories of decision-making developed by psychologists and economists, the experiments belonging to this research agenda should be preferentially (if not exclusively) performed in humans.

On the other side, as neural models are, ultimately, models of which information is encoded in neurons and how neurons are connected (networks), the strong neuroeconomic agenda research programme cannot be pursued only relying on fMRI neural signals. In fact, BOLD signal, at its best resolution, aggregates over thousands of neurons. Furthermore, it is still unclear to which extent it reflects presynaptic or postsynaptic activity (probably a mixture of both). Such neural models should eventually be validated based on the recording of single-cell activities, which is, for obvious ethical reasons, nearly impossible in humans. This is why neuroeconomics research, from its very inception, strongly relies on electrophysiological research on animal models, which have been employed in the study of neural mechanisms and cognition for almost 80 years. Monkeys (especially rhesus monkey: Macaca mulatta), are particularly popular models, because they present a wide behavioural repertoire and high degree of neuro-anatomical homology with humans, especially concerning the prefrontal cortices that underpin decision-making.

In, we represent what a prototypical workflow should look like to combine human and monkey data to deliver a neural model of decision-making. Of note, we describe it from an abstract perspective of theory-building, but in reality, its different steps can occur simultaneously (or in reverse order), and in very distant laboratories. Once identified as a behavioural process of interest (e.g. decision-making under uncertainty), a behavioural protocol is designed (typically, a series of choice problems involving different amounts of rewards and probabilities) and administered to both humans and monkeys. If the behaviour is comparable across species (meaning that the monkey represents a valid experimental model of human behaviour), functional imaging in humans can then be deployed to identify neural targets encoding macroscopic variables (e.g. probabilities, outcomes) that are later used to guide the selection of the areas where neurons will be recorded in monkeys. A desirable intermediate step, to reinforce the functional correspondence between human and monkey brain activations, would be to also deploy fMRI in monkeys. Similarly, in some neurologic and psychiatric diseases, intra-cranial neural activity can also be recorded in humans. Finally, all these data can then be combined together to propose and validate a neurobiologically plausible model of the behavioural process of interest. Thereafter, the proposed model should be validated using lesions and assessing its generalizability. Methods such as trans-cranial magnetic stimulation and brain lesions can be used to test the alleged causal relationship between neural correlates and behavioural processes. The model's ability to generalize can be assessed by generating predictions in tasks involving different decision problems and behavioural processes (out-of-sample validation).

A crucial step in this workflow is checking that humans and monkeys display the same behavioural processes and biases as a result of a true homology. This is something notoriously tricky to assess, because several, to some extent unavoidable, methodological differences exist between human and non-human primate research.

The foundational experimental paradigm of behavioural decision-making research consists in making choices between ‘lotteries’ or ‘gambles’, i.e. options associated with known or unknown probabilities of obtaining different outcomes. According to the gambling metaphor of individual choice, lotteries are believed to be prototypical of real-life decisions. Outcomes and their probabilities are described to participants, who often (especially in the first generation of behavioural economics studies) make only one or very few decisions, without being informed about the outcome of their choices (in general to purposely prevent learning processes from influencing decision-making). On the other side, monkey electrophysiological research adopts very different methodological standards. For various reasons (including ethical ones), monkey studies are limited in terms of sample size, and consequently, the number of observations per subject is greatly increased in order to increase statistical power and reduce measurement noise. In fact, behavioural tasks in monkeys display a greater number of trials per subject, collected on a sample size of often less than five subjects. Both parameters (sample size and number of trials) are roughly a couple of orders of magnitude different compared to what is common practice in behavioural economics (a). Interestingly, fMRI studies of decision-making present experimental parameters somehow in-between those used in monkeys and human studies: they usually involve hundreds of trials and also sample sizes of about 20–40 subjects (see two notable examples in neuroeconomics:). Assuming that decision-making possesses ergodicity (i.e. the behaviour averaged across trials is the same as the behaviour averaged across subjects), different ratio trial/participants per se should not present a big challenge to compare results from human and monkey studies (but note that ergodicity does not seem to be granted for psychological processes). However, in addition to these quantitative differences, in monkey studies, an outcome (usually a primary reward) is provided on a trial-by-trial basis. This is because a monkey would simply stop doing the experiment in the absence of extrinsic motivation. Thus, in virtually all cases monkey experiments include a reinforcement learning component, where actions are associated with past outcomes. This is true even when the paradigm involves establishing a symbolic system to communicate outcomes and probabilities. In fact, in the absence of a shared language or semantic system to communicate, monkeys are compelled to learn any representational system by trial-and-error from feedback.

In the present article, we argue that the above-mentioned differences do not only present a technical issue, but also a major epistemological challenge for the (strong) neuroeconomic agenda. We detail why below.


The experience–description gap

As mentioned before, foundational contributions to behavioural decision-making research were made through the use of explicitly described gambles. Several representations have been used to convey outcome values and probabilities, including textual and numerical descriptions, later replaced by visual cues such as pie-charts. In these paradigms, the information pertaining to the decision-relevant variables is processed by verbal and mental calculation systems and relies upon some degree of semantic knowledge to decode the meaning of the symbols used. In addition to that, decision problems were usually presented only once and, in case multiple decision problems were used, the final outcome (i.e. the realization of the lottery) was usually not displayed on a trial-by-trial basis (b).

However, relatively few situations in real life match the characteristics of the pure description-based paradigms, namely complete and explicit information about outcome values and probabilities. In fact, in many circumstances, it seems rather prudent to assume that information about outcome values and probabilities are shaped by past encounters of the same decision problem. Experimentally, this configuration is often translated into multi-armed bandit problems (starting with Thompson, but see for a review), where the decision-maker faces abstract cues of unknown value and has to figure by trial-and-error the value of the options. Computationally, behaviour in multi-armed bandit problems is generally well-captured by associative or reinforcement learning processes. In the early 2000s, a line of enquiry arose where researcher translated the typical decision problems used in behavioural economics (i.e. involving choices between a safe and a risky prospect in the gain and loss domain) into experience-based paradigms (b). Systematic comparisons between these two decision-making modes revealed the existence of robust description–experience gaps regarding risk preferences in humans. More precisely, probability weighting functions eventually show opposite deformations when comparing description-based and experience-based choices. In particular, most of the tenets of PT do not seem to hold in experience-based choices. While traditionally, in the description domain, the occurrence of rare events is overestimated (possibility effect) and the occurrence of frequent events is underestimated, experience-based decisions tend to show the opposite biases: an effect that is only partially explained by incomplete sampling.


Description- and experience-based behavioural models.

In this box, we sketch the formalisms standardly employed to explain and quantify risk preferences in description-based and experience-based decisions. Description and experience paradigms radically differ in how they model decision under risk. In the description domain, risk preferences are the direct result of subjective deformations of probabilities and outcomes that are explicitly stated. On the other side, in the experience domain there is no separate representation of outcomes' probabilities and no explicit deformation of outcomes’ values. Consequently, risk preferences are the indirect result of the learning process that links past outcome information to subsequent choices. Eventually, these two approaches lead to different explanations of risk attitudes.

Risk preferences in description-based paradigms are commonly explained by prospect theory (PT). The expected value of k iterations of the same gamble X (which is random variable) is computed as follows:

where xi is the value of an individual outcome and pi is the objective probability of the outcome. PT states that the utility of an outcome, that is the subjective value u(xi), is nonlinear and modulated by different parameters: α and β, that are the power to which, respectively, a positive or negative outcome are elevated, and λ the loss aversion coefficient. Thus, the PT utility function is defined as follows:

an α ≤ 1 corresponds to risk aversion in the gain domain (the intuition dates back to Bernoulli), α > 1 corresponds to risk-seeking behaviours. In the loss domain, the same relation is true concerning the values of β. A value of λ > 1 corresponds to loss aversion; its typical empirical value is around 2. A decision-maker with α < 1, β > 1 and λ > 1 will present different risk preference in the gain (risk aversion) and the loss (risk seeking) domain (b).

In addition, PT postulates a subjective deformation of probabilities. There are multiple ways to mathematically express the probability weighting function. One of the most common is the ‘Prelec’ function:

with δ controlling the elevation and γ the curvature. When both parameters are set to 1, the function tends to linearity. The more γ > 1, the more the function adopts an S-shape. A classical result is the overweighting of low probabilities compared to high probabilities, where the direction of the curve follows an inverse S-shape (a), with γ < 1. Note that another probability weighting function has been proposed. Finally, the subjective expected utility is given by

By the variation of these parameters, PT accounts for inter-individual differences in risk preferences. Of note, concurrent theories such as regret theory or rank-dependent utility models, which use very different representational structures and parameterizations, are also used to model decision-making under risk.

Experience-based paradigms can be seen as reinforcement learning problems operationalized as k-armed bandit tasks. Consider an environment composed by a state vector S, with s ∈ S. In each of states s, there are available actions denoted a ∈ A. Each state-action pair has an underlying reward probability distribution, such that P[R|s, a], is the probability of obtaining the reward R, knowing the state-action couple (s, a). An agent must then follow a policy in order to maximize a state-action value function Q(s, a) (i.e. to maximize the average expected reward). A common learning policy is to compute subsequently to a choice of the prediction error δ, that will be used to incrementally update the value associated to a specific state-action pair (s, a):

with α the learning rate that determines to what extent newly acquired information overrides the previous. In this paradigm, inter-individual variability in behaviours can be accounted for by differences in individual parameters such as the aforementioned learning rate α. However, this model with only one parameter is too simple to accommodate different risk preferences.

A way to refine this model to account for different risk preferences, is to allow for two different learning rates, α+ and α−:If α+ = α−, the two learning rates model is equivalent to a one learning rate model. We define the tendency to preferentially update Q(s,a) from positive prediction errors rather than negative prediction errors as positivity bias (or loss neglect) (α+ > α−). Conversely, we define the opposite situation (α+ < α−) as negativity bias (or loss enhancement).

The learning rate asymmetry has direct consequence for risk preferences in the setting where a subject has to learn the value of a safe (say a fixed value of 0) and a risky (say 50% chance of winning/losing one euro) option. A subject displaying a positivity bias would neglect the past losses and will, therefore, be a risk-seeker (b). Conversely, the negativity bias implies risk aversion. Both pessimistic and optimistic biases have been reported in the literature, with the latter bias being more frequently reported.

While it is tempting to see the positivity bias as the experience-based antithesis of loss aversion, their formalism and psychological interpretations are quite different and they are, therefore, not mutually exclusive. Indeed, loss aversion concerns the valuation of prospective losses, while the positivity bias concerns the retrospective assessment of past losses.

It is important to note that, in humans, although the average values of the behavioural biases are reported as described above (for instance: inverse S-shape in description-based paradigms and loss neglect in experience-based paradigms; see a), their results are further tempered by a high degree of inter-individual variability in the bias parameters. At the individual level, some subjects may in fact display opposite biases in both experimental settings. If inter-individual variability is equally high in other primates, the fact that monkey studies use very small sample size can contribute to explaining the comparably less consistent picture observed.

In description-based choices, a behavioural hallmark of loss aversion (overweighting of negative outcomes) is the reflection effect, where subjects are risk averse in the gain domain and risk seeking in the loss domain. The opposite pattern has been repeatedly found in the experience-based decisions. This observation may be explained by biases in the learning process, such as remembering preferentially extreme outcomes or integrating preferentially better-than-expected outcomes. Finally, a smaller subset of studies investigated a hybrid situation where decision problems are fully described, choices are repeated and followed by a trial-by-trial feedback. These ‘description plus experience’ paradigms showed that probability distortions compatible with prospect theory are initially present, but corrected by the presence of feedback. To summarize, the whole spectrum of decision-making under uncertainty in humans is far from being fully captured by PT's loss aversion and subjective probability deformation. Specifically, different descriptive models seem to apply as a function of how outcome and probability information is conveyed. In what remains of the paper, we illustrate why we believe that this feature seriously challenges leveraging on neural and behavioural data in monkeys to build a neural model of decision-making under uncertainty.


Decision under risk in monkeys

In this section, we try to address the question of whether monkeys are a good experimental model for human decision-making under uncertainty. We will focus this survey on rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) results because most electrophysiological studies are performed in this species (but see for a more detailed review including other primates). Asking whether monkeys are a good experimental model translates into asking whether in the laboratory setting their behaviour displays the distinctive features and biases observed in humans. We stress again that the comparison is complicated by the fact that pure description-based paradigms cannot exist in monkey studies because of the lack of language. In fact, in monkey studies, whenever outcomes and probabilities are conveyed via a symbolic system, the system is nonetheless learned and maintained by trial-by-trial outcomes (i.e. a situation similar to the ‘description plus experience’ paradigm, described above). In such ‘pseudo’ description-based paradigm, monkeys are trained to associate continuous variations in one visual feature (e.g. colour or size) to continuous variations of a decision variable (e.g. outcomes or probabilities). The comparison is further complicated by the fact that only few studies formalize risk preferences in terms of model parameters (such as probability distortion, loss aversion or learning rates) and data reporting is often limited to behavioural measures.

The general picture emerging from ‘pseudo’ description-based paradigms in monkeys (i.e. studies relying on learned symbolic systems to communicate values) is, at best, mixed. PT has been explicitly tested in paradigms using visual cues carrying symbolic information similar to those presented to humans (e.g. pie-charts). Only a few studies show results in conformity with the pattern of description-based decisions observed in humans. Risk aversion, suggestive of marginally decreasing utility in the gain domain, has been rarely reported. Nioche et al. is the sole study confirming all PT features: marginally decreasing utility (risk aversion in the gain domain), loss aversion (risk seeking in the loss domain) and subjective probability weighting consistent with overestimation of rare events. Probability weighting function consistent with standard PT has been reported by other studies, but the same studies also reported increasing marginal utility and risk seeking in the gain domain, which is not typically observed in description-based decisions in humans. Many others pseudo description-based experiments also reported risk-seeking attitudes and/or marginally increasing utility in gains. In addition, although the traditional inverse probability weighting function has sometimes been observed, variation of experimental design features (such as randomly mixing gambles instead of repeating the same gambles sequentially) can reverse the direction of the probability weighting function.

Regarding ‘pure’ experience-based studies in monkeys (i.e. involving no symbolic system to communicate values), the picture is somehow clearer. Indeed, rhesus macaques exhibit robust risk-seeking behaviour in the gain domain. Risk-seeking attitudes have also been reported in the loss domain.

Risk-seeking behaviour in experience-based studies can be computationally explained by an increased sensitivity to positive (compared to negative) prediction errors (‘positivity’ bias) which is generally documented in human reinforcement learning. This hypothesis is corroborated by studies demonstrating a stronger impact of past positive outcome in choices using either model-free or model-based measures.

Finally, it can be argued that if monkeys are a good model for human decision-making under uncertainty, they should display a description–experience gap. To our knowledge, so far only one study explicitly tackled this issue. Monkeys were asked to make repeated choices between safe, and risky options, whose outcome probability was either learned by experience or described by the ratio between colours on a rectangle. Replicating previous findings in monkeys, and in discordance with the standard result in humans, Heilbronner and Hayden found that monkeys were risk-seekers in the description domain. However, consistent with the gap observed in humans, they also found that risk-seeking behaviour was higher for experience-based cues.

To summarize, the literature seems to suggest that monkeys' decision-making for experience-based choice is quite consistent with what is observed in humans in terms of risk preference. This is consistent with a large body of literature showing that the neural substrates of reinforcement learning are largely preserved in the two species. Risk seeking in this context may be driven by a higher learning rate from positive compared to negative prediction errors, which is essentially a computational reinforcement learning translation of the ‘hot hand’ fallacy. The situation is much less reassuring concerning description-based decisions, as preferences compatible with PT are rarely observed. This can be due to the fact that pseudo description-based design in monkeys resembles the ‘description plus experience’ set-up in humans, where PT-like deformations are blunted or even disappear, as if description-based and experience-based biases reciprocally cancel themselves. As a result, it remains unclear to what extent description-based processes can be elicited in the non-human primate animal model.


The impact of other experimental differences

Experimental results concerning decision-making under uncertainty in monkeys do not seem to straightforwardly comply with the predictions of PT. Overall it seems that monkeys' behaviour is better accounted for as an experience-based decision process, which is consistent with the fact that pure description-based paradigms are not possible and monkey experiments always involve trial-by-trial feedback. The systematic presence of trial-by-trial feedback is not the only systematic methodological difference between the monkey and human studies.

First, monkey studies essentially rely on primary rewards (mainly water or fruit juice), while human studies are realized mainly with secondary rewards (sometimes hypothetical ones) and primary reinforcers are only occasionally used. Preliminary evidence from a study comparing risk propensity for different kinds of rewards in humans (money versus sport beverage) and monkeys showed similar patterns in the two species, thus suggesting that in more comparable experimental condition risk preferences in both species could converge. Furthermore, while the neural correlates of different kinds of rewards converge in the ventral prefrontal and striatal systems (principle of the common currency) they also have specific correlates, which may contribute to the different neural mechanisms and result in distinct, reward-specific, risk preferences. On the other side, a proxy for secondary reward can be found in monkey paradigms that involve collecting (virtual) tokens to be later exchanged for a primary reward. Unlike pure primary reward tasks, where losses cannot be implemented (it is impossible to take some fruit juice away from the stomach of a monkey), tokens have the advantage of making possible subtracting previously acquired rewards from the animal, thus inducing ‘losses’ in the same manner as in human. However, a recent study using tokens, showed risk-seeking attitudes comparable to that observed using primary reward. Furthermore, when tokens are used, they are almost immediately changed against primary reward, making them not really comparable to money, whose value is much more permanent. Taken together, the available evidence suggests that the primary/secondary reward dichotomy does not explain the fact that human description-based biases are hardly observed in monkeys.

Second, in addition to the difference in the nature of the reward, description-based paradigms in humans and paradigms in monkeys often present a systematic difference in the amount of the reward. Indeed, most of the original studies about PT used hypothetical gambles of hundreds of dollars and the same biases have been replicated using real stakes of about a month's salary. On the other side, monkey studies use very small amounts of rewards (mere drops of liquids). It has been argued that part of the description–experience gap may simply derive from this difference in stake instead of being induced by fundamental differences in the decision-making process. This would be consistent with Markowitz utility function which supposes risk seeking for small stakes (peanuts effect) before converting to risk aversion for higher stakes and is supported by the finding that increasing the relative amount of reward (by reducing its frequency) decreases risk seeking down to risk neutrality in monkeys. However, risk aversion in the gain domain (and a reverse pattern in the loss domain: the reflection effect) has also been observed with small stakes in description-based decisions in humans. Thus, available evidence suggests that differences in the size of the stake cannot fully explain the fact that human description-based preferences are hardly observed in monkeys.

Finally, another notable difference between human and monkey experiments is represented by the amount and the type of training required to perform the task. In human experiments, task training rarely takes more than a few minutes (in some extreme cases of description-based paradigms, there is virtually no training: subjects are just asked to reveal their preferences). On the other side, monkey experiments require extensive training, in general spanning several months (usually training takes longer than the experiment itself). It can be, therefore, argued that their behaviour becomes to some extent habitual or automatized: a cognitive state that contrasts dramatically with the declarative and deliberative stance of description-based choices taken by humans. In addition to that, training in monkeys (and other animals) often involves simplified versions of the task (often deterministic contingencies), which may reinforce specific risk preferences. Although the role of extended (several days, weeks) training and the resulting behavioural automation (or habituation) in risk preferences is unclear, it may contribute to the fact that human description-based biases are rarely observed in monkeys.


Conclusion and perspectives

Our review suggests that the rhesus monkey is a partial model of human decision-making under uncertainty. Risk preferences in monkeys are generally better explained as experience-based processes. Accordingly, monkeys proved to be a very good model of human reinforcement learning processes, providing crucial insights into its neural implementation (the dopamine prediction error hypothesis:). The situation is less clear concerning description-based choices. In paradigms using explicit symbolic information about decision variables, monkeys only rarely displayed risk preferences compatible with human results. Deciding by description implies a symbolic system of communication. While in humans this system pre-exists (language), in monkeys it has to be learnt by trial-and-error, thus irremediably confounding description and experience. In addition to differences in the way value information is conveyed (experience- or description-based), other methodological factors (training, reward type and stakes) further drive apart the experimental set-ups of the two species. This situation is problematic as building a neural model of decision-making under uncertainty should integrate human (fMRI) and monkey (single unit) neurophysiological data, while explaining risk preferences in a wide range of situations that span from pure description-based choices to pure experience-based choices.

We propose further lines of research that could eventually help filling these gaps and ultimately fulfilling the strong neuroeconomic agenda. On the human side, the description–experience gap has been extensively studied at the behavioural level, but surprisingly neglected at the neural level. A notable exception, found different neural representations for description- and experience-oriented decisions. Furthering this line of enquiry would prove useful to redefine the target areas to look specifically for description-based processes in monkey electrophysiological studies.

With the development of online testing techniques, it is becoming easier to implement extended massive training in humans. Translated in the field of decision-making under risk, these experiments would provide crucial insights into the impact of extensive training in risk preferences. While, description-based studies in monkeys require learning ex novo a symbolic system, in humans the meaning of pie-charts is provided by the language. It would be interesting to put humans in situations where they have to figure out by trial-and-error the code linking continuous visual features to decision variables.

In general, all the efforts aimed at increasing the methodological overlap between human and monkey studies will provide further insights into what are the behavioural processes shared across the two species. Popularizing fMRI experiments in monkeys would help confirm the neuro-anatomical targets and increase the focus on shared neural systems. The token paradigm (conceptually closer to the notion of the secondary reward) offers the possibility to implement losses in monkeys, hence facilitating the cross-species study of loss aversion.

Finally, on the monkey side, PT has been sporadically replicated. It will be important to clarify and formalize the experimental factors (in terms of stimuli, training and reward type;) that predict whether PT-like behaviour will be observed in a monkey experiment. Determining under which experimental conditions PT is replicated in monkeys will imply a deeper understanding of the cognitive mechanisms underlying decision-making under uncertainty.


From environmental sensing to developmental control: cognitive evolution in dictyostelid social amoebas

Pauline Schaap — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2021. PMC7934950, CC BY 4.0.

Dictyostelid social amoebas respond to starvation by self-organizing into multicellular slugs that migrate towards light to construct spore-bearing structures. These behaviours depend on excitable networks that enable amoebas to produce propagating waves of the chemoattractant cAMP, and to respond by directional movement. cAMP additionally regulates cell differentiation throughout development, with differentiation and cell movement being coordinated by interaction of the stalk inducer c-di-GMP with the adenylate cyclase that generates cAMP oscillations. Evolutionary studies indicate how the manifold roles of cAMP in multicellular development evolved from a role as intermediate for starvation-induced encystation in the unicellular ancestor. A merger of this stress response with the chemotaxis excitable networks yielded the developmental complexity and cognitive capabilities of extant Dictyostelia.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Basal cognition: conceptual tools and the view from the single cell’.

Keywords: excitable networks, self-organization, stress response, cAMP oscillations, Dictyostelium


Introduction

A hallmark of all life is its ability to adapt continuously to a changing environment. This ability involves perceiving the change and performing an appropriate response. At the cellular level the response can be rapid and only require a change in protein function. The response can be somewhat slower, requiring a change in the available protein repertoire by gene expression, or it can occur over several generations by changing the genes themselves in the course of natural selection.

The process of perceiving environmental stimuli and mounting an appropriate response shares many properties with cognition in higher animals, such as (i) discrimination—the ability to recognize only those features that are relevant for species survival, (ii) memory—the ability to retain the perceived information for a persistent change in cell function, (iii) problem solving—the ability to select the most appropriate response, when faced with complex input, and (iv) communication—the ability to interact with members of the same or other species. In multicellular organisms these basal cognitive abilities evolved into more sophisticated behaviours that eventually incorporated anticipation, learning, sentience and creativity. The latter properties are generally only associated with organisms with a well-developed nervous system. However, to understand how they came into being, it is important to establish whether they are the result of entirely novel processes or whether they differ from environmental sensing only in a matter of degree.

While not claiming to answer that question, this review illustrates how mechanisms for finding food and responding to stress in a unicellular amoeba evolved into mechanisms controlling cell-type specialization and generation of form in its multicellular descendants, the Dictyostelia.


Multicellularity evolved many times

The well-known macroscopic multicellular organisms such as animals, plants and fungi start life as a single cell, which then enters into a series of cell divisions with all successive generations staying together to generate the adult form. Another form of multicellularity is more common and has evolved separately in seven out of the eight major divisions of eukaryotes. In this form, a single cell emerges from a spore and starts feeding on smaller creatures or molecular substrates. The individual cells divide and stay apart as long as food is available. However, when starved they come together to construct a multicellular fruiting structure, where all or most of the cells differentiate into spores.

The dictyostelid social amoebas are, with over 150 known species, the largest group of such organisms. They are members of the Amoebozoa, a eukaryote division that otherwise almost exclusively consists of single-celled amoebas that individually differentiate into dormant cysts when starved. The Dictyostelia are subdivided into four major groups, which show different levels of morphological and behavioural complexity. Species in groups 1, 2 and 3 differentiate into at most two cell types, stalk cells and spores, and form relatively small clustered or branched fruiting bodies. Many species in these groups have retained the ability to form solitary cysts under wet and dark conditions that do not favour aggregation.

The group 4 Dictyostelia form larger solitary fruiting bodies with up to three more somatic cell types. They show extensive light-oriented migration of an intermediate stage, the sorogen or slug. In its soil habitat, this serves to bring the cell mass to the top layer of the soil, where it then proceeds to form the fruiting body. Within the slugs, cells differentiate into prestalk and prespore cells and regulate the proportions of these cell types to the requirements for stalk cells and spores in the fruiting body. This is in contrast to species in groups 1–3, where all cells differentiate into prespore cells, and then transdifferentiate into stalk cells at the top of the sorogen. Group 4 species all use cyclic AMP (cAMP) as attractant for aggregation, whereas the dipeptide glorin and other attractants are used in groups 1–3. However, group 4 species have lost the ability to encyst.


Excitable networks enable chemotaxis and self-organization

The ability to detect and move towards food could be the most ancient sign of cognition and is in Dictyostelia and their amoeboid relatives achieved by chemotaxis—movement guided by the presence of chemical gradient. Chemotaxis is a complex process, since it requires the cell to detect a small concentration difference over a wide range of ambient concentrations. This is achieved by including adaptation in the response, which desensitizes the cell to the average concentration of attractant, while allowing response to change.

True to their name (amoibē = change) amoebas are always moving by extending pseudopods in different directions. These shape changes are the result of waves of polymerized actin (F-actin) that propagate through the cell cortex and cause pseudopod protrusion. The F-actin waves originate at sites where the cell touches the substratum. Such contacts locally activate the small GTPase Ras and increase levels of the membrane phospholipid PI(3,4,5)P3. Together with the 3-phosphatase PTEN, which dephosphorylates PI(3,4,5)P3, coronin, which depolymerizes F-actin and other factors, these components make up the cytoskeletal excitable network that governs wave initiation, propagation and extinction. Using the same network, F-actin waves are also triggered when amoebas contact bacteria, but then lead to formation of cup-shaped protrusions that capture and internalize the bacteria.

In chemotaxis, the cytoskeletal excitable network interlinks with the signal transduction excitable network, which brings the localized polymerization of actin under control of the chemoattractant cAMP. cAMP activates the G-protein coupled receptor cAR1, which causes dissociation of the heterotrimeric GTPase G2 into its α and βγ subunits. The βγ subunits activate at least six signalling cascades in parallel, which cause (i) actin polymerization resulting in pseudopod extension and adhesion to the substratum at the front of the cell, (ii) activation of myosinII at the back, which causes the cell to pull in its rear.

In most cascades this involves activation of small GTPases such as Rac, RasB, RasC, RasG and Rap1. Small GTPases are activated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), which assist dissociation of GDP from the inactive protein, allowing binding of GTP and activation. They are inactivated by GAPs (GTPase activating proteins), which activate their intrinsic GTPase activity causing GTP to convert into GDP (a).

Rac directly activates the actin nucleation complex Scar-Arp2/3. Many other small GTPases first activate protein kinases like Phg2 and TorC2, which, by phosphorylating other protein kinases like MHCK-A, PKBA, PKBR1 and ultimately PakA, regulate the activity of cytoskeletal components by phosphorylation. RasG activates phosphatidyl-inositol kinases (PI3Ks), which converts PI(4,5)P2 into PI(3,4,5)P3. PI(3,4,5)P3 acts as a membrane binding site for proteins with a PH domain, like PKBA, CRAC and PhdA, resulting in their recruitment from the cytosol to the plasma membrane, where they exert their function. CRAC has a dual role in actin polymerization and activation of adenylate cyclase A (ACA), the enzyme that synthesizes cAMP.

In addition to these responses which require the G-protein G2, binding of cAMP to cAR1 also triggers G-protein independent responses, such as activation of the protein kinase ERK2, transient influx of Ca2+, and phosphorylation of cAR1, which recruits the arrestin AdcC to the plasma membrane, where, activated by Ca2+, AdcC causes internalization and degradation of cAR1 as well as inhibition of ERK2. Ca2+ also inhibits the synthesis of cGMP, a small molecule required for myosinII activation.

ERK2 participates in a negative feedback loop, where cAMP, by successively activating PKA and the cAMP phosphodiesterase RegA, stimulates its own hydrolysis. Together with the positive feedback loop formed by cAMP stimulating its own synthesis by cAR1, RasC, PI3 K and CRAC mediated activation of ACA, and PdsA mediated cAMP hydrolysis outside the cell, these interactions represent a separate excitable network, which is proposed to generate the spontaneous cAMP oscillations that control the supra-cellular processes of aggregation and morphogenesis.

The interactions between the components that control localized actin polymerization are highly dynamic. Generally speaking, the components that act positively on actin polymerization, such as TorC2, PI3K, PI(3,4,5)P3, PKBA/PKBR1, PhdA and CRAC, self-organize to take up position at the side of the cell that faces the highest cAMP concentration, while negatively acting components such as PTEN, Dd5P4 and several GAPs take up positions at the back of the cell. The first set is interconnected in a fast positive feedback loop acting on the activation state of small GTPases like Ras and Rap, while the second set is part of a slower negative feedback loop that inhibits Ras and Rap. When a naive cell is exposed to a cAMP gradient, rapid excitation of actin polymerization is triggered throughout the cell, followed by slower inhibition (c). At the back of the cell, where the perceived cAMP concentration is lower, both the excitation and inhibition response are lower, causing excitation at the back to be overwhelmed by inhibition emanating from the front. Only at the front, excitation exceeds inhibition sufficiently to sustain persistent actin polymerization and pseudopod extension.

There are more negative feedback loops in the cAMP signal transduction cascade, such as inhibition of cAMP-induced cGMP synthesis by cAMP-induced Ca2+-influx, cAMP-induced internalization of cAR1 in response to cAMP-induced cAR1 phosphorylation, and activation of arrestin. Additionally, there is considerable redundancy in the pathways leading to actin polymerization. The significance of either is at present not fully understood. It should be realized that in their natural environment cells do not perceive just one signal at a time, as outlined here, but are simultaneously beset by a panoply of sensory input. Since their continued survival depends on appropriate distinction between and responses to different stimuli, the biochemical computational skills of a single amoeba have to be quite considerable.


cAMP oscillations self-organize aggregation, morphogenesis and slug movement

Some small species of Dictyostelia, such as Dictyostelium minutum or Dictyostelium lacteum in group 3 secrete chemoattractant continuously causing surrounding cells to move individually towards the source. The cAMP oscillatory network, as used by Dictyostelium discoideum, is a more effective mechanism for aggregation. Firstly, an initial cAMP pulse causes surrounding cells to synthesize a cAMP pulse and secrete it using the ABC transporter AbcB3, thus propagating an unattenuated wave of cAMP through the population. Owing to cAMP hydrolysis by PdsA, each pulse presents the cell with a steep gradient, instead of the shallow gradients that result from secretion by a single source.

Once aggregated, the tip of the aggregate continues to emit cAMP pulses. The propagating cAMP waves cause the cells to move upward, aerially projecting the structure as the sorogen or ‘slug’. At this stage the slug can either directly form the fruiting body or fall over and start migrating. In nature, slugs move towards the soil surface by responding to light and warmth. While the slug does not possess sensory organs, it does this as follows. The rounded slug front acts as a lens focusing infrared and visible light on the distal surface. This increases metabolism at this spot, resulting in enhanced NH3 production by protein degradation. NH3 inhibits cAMP signalling, causing the oscillator to move towards the light-facing side of the slug and thereby turning slug movement towards the light. After having reached the soil surface, the slug projects the tip upward in response to incident light and starts to form the fruiting body.

By organizing the motility of individual cells to generate form and movement of the multicellular structure, the cAMP excitable network functions analogously to the animal nervous system, where the propagation of an action potential along an axon represents another excitable network, which in this case activates muscle fibre contraction and movement of the organism. One reason why the cAMP excitable network is not more commonly used is that by depending on cAMP diffusion, at 5 × 10−6 cm2 s−1, it is orders of magnitude slower than an action potential moving along a motor nerve at approximately 40 m s−1. Nevertheless, the cAMP excitable network imparts a range of adaptive behaviours to what is essentially a heap of amoebas, highlighting the power of nonlinear biochemical networks to generate apparent cognitive function.


Extensive use of cAMP signalling in the Dictyostelium differentiation programme

cAMP also plays a dominant role in the spatio-temporal control of cell differentiation during the developmental programme. As part of a gene-regulatory positive feedback loop on the aggregation process, the cAMP pulses that mediate aggregation also upregulate expression of the genes that are required for aggregation, such as cAR1, ACA and pdsA, and render cells competent for subsequent induction of post-aggregative genes. Owing to close cell proximity, the extracellular cAMP concentration increases once cells are aggregated, with micromolar cAMP now triggering prespore differentiation. Prespore cells lose chemotactic responsiveness and secrete factors like DIF-1, which prevent neighbouring cells from acquiring a prespore cell fate. These so-called anterior-like cells (ALCs) chemotax preferentially towards the tip to form the prestalk region, which makes up the anterior 25% of the slug. Here they sustain a population capable of generating cAMP pulses, with the more distal ALCs propagating the signal.

In addition to its roles as secreted signal, cAMP has many intracellular roles as second messenger for other external stimuli, where it activates cAMP dependent protein kinase (PKA). PKA is required for the transition from growth to development by triggering basal expression of aggregation genes. Together with cAMP activation of cAR1, cAMP activation of PKA induces expression of prespore genes. PKA activation is also required for the maturation of spore and stalk cells and to prevent spores from germinating in the fruiting body.

Both stalk cells and spores become encased in rigid cell walls as part of their differentiation process. Fruiting body formation depends on amoeboid movement, which is obviously impaired by rigid cell walls. It is therefore important that spores and stalk cells mature only at the right time and place. Spatial control over stalk formation is achieved by interaction between secreted c-di-GMP and ACA. c-di-GMP is synthesized by a prokaryote-type diguanylate cyclase that is expressed by all prestalk cells, while ACA is preferentially expressed at the utmost tip. c-di-GMP is a potent activator of ACA, with cAMP then activating PKA to induce stalk maturation. Owing to the localized expression of ACA, this only occurs at the slug tip, where prestalk cells normally initiate stalk formation, thereby synchronizing organization of cell movement with organization of cell differentiation.

The timely maturation of spores is achieved by intensive communication between prespore cells and the maturing stalk. Here the intracellular cAMP phosphodiesterase RegA plays a central role. Apart from a cAMP-phosphodiesterase domain, RegA contains a response regulator domain that requires phosphorylation of a conserved aspartate for the phosphodiesterase to be active. RegA phosphorylation/dephosphorylation occurs by the conserved histidine–aspartate phosphorelay system which is activated by sensor histidine kinases/phosphatases (SHKPs). Dictyostelium has 16 SHKPs, of which many have known biological roles, but I will here only highlight the roles of two of those, DhkC and DhkA.

DhkC is a sensor for NH3, which is produced by autophagy in the starving cells. The migrating slug is partially submerged in its own NH3, but the aerial projection of the slug tip in response to incident light enables dissipation of NH3 gas. NH3 prevents stalk maturation by activating DhkC, which, by phosphorylating and thereby activating RegA, inhibits cAMP accumulation and activation of PKA. Loss of NH3 from the projecting tip relieves this inhibition, allowing stalk maturation to proceed.

In the case of DhkA, it is the phosphatase and not the kinase activity that is activated by its ligand SDF-2 (spore differentiation factor 2). The peptide SDF-2 is produced through cleavage of acyl-CoA binding protein (AcbA), which is secreted by prespore cells, by the protease TagC, which is exteriorly exposed on prestalk cells. By activating DhkA on prespore cells, SDF-2 causes reverse phosphorelay from RegA, rendering its cAMP phosphodiesterase inactive and allowing PKA and thereby spore maturation to be activated.

cAMP is extensively used as a second messenger by mammals to regulate many aspects of metabolism, physiology, development and memory and also regulates diverse cellular functions in all other domains of life. However, its role is never as dominant as it appears to be in D. discoideum, where its entwined regulation of cell motility and cell differentiation controls the entire developmental programme.


An ancestral role for cAMP in amoebozoan stress sensing

Comparative genomics, combined with gene knock-out and gene replacement, provide opportunities for understanding how cAMP signalling networks evolved. The genes encoding PKA, ACG, ACR and RegA, which in D. discoideum detect, synthesize and hydrolyse intracellular cAMP, are conserved across the four dictyostelid taxon groups and, apart from ACG, also in the unicellular Amoebozoa Protostelium fungivorum, Physarum polycephalum and Acanthamoeba castellani. Similar to D. discoideum, PKA activation is required for aggregation and fruiting body formation in Polysphondylium pallidum in taxon group 2, and, remarkably, also for encystation of single amoebas. As is the case for sporulation, deletion of PKA or of ACR and ACG together prevents encystation, while deletion of regA causes precocious encystation, while amoebas are still feeding. Also in the distantly related amoebozoan, A. castellani, RegA inhibition causes cells to encyst while food is still plentiful.

This indicates that the roles of PKA, ACR, ACG and RegA in spore and stalk maturation are evolutionarily derived from a role in encystation, where starvation or drought acts to elevate intracellular cAMP, which then acts on PKA to induce encystment. While involvement of a specific sensor histidine kinase/phosphatase in encystation is not yet known, the genomes of the solitary Amoebozoa listed above each contain a large repertoire of these enzymes. Regulation of RegA activity by phosphorelay is therefore very possible.


Extracellular cAMP signalling is unique to Dictyostelia

The genes involved in the extracellular roles of cAMP, such as cAR1 and pdsA, are conserved throughout Dictyostelia, but are not present in the solitary Amoebozoa. Dictyostelium discoideum has four cAR genes, but of those only cAR1, which mediates chemotaxis and prespore gene induction by cAMP, is conserved outside group 4. Polysphondylium pallidum has two cAR1-like genes and deletion of both does not affect aggregation, for which P. pallidum uses glorin as attractant. However, without cARs, fruiting body morphogenesis is stunted, with disorganized differentiation of stalk cells. Remarkably, the remaining cells differentiate into cysts instead of spores. Without cARs, cAMP cannot induce prespore gene expression, but because PKA is still activated, the starving cells form cysts instead. This again illustrates that sporulation is evolutionarily derived from encystation.

Deletion of the extracellular phosphodiesterase pdsA in P. pallidum disrupted fruiting body morphogenesis similarly to deletion of cARs. Since PdsA specifically sustains oscillatory cAMP signalling by hydrolysing cAMP between pulses, this indicates that cell movement during P. pallidum post-aggregative development is organized by cAMP oscillations, as was found earlier for the group 3 species D. minutum. This indicates that the cAMP oscillatory network was first used to organize fruiting body morphogenesis, before group 4 used it for aggregation as well. The organization of the promoters of the cAR1, pdsA and ACA genes indicates how this happened. All three genes have multiple promoters; the promoter closest to the coding sequence directs transcription during post-aggregative development, while a more distal promoter directs expression during aggregation. At least for cAR1, this distal promoter is absent outside group 4. Apparently, addition of distal aggregative promoters to existing cAMP signalling genes enabled group 4 to use cAMP as attractant for aggregation.

cAR1 function itself did not change, since a group 3 cAR1 restores cAMP oscillations in a D. discoideum cAR null mutant. This is not the case for PdsA, which increased its affinity for cAMP 200-fold in group 4, likely to accommodate the lower cAMP concentrations in a dispersed field of amoebas. Dictyostelium discoideum secretes a PdsA inhibitor, PDI, during aggregation, which generates discontinuities that favour the formation of spiral cAMP waves over concentric waves, with the former being able to control larger aggregation territories. PDI belongs to a family of extracellular matrix proteins that are present in all Dictyostelia. However, in its current modified form, it is only present in group 4, suggesting that co-option of this matrix protein as a PdsA inhibitor may at least partially be responsible for the typically large and robust fruiting bodies in this group.


Dictyostelium development—a merger of the chemotactic network with a stress response?

Across the approximately nine divisions of eukaryotes, the amoeboid mode of cell movement is most common and likely to be ancestral to all eukaryotes. Many components of the cytoskeletal and signal transduction excitable networks that trigger and direct actin waves, respectively, are conserved between D. discoideum and mammalian cells. While in amoebas the actin waves are involved in the formation of pseudopods and phagocytic cups, in mammalian cells they generate a range of protrusions, such as lamellipodia, filopodia, invadopodia and podosomes. In view of the fact that Dictyostelia and mammals evolved multicellularity independently from each other, this implies that the cytoskeletal and signal transduction excitable networks have ancient origins that pre-date the evolution of multicellularity.

The differentiation pathway of encystation is equally ancient and prevalent among the unicellular members of all eukaryote divisions. Encapsulation as a dormant cyst is the preferred and often only strategy available to single cells to survive environmental stress, such as starvation, drought or, for phytoplankton, lack of light in winter at high latitudes. In Dictyostelia, starvation and drought stress trigger encystation by increasing intracellular cAMP and activating PKA, with the cAMP phosphodiesterase RegA maintaining low cAMP levels in cells that are not under stress. Evidence for RegA and PKA involvement in other Amoebozoa is more sporadic, which is largely due to lack of gene modification procedures for these organisms.

While unicellular Amoebozoa lack cAMP receptors and are therefore unlikely to use cAMP as chemoattractant, in D. discoideum, the cAMP pathway has become entangled with the signal transduction excitable network that controls the chemotactic response. Specifically, the regulation of the ACA by RasG mediated PI(3,4,5)P3 production, combined with regulation of cAMP levels by PKA activation of RegA, has uniquely generated the cAMP excitable network in Dictyostelia that coordinates the supra-cellular processes of aggregation and morphogenesis.

The comparative evolutionary studies described in the previous paragraph suggest how this may have happened:

1. An ancestral pathway was present in solitary Amoebozoa, where cAMP, PKA and RegA acted as intermediates for sensing stress or for conditions favourable for growth by sensor histidine kinases/phosphatases and/or sensor-linked adenylate cyclases. In Dictyostelia these sensors evolved to detect developmental signals that thereby acted on PKA to control the maturation of spores and stalk cells in the fruiting body.

2. Early colonial dictyostelids used accumulation of secreted cAMP as a sensor for the aggregated state, causing cells to differentiate into spores when detecting elevated levels of both intra- and extracellular cAMP, and into cysts when only detecting a rise in intracellular cAMP.

3. Next, cAMP receptors, ACA, RegA and PKA became incorporated in the chemotaxis excitable network, enabling cells to generate the cAMP oscillations that coordinate the morphogenesis of well-structured fruiting bodies.

4. Finally, the cAMP oscillatory genes cAR1, pdsA and ACA became expressed before and during aggregation by the addition of distal ‘early’ promoters to the existing ‘post-aggregative’ promoters Other modifications, such as increased affinity of PdsA for cAMP and secretion of the PdsA inhibitor PDI imparted greater efficiency to cAMP signalling in a dispersed field of amoebas.

This scenario is speculative and contains many missing links. However, it helps to perceive how a mundane stimulus–response pathway can evolve to incorporate interactions that impart positive and negative feedback and thereby turn it into an excitable network with flexible regulatory potential. In Dictyostelia, the merger of at least two of these networks enabled a collection of stressed amoebas to self-organize into a motile multicellular structure, capable of stimulus-driven decision-making.


Data accessibility

This article has no additional data.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

This article has no additional data.


Vocal learning as a preadaptation for the evolution of human beat perception and synchronization

Aniruddh D Patel — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2021. PMC8380969, CC BY 4.0.

The human capacity to synchronize movements to an auditory beat is central to musical behaviour and to debates over the evolution of human musicality. Have humans evolved any neural specializations for music processing, or does music rely entirely on brain circuits that evolved for other reasons? The vocal learning and rhythmic synchronization hypothesis proposes that our ability to move in time with an auditory beat in a precise, predictive and tempo-flexible manner originated in the neural circuitry for complex vocal learning. In the 15 years since the hypothesis was proposed a variety of studies have supported it. However, one study has provided a significant challenge to the hypothesis. Furthermore, it is increasingly clear that vocal learning is not a binary trait animals have or lack, but varies more continuously across species. In the light of these developments and of recent progress in the neurobiology of beat processing and of vocal learning, the current paper revises the vocal learning hypothesis. It argues that an advanced form of vocal learning acts as a preadaptation for sporadic beat perception and synchronization (BPS), providing intrinsic rewards for predicting the temporal structure of complex acoustic sequences. It further proposes that in humans, mechanisms of gene-culture coevolution transformed this preadaptation into a genuine neural adaptation for sustained BPS. The larger significance of this proposal is that it outlines a hypothesis of cognitive gene-culture coevolution which makes testable predictions for neuroscience, cross-species studies and genetics.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Synchrony and rhythm interaction: from the brain to behavioural ecology’.

Keywords: vocal learning, synchrony, rhythm, evolution, beat, gene-culture coevolution


Introduction

Recent years have seen growing research on the evolutionary foundations of human musicality, defined as the spontaneously developing cognitive and sensorimotor abilities supporting musical behaviour. Among these abilities is the capacity to synchronize rhythmic movements to an auditory beat. This ‘beat perception and synchronization’ (BPS) is a form of entrainment, whereby periodic motor and auditory rhythms become temporally coordinated with the close temporal alignment of movements to auditory beats. BPS is a prominent aspect of human musical behaviour, is not part of everyday spoken language and is foundational to dance. Because BPS is culturally widespread, emerges without explicit instruction, begins developing early in life and builds on infant predispositions to move rhythmically to beat-based rhythms, it is relevant to evolutionary questions about musicality. Does BPS reflect any evolved neural specializations for music processing, or does it rest entirely on brain circuits that evolved for other reasons? This question goes to the heart of a long-standing debate about evolution and music. In The Descent of Man (1871), Darwin argued humans had evolved to be musical, while in The Principles of Psychology (1890), William James, who admired Darwin and believed the human mind was full of instincts, implied that music was a purely cultural invention built on brain mechanisms that evolved to serve other functions. Nearly 150 years later, we are nowhere near consensus on this debate, with detailed arguments on both sides (e.g. versus). BPS is important to this debate because it is the focus of a growing body of research relevant to evolutionary questions, spanning neuroscience, cross-species studies, genetics, cross-cultural work and developmental psychology.

Thanks to research in cognitive neuroscience, several key behavioural and neural features of BPS are well known. One such feature is the spontaneous tendency of listeners to predict the timing of beats, as shown by experiments where people tap to the beat of auditory rhythms: taps fall within a few tens of milliseconds of beats and often anticipate the beat, indicating precise temporal prediction of beat times. Another key feature is tempo flexibility. When engaging in BPS humans have a preference for beats separated by approximately 500 ms, near a natural frequency of human movement. However, humans exhibit precise and predictive temporal synchronization (e.g. taps closely aligned to beats) across a wide range of tempi, spanning inter-beat-intervals ranging from approximately 250 ms to approximately 1 s. Precise temporal prediction and tempo flexibility enable tight coordination in group music-making and dance. Thus, these abilities are probably important to the social functions and psychological consequences of synchronized, collective musical behaviour.

In terms of neuroscience, BPS can be separated into perceptual and motor processes, which do not always co-occur because listeners can perceive a beat while remaining still (although). Yet brain imaging has revealed that even in the absence of movement, beat perception and motor system activity are linked. When humans perceive a beat in an auditory rhythm, several motor areas, including cortical premotor and subcortical motor control areas, are strongly active and interacting. Overall, the networks involved in beat perception without movement and in BPS have a great deal of overlap, and there is growing interest in the idea that motor system activity plays a causal role in predicting the timing of beats even when humans do not move to the beat.

According to one line of theorizing and computational modelling, BPS taps into ancient and widespread brain mechanisms of entrainment. These mechanisms involve endogenous cortical neural oscillations which become coupled to stimulus-driven oscillations of brain activity caused by sensory input. This view reflects an old intuition that musical rhythm processing is rooted in fundamental aspects of animal biology. Darwin voiced this intuition in The Descent of Man (1871), when he wrote ‘The perception, if not the enjoyment, of musical cadences and of rhythm is probably common to all animals, and no doubt depends on the common physiological nature of their nervous systems' [vol. 2, p. 333]. One appeal of the coupled oscillator framework is that it has been productively applied to diverse forms of biological entrainment, ranging from circadian rhythms to synchrony in insect choruses, and is thus attractive for its generality. Indeed, commenting on his model of adaptive coupled oscillators for the synchronization of rhythmic firefly flashing in tropical trees, Ermentrout [p. 584] noted ‘In a broader context, the equations we consider in this paper are similar to those describing an interconnected oscillatory neural network… The only significant difference between the firefly tree and an oscillatory neural network is in the time scale (milliseconds for the neural network and seconds for the firefly tree) and the space scale (microns for the neural system and meters for the insects).’ Another reason for the appeal of a coupled oscillator framework for BPS is research suggesting that neural oscillations have an important role to play in sensory, motor and cognitive processing across a range of species, including humans.

The coupled oscillator perspective on BPS entails the idea that many animal species should be capable of this form of rhythmic entrainment, since the purported brain mechanisms are very general. Yet BPS is notably absent in our most familiar animal companions, such as, dogs, cats and farm animals, even though these species have lived with humans and their music for thousands of years. Wilson & Cook have suggested that this does not reflect the lack of a capacity for BPS and is owing to other factors that inhibit BPS from developing spontaneously. These could include a lack of motivation for BPS, inattention to auditory rhythms because of their ecological irrelevance for the animal, or the fact that the rhythms of human music are not at tempi suited to the natural frequencies of the animal's movements. Consistent with this view, Cook and colleagues showed that a California sea lion (Zalophus californianus), which did not spontaneously engage in BPS when exposed to rhythmic music, could learn to synchronize her head bobs to a musical beat via operant training.

A very different hypothesis suggests that the capacity for BPS is limited to a narrow range of species. The ‘vocal learning and rhythmic synchronization hypothesis' proposed that BPS relies on specialized auditory–motor forebrain circuitry which originally evolved to serve complex vocal learning. In complex vocal learning, an animal requires auditory input to develop its normal species-specific vocalizations, because this input forms an auditory template which guides the development of the animal's own vocalizations. Complex vocal learning occurs in a few groups of mammals, including cetaceans, pinnipeds and humans uniquely among primates, and in three groups of birds: songbirds, parrots and hummingbirds.

The vocal learning hypothesis (VLH) predicts that only species with complex vocal learning are capable of BPS. This motivated a number of studies testing the hypothesis, including research demonstrating BPS in parrots, which supported it. However, the sea lion study mentioned above challenged the hypothesis, because sea lions do not show evidence of complex vocal learning. While there are open questions about whether the sea lion study refutes the VLH, as discussed in §3 below, there are other reasons to revisit the hypothesis. One such reason is the growing view that vocal learning should not be considered a dichotomous trait that animals have or lack, but a more continuous trait along which animals vary, or a modular trait with distinct subcomponents which can dissociate in different species. Another reason to revisit the hypothesis is that parrots appear to be the only nonhuman vocal learners to show spontaneous BPS to human music, despite the fact that songbirds have complex vocal learning and are sometimes extensively exposed to human music as pets. This is important because recent neural research has revealed that the parrot vocal learning system is more elaborate than that of songbirds. A final reason to revisit the VLH is the considerable amount of neurobiological research on beat processing and vocal learning which has taken place in the 15 years since the hypothesis was published.

Collectively, these factors suggest it is time to reconsider the hypothesis that complex vocal learning is related to the emergence of BPS in our species. The current paper addresses this goal and is organized as follows: I first clarify the scope, background and evolutionary implications of the original VLH. I next critically examine the data that challenge the hypothesis and then discuss the implications of a continuum/modular view of vocal learning for the hypothesis. Based on these considerations, I propose a revision of the hypothesis whereby an advanced form of vocal learning acted as a preadaptation for BPS. I then suggest that once this form of vocal learning evolved in our lineage, it interacted with ancestral primate rhythmic vocal behaviours to produce sporadic BPS as a fortuitous trait, i.e. intermittent BPS in response to periodic auditory rhythms. Finally, I propose that our capacity for BPS was sharpened by gene-culture coevolution, leading to evolved neural specializations for sustained BPS in humans. I describe the predictions this view makes in terms of neuroscience, cross-species studies and genetics, and close by discussing the larger significance of research on BPS for theoretical issues in evolutionary biology.


The original vocal learning and rhythmic synchronization hypothesis

In this section, I discuss the scope, background and evolutionary implications of the original vocal learning and rhythmic synchronization hypothesis (henceforth, VLH). Understanding the scope of the VLH is particularly important, because it explains why the hypothesis has not been challenged to date by any studies other than the sea lion research mentioned above.


Scope

The VLH focuses on BPS, which differs in several ways from well-known cases of rhythmic entrainment in other species, as noted in earlier publications. First, BPS includes the capacity to align rhythmic movement to a periodicity perceived in complex auditory rhythms, distinguishing it from synchronization to quasi-metronomic auditory patterns as seen in crickets and katydids. Second, BPS involves predictive and temporally precise alignment of movement with beats over a wide tempo range (e.g. from approximately 50% slower to 100% faster than one beat every 500 ms, as noted previously), contrasting with the narrower ranges of tempi over which some insects can synchronize their periodic sonic pulses in a phase-aligned fashion. Third, BPS often involves movements which are not themselves aimed at sound production, such as head bobbing or rhythmic movements of the arms or trunk, unlike rhythmic entrainment in insect acoustic chorusing, which is aimed at sound production.

To date, research on synchronization of movement to an auditory beat in monkeys has focused on metronomes or tempo-varying metronomes, and thus does not challenge the VLH, as a defining feature of BPS is the ability to synchronize to periodicities perceived in complex auditory rhythms. Nevertheless, such research has been a valuable source of neural data on how primate brains coordinate rhythmic movements with rhythmic sounds, and these data have informed neural theories of human beat perception. Interestingly, primate research suggests that monkeys and humans have similar capacities in terms of single-interval or ‘absolute’ timing, but differ in capacities related to beat-based or ‘relative’ timing, supporting the gradual audiomotor evolution hypothesis. This hypothesis is consistent with neural research on rhythm perception in monkeys which finds that they are sensitive to isochrony but do not appear to perceive a beat in complex rhythms.

In terms of predictive and tempo-flexible synchronization with a beat, a striking finding from monkey research is that when trained to synchronize movements to a metronome, their spontaneous tendency is to move reactively rather than predictively with respect to the stimulus, unlike humans. Recent research has shown monkeys can be trained to synchronize predictively if every predictive movement is rewarded, raising the idea that species may lie along a continuum of ability or proclivity for reactive versus predictive motor synchronization with a beat. Interestingly, while rats appear to share monkeys' spontaneous tendency for reactive motor synchronization to metronomes, Hattori et al. demonstrated that a chimpanzee showed spontaneous predictive synchronization of movement to a metronome. However, this only occurred at one tempo near the animal's spontaneous tapping tempo, and the animal showed no evidence of tempo flexibility. Research with a bonobo has shown that it occasionally synchronized predictively during concurrent rhythmic drumming with a human partner, but because the bonobo and human could see each other it is unclear if the animal is capable of BPS without support from visual rhythmic signals. This is a concern as research with other primates reveals that they are better at synchronizing movement with discretely timed visual versus auditory rhythms, unlike humans. Finally, despite anecdotal reports of spontaneous BPS in horses trotting to music without a rider onboard who might cue them to the beat, empirical work has not provided evidence of tempo flexibility in this behaviour, although methods for testing this have been developed and research is currently underway.


Background and evidence

When the VLH was proposed in 2006, there were no known cases of BPS in nonhuman animals, either spontaneous or trained, and it had been suggested that BPS was uniquely human. The VLH was motivated by a synthesis of behavioural, neural and cross-species research. Behavioural experiments had shown that humans were far better at extracting a beat and synchronizing to it in complex auditory versus visual rhythms matched in temporal structure. (Later work extended this auditory advantage to matched complex tactile rhythms.) This suggested that beat perception involved specialized auditory–motor processing. When considering evolutionary forces which might have strengthened auditory–motor processing in humans, complex vocal learning was a plausible candidate as it involves tight coupling between auditory input and motor output in order to match vocal movements to an auditory model. In terms of neural work, brain imaging had revealed that even in the absence of movement, beat perception engages a number of motor regions of the human brain, including premotor and basal ganglia (striatal) regions. Interestingly, it was known from research on birds that the evolution of complex vocal learning was associated with neural specializations in premotor and striatal regions. Collectively, these findings led to the VLH, which proposed that the neural circuitry for complex vocal learning was a necessary prerequisite for the capacity for BPS.

The key prediction of the VLH hypothesis was that vocal non-learning animals would not be capable of BPS, while only animals with complex vocal learning would have this capacity. (It is worth noting that while the VLH claimed the neural circuitry for complex vocal learning was a necessary foundation for BPS, it never claimed it was sufficient.) Research demonstrating BPS to music in large parrots, such as the sulfur-crested cockatoo ‘Snowball’, supported the hypothesis and experimental work on pecking to a metronome in small parrots (budgerigars) also proved consistent with the hypothesis, though synchronization to a beat in more complex auditory stimuli remains to be studied in smaller parrots.


Evolutionary implications

The VLH suggested that brains shaped by evolution for complex vocal learning had ‘BPS potential’ as a byproduct of their wiring. As parrots are not known to engage in BPS as part of their natural behaviour, the discovery of BPS in these animals supported the theoretical position that key components of human musicality rely on brain circuits that evolved for other reasons, and that humans have not evolved neural specializations for music processing.


A critical examination of data challenging the vocal learning hypothesis

To date, the only challenge to the VLH is from a study of a California sea lion (‘Ronan’) who was trained to synchronize her head bobs to a musical beat and who showed tempo flexibility in generalizing this ability to novel, untrained tempi ranging from 20% slower to 10% faster than the original tempo of 130 beats per minute (BPM). Because sea lions are not known to be complex vocal learners, this excellent study challenges the VLH. Yet several facts suggest that this study does not refute the VLH.

First, while sea lions are traditionally considered a vocally inflexible species, the upper limits of their vocal learning capacities are not yet known and have not been studied using modern methods applied to other pinnipeds. This is a concern because there is strong evidence of complex vocal learning in pinnipeds such as grey seals and harbour seals. Indeed, it is already known that adult sea lions are more vocally flexible than macaque monkeys, as the former, but not the latter, can be trained to vocalize on command. (Interestingly, juvenile macaques (Macaca mulatta) can be trained to vocalize on cue, but unlike sea lions this ability is lost as they grow into adulthood, even as they retain the ability to make non-vocal movements on command.) Given sea lions' voluntary control of vocalization, it would be interesting to see if they can be trained to modulate spectral or temporal aspects of their calls, which would indicate even greater vocal flexibility.

Second, Ronan was tested as a juvenile, between 3 and 4 years of age, before the age of sexual maturity in this species, which is around 4–5. Juveniles in some mammalian and avian species are more vocally flexible than adults. Furthermore, related to a point made by Schachner, the intensive operant training Ronan received in synchronizing movements to sounds (first with metronomes, later with music), combined with the heightened plasticity of juvenile mammalian brains, raises the question of whether Ronan developed unusually strong auditory–motor forebrain circuitry compared to normal sea lions. This could be addressed via structural brain imaging of auditory–motor forebrain connections in Ronan compared to conspecifics without early auditory–motor training, using recently developed in vivo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) protocols for sea lions.

Third, as noted by Merker et al., the way Ronan synchronized her movements to music was unlike human BPS in an important respect. Specifically, there was a strong change in the phase relationship of her head bobs to the musical beat as a function of tempo. When tested for her ability to synchronize at novel tempi, Ronan's head bobs lagged considerably behind the beat by an average of approximately 90o at the fastest tempo (143 BPM) and occurred considerably before the beat by an average of approximately 60o at the slowest tempo (117 BPM) (fig. 5 of). This is unlike human BPS, in which rhythmic movements and beats remain much more phase aligned across a comparable range of tempo variation. Ronan's pattern of phase leads and lags is reminiscent of an oscillator with a single intrinsic period driven by nearby frequencies. Subsequent elegant work with Ronan studying her synchronization to metronomes with phase or tempo perturbations, and modelling her behaviour with an oscillator capable of period and phase correction, showed that Ronan exhibited a low degree of period coupling to the stimulus, below the range of period coupling reported in prior human studies. This suggests her synchronization abilities may reflect different mechanisms from those used by humans, perhaps relying more heavily on subcortical circuits.

Based on the above points, I believe that rejecting the VLH on the basis of Ronan's rhythmic entrainment abilities is premature. Nevertheless, the pioneering studies of Cook, Rouse and colleagues are an important challenge to the VLH and motivate further work on pinnipeds' rhythmic synchronization abilities. As a clade with a broad range of vocal flexibility across species, pinnipeds are a particularly promising group for studying phylogenetic relationships between vocal learning and rhythmic synchronization in mammals.


Vocal learning as a continuous or modular trait

The original VLH proposed that complex vocal learning provided the evolutionary and neural foundations for BPS. As noted above, complex vocal learners require auditory input to develop their normal species-specific vocalizations, because this input acts as a template that guides vocal development. Complex vocal learning is associated with specializations of auditory–motor forebrain circuitry which support sophisticated auditory–motor neural interactions. This type of vocal learning can be distinguished from limited vocal learning, where the latter is ‘the ability to fine-tune acoustic features of species-specific vocalizations that can develop in the absence of auditory input because innate motor programs can generate the species-specific pattern’ [p. 3]. While humans are the only primate with complex vocal learning, limited vocal learning occurs more broadly in primates, including in chimpanzees).

The distinction between complex and limited vocal learning highlights the fact that vocal learning is not a binary trait that animals have or lack. Indeed, this has been known for some time. Songbird researchers have long distinguished between closed-ended and open-ended complex vocal learners, where the former, such as zebra finches, do not modify their repertoire after the initial song learning, while the latter, such as European starlings, continue to modify their repertoire as adults. Furthermore, complex vocal learners can differ in other ways, including in whether they copy a tutor model or improvise on tutor songs, and whether they ‘copy only tutor songs that fit tightly constrained species-specific parameters or copy essentially anything they hear’.

Of direct relevance to the VLH, recent theoretical and empirical work suggests a continuum in vocal learning capacities across species, or regards vocal learning as comprised multiple distinct abilities that may be targeted independently by evolutionary pressures. These include the ability to flexibly coordinate the timing of innate vocalizations in social interactions with conspecifics, such as in the antiphonal calling seen in marmosets and singing mice, and the ability to modify vocalizations as a function of social and auditory experience, or ‘vocal plasticity’. Vocal plasticity is the most relevant for the VLH, because substantial modification of the spectral and temporal properties of vocalizations based on auditory experience requires extensive auditory–motor crosstalk in the forebrain, and extensive, precise auditory–motor cortical crosstalk is a foundation of BPS. In this regard, the ‘vocal learning continuum hypothesis' is of particular interest, as it suggests that vocal plasticity varies in a quasi-continuous way across vertebrates. As shown in, the hypothesis groups parrots and humans together as high vocal learners at a far end of this continuum, with greater vocal plasticity than complex vocal learners.

This placement makes intuitive sense because it has long been known that parrots have extraordinary vocal plasticity, being able to imitate human speech and other sounds with high fidelity. In support of placing them in a distinct category relative to other complex vocal learners, recent neural research using gene expression and neural tract tracing has revealed that parrots have a uniquely elaborated vocal learning system, consisting of a ‘core’ system similar to that found in songbirds, and a ‘shell’ system unique to parrots.

While the relative contributions of the core and shell systems to parrot vocal plasticity remain to be understood, one intriguing possibility is that these distinct yet interconnected systems facilitate independent control of the syrinx (the avian analogue of the mammalian larynx) and tongue during vocalization. It has been found that parrots modulate both of these anatomical structures to shape vocal sounds, whereas in songbirds the acoustic structure of songs is largely produced by the syrinx rather than the tongue. Regardless of the precise functional significance of the elaborated vocal control system of parrots, Chakraborty & Jarvis propose that it enhances vocal–auditory–motor integration compared to the songbird system and suggest that this is related to parrots' abilities to synchronize body movements to musical rhythms.

The discovery of a dual pathway system for vocal learning and control in parrots is fascinating in light of an influential model of human speech processing in which the sensorimotor control of speech relies on two pathways within a complex ‘dorsal stream’ which bidirectionally connects cortical premotor and auditory regions via the temporo-parietal cortex. These two pathways are probably important to our ability to independently control the larynx and tongue in shaping vocal sounds. a,b shows a schematic of this model, which distinguishes dorsal and ventral streams in spoken language processing, and which has two pathways within the dorsal stream, labelled dorso-dorsal and dorsoventral. In this model, dorsal stream pathways are involved in speech sound-to-articulation mapping and ventral stream pathways are involved in mapping perceived sounds onto lexical representations. b shows a more elaborate diagram of dorsal stream pathways based on a review of long-distance neural connections involved in auditory language processing.

Relevant to the VLH, neural studies in humans indicate the involvement of dorsal stream regions in BPS and in beat perception without overt movement, including the dorsal premotor cortex and parietal cortex, which are connected by the blue pathway in c. Patel & Iversen proposed that dorsal stream pathways are crucial for communicating temporal predictions about beat timing from premotor to secondary auditory regions, via the parietal cortex. Based on prior neuroanatomical research in monkeys, Patel and Iversen further proposed that a specific part of the dorsal stream is much more strongly developed in humans than in monkeys owing to the evolution of vocal learning in our lineage, namely the orange fibre tract in c linking auditory regions in posterior superior temporal gyrus to regions around the angular gyrus. The relative weakness of this connection in monkeys could help explain why they do not spontaneously move predictively when synchronizing to auditory rhythms.

Stepping back to the larger picture, the additional neural regions and pathways for vocal learning in parrots compared to complex vocal learning songbirds are intriguing when juxtaposed with the complexity of the human dorsal auditory stream, which is involved in vocal learning and BPS. This juxtaposition, combined with the fact that only parrots and humans show spontaneous BPS to music, suggest that spontaneous BPS has an evolutionary relationship to high vocal learning rather than to complex vocal learning more generally.


The revised vocal learning and rhythmic synchronization hypothesis

The original VLH proposed that the capacity for BPS relied on neural substrates that first evolved to serve complex vocal learning. Based on the considerations reviewed above, here I propose the revised vocal learning and rhythmic synchronization hypothesis or ‘rVLH’. Like the VLH, the rVLH is focused on BPS, which differs in several ways from synchronous rhythmic behaviours seen in insects and many other species, as previously discussed. However, unlike the original VLH, the rVLH shifts the focus from complex vocal learning as a prerequisite for BPS. Rather, it seeks to explain why spontaneous BPS occurs in ‘high vocal learners’ such as humans and parrots, who have a behaviourally and neurally more elaborate form of vocal learning than complex vocal learners (and §4 above). The rVLH proposes that high vocal learning is a preadaptation for spontaneous, sporadic BPS to periodic auditory rhythms. This is because:

high vocal learning provides intrinsic rewards for predicting the temporal structure of complex auditory sequences, because such predictions scaffold vocal learning of such sequences;

temporal predictions about auditory periodicities in the hundreds-of-milliseconds range are made via action-like neural processes in forebrain motor planning regions; and

in high vocal learners, these motor planning regions are in tight reciprocal communication with forebrain auditory regions throughout life.

The first reason above is based on cognitive research on statistical learning, a form of implicit learning without external reinforcement which involves detecting patterns and regularities in the environment. Research suggests that statistical learning of auditory sequences is an active process in which predictions are continuously formed and compared to incoming input in order to update mental models of sequence structure. Santolin & Saffran point out that statistical learning of auditory patterns by humans begins in infancy as part of language acquisition and also occurs in nonhuman animals. Notably, they argue that ‘statistical learning is likely to drive vocal learning in organisms that must learn to produce structured vocalizations’ (p. 59). These authors also discuss research indicating that parrots surpass songbirds in the ability to learn underlying patterns in sound sequences. Point (i) above asserts that part of the cognitive system of high vocal learners is a mechanism that provides them with an intrinsic reward for accurately predicting the temporal structure of such sequences, to facilitate learning of this structure. This relates to an idea raised later in this paper, namely that selection on the motivation for BPS can be conceptually distinguished from the selection on the capacity for BPS.

The second reason in the above list is based on recent theorizing about the role of the motor system in predicting timing in periodic auditory rhythms. This theorizing draws heavily on neurophysiological research on rhythmic timing in nonhuman primates. The involvement of the motor system in such predictions, combined with the above idea of intrinsic rewards for such predictions, provides an explanation for spontaneous rhythmic movement to auditory rhythms in high vocal learners.

The third reason in the above list is based on the importance of strong reciprocal connections between forebrain premotor and auditory regions for high vocal learning and for BPS. Circuit-level research on the role of such connections in vocal learning has only been conducted in songbirds, who have complex vocal learning. Because high vocal learners surpass complex vocal learners in vocal flexibility and in the neural complexity of their vocal learning system (cf. §4), the strength and plasticity of such auditory–motor interactions is probably stronger in high vocal learners than in complex vocal learners. The rVLH argues that these strong connections allow rapid two-way communication between forebrain auditory and motor planning regions, scaffolding the spontaneous predictive movements to auditory rhythms seen in high vocal learners.

The rVLH's claim that high vocal learning is a preadaptation for spontaneous, sporadic BPS to periodic auditory rhythms requires clarification of some terms. The first is ‘preadaptation’, which is ‘an evolutionary change that adapts organisms to one set of environmental conditions but in addition and quite fortuitously positions them for a new surge in adaptive evolution’ [p. 13]. Examples of preadaptation abound in evolutionary biology, as evidenced by research in palaeontology, developmental biology and genetics. Feathers, for example, were a preadaptation for flight, evolving in therapod dinosaurs long before flight evolved in their avian descendants. Feathers originally served non flight-related functions such as thermal insulation, conferring flight-related aerodynamic benefits as a fortuitous consequence of their structure. Only later were the flight-related properties of feathers a direct target of natural selection, resulting in changes in feather structure supporting powered flight. Just as the aerodynamic properties of early feathers were a fortuitous byproduct of their structure, the rVLH suggests that a capacity for sporadic BPS was a fortuitous byproduct of the neural circuitry for high vocal learning.

A second term requiring clarification is ‘sporadic.’ Sporadic BPS is the type of BPS observed in parrots, whereby rhythmic movements are phase aligned to an auditory beat during sporadic ‘bouts’ of several seconds surrounded by stretches of little movement or of rhythmic movement not synchronized to the beat. This is what was observed in Snowball, who exhibited BPS in bouts with a median of 16 head bobs, and tended to gravitate to a head bob tempo near 126 BPM during unsynchronized movement to music. When presented with 10 different novel tempi relative to the original musical tempo of 109 BPM, Snowball synchronized in a phase-aligned manner at nine of these tempi spanning 98–130 BPM. While statistical analyses showed that this amount of synchronization was very unlikely to happen by chance, Snowball's sporadic BPS is distinct from the sustained BPS observed in adult humans, where rhythmic movements remain phase aligned to a beat for much longer periods, even in musically untrained individuals. Interestingly, sporadic BPS may be more representative of how young children move to music.

The third term that requires clarification is ‘spontaneous’, meaning BPS that emerges without explicit instruction or physical rewards, as observed in humans and in parrots. Snowball the cockatoo, for example, was never explicitly trained to move rhythmically to music using food rewards, unlike the sea lion Ronan. Of course, parrots, like human children, often receive positive attention from human adults for BPS, and such attention is doubtless rewarding in species that form strong and lasting social bonds, as parrots and humans both do. Indeed, such social rewards may amplify BPS behaviour. However, by focusing on intrinsic rewards, the rVLH entails the idea that attention and social rewards alone cannot account for spontaneous BPS to music. This distinguishes it from a proposal made by Wilson & Cook [p. 1655], who suggest that parrots engage in BPS because ‘these birds bond with their caretakers and are highly sensitive to social reward, making it particularly likely that they will pick-up behaviours that humans find amusing’. A problem with this proposal is that dogs bond strongly with their carers and are highly sensitive to social reward, yet do not show spontaneous BPS to music.

A focus on the intrinsic rewards of temporal prediction in sequence processing bears a resemblance to a suggestion by Merker that vocal learners have an intrinsic motivation for high-fidelity copying of sounds, because such copying is needed for vocal learning and is typically not reinforced by immediate external rewards. Merker refers to this motivational mechanism as a ‘conformal motive’ and suggests that in parrots this motivation to copy could extend to non-vocal body movements, leading them to imitate humans moving to the beat of music. Consistent with this view, parrots can imitate non-vocal movements. However, an intrinsic motivation to imitate non-vocal movements also seems to occur in chimpanzees. For example, a juvenile chimpanzee observing an adult crack a nut with an anvil stone and pounding stone will imitate the adult's actions without any reinforcement and often without success. Yet despite this intrinsic motivation to imitate movements, among the cases of enculturated chimpanzees raised by humans and exposed to music during their development, there are no reports of spontaneous BPS in these animals.

Before closing this section, it is worth emphasizing that while the rVLH claims that the neural circuity for high vocal learning is a necessary prerequisite for spontaneous BPS, it does not claim that it is sufficient. To date, parrots and humans are the only species known to engage in BPS spontaneously. In addition to high vocal learning, parrots and humans also share the ability to imitate non-vocal movements and a tendency to live in complex social groups and form long-term bonds. The extent to which these factors also act as preadaptations for spontaneous BPS merits further research.


The primate heritage in the origins of human beat perception and synchronization

The rVLH suggests that a brain adapted for high vocal learning will fortuitously show a predisposition for spontaneous, sporadic BPS. Yet for BPS to occur, exposure to rhythmic sound is needed. In the case of parrots living with humans, human music provides such rhythms. Assuming human ancestors had evolved high vocal learning, what would be the source of rhythmic sounds in their environment? Research on chimpanzees and bonobos, the closest living relatives of humans, shows that rhythmic vocalizations are part of their natural social behaviour. These vocalizations include pant hooting in chimpanzees and high-hooting in bonobos, and both species show evidence of temporal coordination with conspecifics when making these vocalizations. Furthermore, short episodes of rhythmic drumming on tree buttresses are part of chimpanzee display behaviour in the wild, and an untrained chimpanzee in captivity has been filmed drumming steadily on a barrel for more than 30 s. Thus, it seems plausible that rhythmically structured sounds produced in social contexts were present in the last common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees/bonobos. The rVLH suggests that such sounds, in the context of a human ancestor that was a high vocal learner, could have led to spontaneous, sporadic BPS.

In light of this suggestion, a recent study by Hattori & Tomonaga is of particular interest. These researchers found that enculturated chimpanzees exposed to complex rhythms made rhythmic rocking and swaying movements. These movements were not entrained to the beat and occurred whether the rhythms were beat-based or not, thus differing from BPS in important ways. Nevertheless, the movements seemed to reflect positive engagement, were made without any reinforcement and did not resemble distress responses or stereotyped behaviours sometimes seen in poorly treated animals. Furthermore, despite the fact that the chimpanzees were free to leave the testing area at any time, one male chimpanzee stayed closer to the sound source when the sounds were on versus off, suggesting attraction to the stimulus. Furthermore, this chimpanzee also made a few different types of rhythmic movements in response to rhythmic sounds, including head bobbing and hand clapping. When combined with field observations of chimpanzee ‘rain dancing’ (ritualized movements in response to loud sounds such as rain or waterfalls), this study suggests that a predisposition to move rhythmically to loud, complex sound patterns may have been in place in human ancestors prior to the evolution of high vocal learning. In the framework of the rVLH, this would facilitate the occurrence of sporadic BPS once high vocal learning evolved.


Human beat perception and synchronization and gene-culture coevolution

There is growing evidence that gene-culture coevolution has shaped some important human biological traits. Convincing cases coming from biological adaptations to diet, including the evolution of lactose tolerance around 10 000 years ago in certain populations that practiced dairying, and much more ancient and species-wide anatomical changes associated with the control of fire and associated dietary changes. In this section, I suggest that BPS has been the locus of cognitive gene-culture coevolution, with a gradual transition from sporadic to sustained BPS in human ancestors leading to evolved neural specializations for sustained BPS in humans. (Recall that in sporadic BPS, as observed in parrots, accurate synchronization to a beat occurs in short bouts of a few seconds separated by stretches of little movement or of unsynchronized rhythmic movement. In sustained BPS, accurate synchronization is maintained over longer stretches of time, as seen in a dance around the world today.) The current proposal aligns with modern theories suggesting a prominent role for gene-culture coevolution in the emergence of human musicality.

The previous section argued that sporadic BPS arose fortuitously when the neural circuitry for high vocal learning evolved in a human ancestor that already had rhythmic social vocalizations. Below I suggest why a transition from sporadic to sustained BPS occurred via gene-culture coevolution, and then outline predictions of this view in terms of neuroscience, cross-species studies and genetics. I close this section by briefly discussing two important issues for future work in this area.


Factors leading to gene-culture coevolution for beat perception and synchronization

For BPS to become a target of gene-culture coevolution, early humans would first have to employ sporadic BPS in a cultural behaviour that became widespread. Here, I would like to draw an analogy to the early use of fire use in human cultures. Fire use has a long history in the genus Homo, dating back at least 1.5 million years and is widely believed to have led to changes in human biology via gene-culture coevolution, including anatomical and physiological adaptations to eating cooked food. Current research suggests that fire use began with early humans taking advantage of ‘fortuitous fire’, such as from lightning strikes, sometimes transporting it to safe places such as caves. The larger point is that fire use probably became widespread in human culture long before the ability to make fire at will and long before fire-driven gene-culture coevolution. This illustrates Richersen et al.'s [p. 8985] point that ‘Culture normally evolves more rapidly than genes, creating novel environments that expose genes to new selective pressures’.

In the case of fire, the spread of fire use based on scavenging fire from natural sources is easy to understand owing to controlled fire's use, e.g. in keeping warm and fending off predators. It is less clear why early humans would use and spread behaviours based on sporadic BPS. If sporadic BPS first emerged in the context of rhythmic social vocalizations in an ancestor with high vocal learning, as suggested in §6 above, perhaps early humans used sporadic BPS for social purposes. For example, Mehr et al. have suggested that synchronized rhythmic vocalizations and body movements could act as signals of coalition strength aimed at other groups, and Merker et al. suggest synchronized rhythmic vocalizations could have a ‘beacon-like’ effect, attracting potential mates and deterring rivals from a distance. If sporadic BPS supported such behaviours and the behaviours led to advantages in survival or reproduction, then displays using sporadic BPS could have spread through human groups via purely cultural dynamics, e.g. via imitation of more successful groups.

Yet if this occurred, why would gene-culture coevolution favour a transition to sustained BPS? Fisher & Ridley [p. 930] have suggested that ‘The smallest, most trivial new habit adopted by a hominid species could—if advantageous—have led to the selection of genomic variations that sharpened that habit’. A possible advantage of increasingly sustained (versus sporadic) BPS in social contexts is that it scaffolds sustained interpersonal synchrony, which can in turn influence subsequent social behaviour. A large body of empirical work finds that group members engaging in sustained interpersonal synchrony are subsequently more cooperative and feel more socially connected to each other, and may also show more in-group conformity and obedience. This may partly reflect the blurring of self-other boundaries owing to the way sustained interpersonal synchrony interacts with neural mechanisms of action, perception and prediction in the brain. If these social effects were more pronounced when episodes of interpersonal synchrony were more sustained, and facilitated behaviours outside of musical contexts that promoted survival, then gene-culture coevolution could favour genetic variants enhancing the capacity and proclivity for sustained BPS. Here, ‘capacity’ refers to the neural mechanisms supporting sustained BPS, while ‘proclivity’ refers to neural mechanisms that make sustained BPS rewarding, especially in social contexts. (Selection on the proclivity for BPS, independent of selection on capacity, has been suggested previously.) With these ideas in mind, I turn to the predictions that emerge from this proposal.


Predictions of the hypothesis: neuroscience, cross-species studies and genetics

Several predictions emerge from the hypothesis that our current capacity for BPS is a product of gene-culture coevolution which refined a preadaptation for BPS rooted in high vocal learning. Because this hypothesis combines the revised rVLH with the claim of subsequent gene-culture coevolution, I will refer to it as the rVLH, using italics to distinguish it from the rVLH as outlined in §5 above, which makes no claim for gene-culture coevolution. Importantly, the predictions listed below are not made by the view that human rhythmic synchronization to a beat reflects widespread entrainment mechanisms with no special relation to the auditory–motor neural specializations of high vocal learners.


Human neuroscience

The rVLH predicts significant overlap in the neural circuitry of BPS and high vocal learning in regions and pathways of the auditory dorsal stream, because BPS is seen as an evolutionary offshoot of high vocal learning. Such specialization could occur via evolutionary mechanisms of brain area duplication or brain pathway duplication/elaboration. Note that ‘overlap’ does not mean ‘identity’. Owing to evolved neural specializations, the rVLH suggests that there should be some neural populations or pathways which show selective involvement in BPS versus vocal learning. One way to conceptualize this combination of sharing and specialization is suggested by recent computational modelling work on the neural relationship between music and speech processing. In a study in which hierarchical artificial neural networks were optimized for speech and music recognition, the best-performing networks showed substantial shared processing at early stages, followed by separate speech and music regions and pathways at higher stages. This organization is consistent with neural research suggesting that music and speech processing have significant overlap in subcortical and primary auditory cortical regions yet also have neurally specialized processing in non-primary auditory cortex.

The rVLH's prediction of neural overlap between BPS and high vocal learning is consistent with studies finding links between childhood speech-related abilities and non-linguistic beat processing. At the same time, the fact that the rVLH posits evolved neural specializations for BPS is consistent with the existence of congenital ‘beat deafness’, in which individuals with normal hearing and musical pitch perception have severe problems perceiving and/or synchronizing with a musical beat.

The rVLH further predicts that human developmental neuroscience will reveal experience-expectant plasticity in circuits underlying the capacity for sustained BPS. Finally, as noted at the end of the previous subsection, the rVLH suggests that natural selection acted not only on the capacity for sustained BPS, but also the proclivity or motivation to engage in this behaviour. The hypothesis thus calls for research on the relationship between BPS and reward-related activity in the brain. In particular, the rVLH suggests that the neural rewards humans experience when engaging in BPS-based interpersonal synchrony may reflect evolved neural specializations in the striatum, which is involved both in beat perception and reward.


Cross-species studies

The rVLH predicts that the more advanced a species' vocal learning capacities, the more its behavioural capacity for, and neural mechanisms of, BPS will resemble those of humans. Thus for example, it predicts that grey seals, which have recently been shown to have remarkable vocal mimicry abilities will outperform less vocally flexible pinnipeds in studies of BPS. Similarly, it predicts that cetaceans with advanced vocal learning abilities, such as belugas and bottlenose dolphins, will outperform less vocally flexible cetaceans on tests of BPS. Counterintuitively, the rVLH predicts the brain mechanisms of rhythmic synchronization to a beat are more similar in humans and parrots than in humans and sea lions, owing to the convergently evolved similarities of parrots and humans in vocal learning capacities, and despite the much closer phylogenetic proximity of humans and sea lions.

In terms of neuroanatomy, because the rVLH posits that the advanced degree of auditory integration with motor circuits seen in high vocal learners is critical for spontaneous BPS and also posits that the auditory dorsal stream is a key site of this enhanced integration, it makes predictions for research on primate comparative neuroanatomy. Specifically, it predicts significant differences in auditory dorsal stream pathways important for BPS in humans and homologous pathways in other primates owing to the limited vocal learning abilities of those species. For example, the rVLH predicts that connections between the secondary auditory cortex and parietal cortex (red pathway linking superior temporal gyrus and parietal cortex in c, see §5) will be much stronger in humans than in monkeys or chimpanzees. This prediction can be tested using structural MRI methods such as diffusion tensor imaging, which are currently used to compare human, monkey and chimpanzee cortical connectivity.


Genetics

For BPS to be subject to gene-culture coevolution, it must have a heritable genetic substrate. Recently, a large-scale genome-wide association study with over 600 000 participants found 67 genetic loci associated with BPS, indicating a heritable, polygenic genetic substrate. That is, BPS is a complex or ‘polygenic’ trait, in which interactions between genetic variants at different loci probably play an important role, rather than a ‘Mendelian’ trait influenced by variation at a single gene. The results of this study were virtually unchanged by controlling for more general tests of cognition, consistent with results from the twin literature which show that the genetics of rhythm are not solely attributable to general cognitive effects. Importantly, in this new study, genetic variance explained only about 13–16% of phenotypic variance in the beat synchronization trait, indicating that variance in BPS ability is genetically influenced but far from genetically determined.

The rVLH makes three distinct predictions about the genetic substrate of BPS. First, like the original VLH, it predicts genetic relationships between BPS and vocal learning. Supporting this prediction, new research finds that the genetic architecture of BPS is significantly enriched for genes expressed during song production in songbird Area X, a key nucleus for vocal learning in avian brains, homologous to human basal ganglia. This is of interest as the basal ganglia plays an important role in human beat perception. Second, since the rVLH proposes there was natural selection for sustained BPS after sporadic BPS emerged as a preadaptation, it predicts BPS will show independent genetic variation in humans after variance related to vocal learning abilities is accounted for. Third, the rVLH predicts that quantitative signatures of natural selection in the genome will be found in the genetic substrate of BPS. In this regard, it is interesting that two loci associated with BPS in the study of Niarchou et al. are in ‘human accelerated regions’, i.e. regions of the genome that are strikingly different from many other species, including our closest living primate relatives.

As a theory of gene-culture coevolution, the rVLH also motivates research on existing small-scale cultures which have traditionally had a very little collective, synchronized music-making. In cases where such cultures have had limited gene flow with other groups, the rVLH predicts that individuals in those cultures will show signatures of relaxed selection on genetic variants supporting sustained BPS.


Two issues for future research

A key issue for future research on BPS and gene-culture coevolution is a more complete spelling out of the proposed feedback cycles between culture and genes in the evolution of BPS. For example, relationships between collective musical synchrony, behaviour outside of musical contexts, cultural group selection and individual-level selection remain to specified in detail. One goal of such theorizing is generating testable predictions distinct from those made by ‘classical’ evolutionary theories of musicality not involving interactions between cultural innovation and biological evolution.

Another issue for future work is broadening the lens when considering possible evolved neural specializations for BPS. The current paper has focused on forebrain circuitry as a site of such specializations, including cortical auditory–motor connections and motivation/reward circuitry in the striatum. Yet when humans engage in BPS, these forebrain circuits interact with lower brain regions, creating loops that include the midbrain, cerebellum, brainstem and spinal cord. Evolutionary changes relevant to BPS may not be restricted the forebrain, and future work will profit from an examination of BPS-relevant regions and connections throughout these loops.


Conclusion

This paper has reviewed and revised the hypothesis that the evolutionary foundations of human BPS lie in our capacity for complex vocal learning. On the basis of behavioural and neural research on vocal learning and on beat processing, the paper argues that an advanced form of vocal learning, convergently evolved in humans and parrots, acts as a preadaptation for sporadic BPS. It further argues that in humans, mechanisms of gene-culture coevolution transformed this preadaptation into a genuine neural adaptation for sustained BPS. This larger significance of this proposal for evolutionary biology is that it outlines a scenario of cognitive gene-culture coevolution which makes testable predictions for neuroscience, cross-species research and genetics. To date, convincing examples of gene-culture coevolution in humans come from studies of non-neural physiology or anatomy, e.g. related to digestion and diet. While there is great interest and promise in the idea that gene-culture coevolution has shaped human mental abilities, including language, we currently lack compelling biological evidence for cognitive gene-culture coevolution. The study of BPS has the potential to provide such evidence and could thus pave the way for other studies examining how biology and culture intertwined in the evolution of the human mind.


Data accessibility

This article has no additional data.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

This article has no additional data.


Mapping between sound, brain and behaviour: four-level framework for understanding rhythm processing in humans and non-human primates

Tomas Lenc, Hugo Merchant, Peter E. Keller, Henkjan Honing, Manuel Varlet, Sylvie Nozaradan — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2021. PMC8380981, CC BY 4.0.

Humans perceive and spontaneously move to one or several levels of periodic pulses (a meter, for short) when listening to musical rhythm, even when the sensory input does not provide prominent periodic cues to their temporal location. Here, we review a multi-levelled framework to understanding how external rhythmic inputs are mapped onto internally represented metric pulses. This mapping is studied using an approach to quantify and directly compare representations of metric pulses in signals corresponding to sensory inputs, neural activity and behaviour (typically body movement). Based on this approach, recent empirical evidence can be drawn together into a conceptual framework that unpacks the phenomenon of meter into four levels. Each level highlights specific functional processes that critically enable and shape the mapping from sensory input to internal meter. We discuss the nature, constraints and neural substrates of these processes, starting with fundamental mechanisms investigated in macaque monkeys that enable basic forms of mapping between simple rhythmic stimuli and internally represented metric pulse. We propose that human evolution has gradually built a robust and flexible system upon these fundamental processes, allowing more complex levels of mapping to emerge in musical behaviours. This approach opens promising avenues to understand the many facets of rhythmic behaviours across individuals and species.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Synchrony and rhythm interaction: from the brain to behavioural ecology’.


Meter is fundamental for temporal coordination

Humans across cultures engage in collective musical behaviours such as ensemble performance and dance, which involve precise temporal coordination of actions between individuals. In such scenarios, information used for coordination is delivered through dynamically changing acoustic (as well as visual and tactile) inputs that stimulate the sensory organs. Importantly, both the auditory input and behavioural output can take the form of non-periodic (i.e. non-repeating), mutually distinct sequences, which supports the emergence of complex creative behaviours. In a string quartet, for example, each musician produces a complex series of movements that may not systematically repeat (i.e. are not necessarily periodic). Still, these movements are precisely coordinated in time with the acoustic input the musician receives, which comprises a complex (again, not necessarily periodic) aggregate sound sequence of the whole ensemble. A powerful way to coordinate such signals involves using an internal temporal reference that is largely invariant to the particular pattern of dynamic changes in the sensory input, yet can be shared and synchronized across individuals.

A fundamental form of temporal reference is based on an internal representation of a pulse, i.e. a series of regularly recurring (periodic) points in time. In humans, such an internal representation of pulse is commonly established when listening to rhythmic stimuli ranging from strictly periodic metronomes to complex musical performances. Moreover, humans often simultaneously represent multiple pulses with different periods arranged in a nested set, a phenomenon referred to as meter perception (electronic supplementary material, figure S1). This nested set of metric pulses thus represents an internal temporal reference that can be used by a number of processes including movement planning, dynamic attention, anticipation of features of the sensory input or encoding of time intervals making up the rhythmic input.

Traditionally, different terms were used to refer to one periodic level within the perceived metric set as the beat (or tactus in music theory), and the other, slower and faster pulses, as grouping or subdivision of the beat periodic level. Relatedly, meter is often described as a hierarchical structure, where the beat serves as a central time reference. However, as an operational definition for the purpose of the current review, the term ‘metric pulse’ will be used to refer to any constituent periodic level within a meter. In other words, we acknowledge that the number of periodic levels (i.e. pulses) in the perceived meter can differ across individuals and contexts (and perhaps in certain cases, only one periodic level can be perceived). But here this will be conceptualized as a quantitative (one, two or N periodic levels) rather than qualitative (categorizing pulses as beat, grouping, subdivision) distinction. Such an approach does not exclude the possibility of hierarchical organization in the way metric pulses are internally represented, but rather reduces the number of assumptions to allow for the development of a more general framework.

It is important to stress that in musical behaviours, the mapping between internally represented metric pulses and the rhythmic modulations of physical signals is typically not one-to-one (a; electronic supplementary material, figure S1). Rather, different meters (i.e. with different periods and phase) can be perceived with the same rhythm, and the same meter (i.e. characterized by the same periods and phase) can be perceived with different rhythms. An example of such many-to-one mapping is when listeners perceive the same meter across different rhythms played by a musician at different time points during a performance. Another example of many-to-one mapping is when dancing a waltz (requiring representation of a meter where pulse periods have 1: 3 relationship) to music as acoustically distinct as Strauss' The Blue Danube and Metallica's Nothing Else Matters. At the same time, physically identical stimuli can induce representation of different meters across individuals or contexts, which can be described as a form of one-to-many mapping.

In the last decades, an important aim of psychology and cognitive neuroscience has been to describe the nature of the processes that enable and shape the mapping between rhythmic sensory inputs and internal representation of metric pulses, to uncover their neural basis, how they develop over the lifetime and to what extent they are present in other species. To this aim, it is critical to use a valid and comparable method to measure the internal representation of metric pulses across these different contexts.


Approaches to measure internal representation of meter

Similar to other perceptual phenomena, the internal representation of meter cannot be measured directly in individuals. Instead, a variety of methods have been developed to infer this representation indirectly, based on a range of assumptions. A particularly fruitful family of methods has been based on analysing dynamic fluctuations of behavioural and neural signals in real time, as the individual is stimulated with rhythmic sensory inputs.


Approaches based on measuring secondary processes

One particularly influential approach to estimate the internal representation of meter is based on measuring the dynamics of a secondary perceptual or cognitive process. This approach is equivalent to probing whether (and how) the brain represents, for example, time, space or semantic content, by quantifying whether the system can use these dimensions to guide processes such as overt movement, attentional selection or expectations. Using such an approach to probe the internal representation of meter rests on three critical assumptions: (i) that the secondary process dynamically changes over time, (ii) these dynamic changes can be measured with appropriate temporal resolution, and (iii) these dynamic changes are coupled one-to-one with the internally represented metric pulses.

A commonly used process that may meet these assumptions is overt body movement. This is owing to the intrinsic connection between meter and movement in musical contexts across cultures, and the ability to directly measure movement dynamics in real time using motion capture equipment. Crucially, the assumption about one-to-one coupling between movement and internally represented metric pulse can be satisfied via instructions. In other words, it is straightforward to ask human participants to directly move along with a periodic pulse they spontaneously perceive when listening to the rhythmic input (note that this is not conventional for many musical styles, e.g. in swing or Second Line music, enculturated listeners commonly move in antiphase with one of the perceived metric pulses by clapping or snapping fingers at mid-points between successive pulse positions). However, such instructions cannot be given to infants or non-human animals, where researchers must rely on one-to-one coupling of movement and internal metric pulses emerging spontaneously, an assumption that may depend on the nature of the sensory input. Moreover, it is important to keep in mind that biomechanical constraints which limit movement at fast rates may not directly apply to the internal pulse representation. This is evidenced by the ability to internally represent faster pulses that can be directly executed through stable movement. Yet, such considerations do not contradict the wide range of evidence suggesting that the internal representation of a metric pulse might be implemented within neural circuits involved in motor control. Rather, the aim is to point out that in certain contexts, the actual executed movement sequences might not match this internal representation one-to-one, and that this possibility should be considered when using movement to infer internal meter representation.

Besides movement, it has been shown that several other psychological processes may use the internal representation of meter as a temporal reference. These include dynamic fluctuations of attentional sensitivity or dynamic attention, and predictions of the upcoming sensory input (‘when’ and ‘what’ predictions). Both, dynamic attention and prediction, can be indirectly measured through their behavioural or neural correlates. Measuring these correlates typically involves capturing responses to transient events in the sensory input. Depending on the targeted process, events may be defined as simple sounds, or sounds that violate a statistical rule established by preceding context (e.g. having greater or smaller intensity relative to the context), or silences that violate a repeating sequential pattern. If the targeted secondary process dynamically changes over time and is coupled one-to-one with the internal metric pulse (assumptions 1 and 3 listed above), the behavioural or neural response to a physically identical event should be consistently different depending on the temporal position of the event with respect to this internally represented metric pulse. At the behavioural level, the responses are typically measured in terms of perceptual sensitivity and reaction times. At the neural level, the responses can be captured as event-related potentials (time-locked fluctuations of field potentials elicited by the event; for a review). Capturing these processes through their neural correlates is advantageous, as responses from infants or non-human animals can be measured. However, similar to movement, the assumption about one-to-one coupling between these processes and internally represented metric pulses must be carefully considered before using them to make inferences about the represented meter. While there is a considerable amount of evidence suggesting that fluctuations of attention and prediction can be directly coupled to the metric pulses, some studies indicate that this may depend on stimulus properties, behavioural goals and prior experience of the individual. Moreover, unlike movement, these processes may be harder to control via explicit instructions.

If the assumptions are carefully considered, measuring processes such as overt movement or dynamic attention constitutes a powerful tool to estimate the internal representation of metric pulses.


Approaches based on measuring neural representations

Instead of measuring a secondary process that uses the internal representation of metric pulses as a time reference, an alternative approach aims to directly capture the neural representation of metric pulses. Hence, this approach does not rely on the assumption about the coupling of a secondary process with the internally represented metric pulses. Rather, it is based on the assumption that the internal representation of a pulse is encoded in the dynamic fluctuations of neural activity that can be measured using neuroscientific methods. The fact that neural activity can be captured at multiple spatial scales, and in a number of ways (e.g. as single-unit firing rates, population trajectories, amplitude modulations of band-limited local field potentials or large-scale electroencephalogram (EEG) activity), may provide complementary insights into the way metric pulses are represented in the nervous system, and into the nature of the transformation processes that support the mapping between internal representations of metric pulses and the sensory input.

Using this approach is valid even for neural signals of complex physiological origin (such as EEG) that probably reflect a mixture of lower- and higher-level processes related to the internal representation of the sensory input. While such signals cannot be expected to directly isolate neural representation of metric pulses, they can be assumed to be systematically influenced by this representation. Hence, in carefully designed experiments and analysis methods, such responses can provide valuable insights into the nature of internal meter representation. It is crucial to note that large-scale neural responses such as field potentials can hardly reveal low-level neurophysiological implementation of metric pulse processing (this can be only achieved by directly capturing neuronal firing rates or layer-specific dendridic currents, e.g.). Rather, these neural signals can be used as a powerful complement to behavioural responses (offering several advantages owing to little reliance on decisional processes and movement abilities). Moreover, when recorded intracranially, field potentials can offer critical insights into the spatio-temporal characteristics of the neural network involved in meter processing.


Quantifying pulse prominence

Once a behavioural or neural signal has been measured while the individual was stimulated with a particular rhythm, the goal is now to measure how prominent a particular set of metric pulses is within the captured signal. To this goal, a range of analysis methods can be used, and these different analytic tools are linked to a common principle which is based on the definition of pulse, i.e. periodic recurrence. Particularly, periodic recurrence can be decomposed into three crucial components (see the electronic supplementary material, figure S2) that will all need to be quantified in the signal: (i) a part of signal's dynamic trajectory in the state space must consistently repeat (self-similarity), (ii) this repetition must occur precisely separated by the time interval given by the pulse period (regularity), and (iii) the trajectory must be otherwise different from the repeated part (contrast). Here, the state space is a general term that captures possible patterns of features relevant for the signal (e.g. amplitudes measured at different sensors).

It is important to note that periodic recurrence can be considered a quantitative property. That is, a signal characterized by a greater degree of self-similarity, contrast and regularity at a particular period may be considered to comprise a more prominent representation of a pulse with that period. Moreover, because a variety of signals can show comparable self-similarity, contrast and regularity, it follows that equivalent pulse representation might be implemented in signals with various shapes and formats (see the electronic supplementary material, figure S3). Hence, a valid method to quantify the prominence of a pulse would generalize across signal properties irrelevant to periodic recurrence, but remain sensitive to self-similarity, contrast and regularity. To this aim, several families of measures have been developed.

Firstly, methods based on phase analysis have been proposed. These phase-based methods are sensitive to the regularity of signal trajectory with respect to pulse period. However, they are less sensitive to the contrast property (see the electronic supplementary material, figure S4 for an example). Secondly, contrast-based methods assume that periodicity in the signal is driven by transient features (such as high-amplitude bursts) that differ within narrow time windows centred on- versus off- pulse positions. However, these measures might be less sensitive to fine temporal regularity (see the electronic supplementary material, figure S4). Finally, a third family of measures include autocorrelation (based on high self-similarity of a periodic signal when shifted by time equivalent to the pulse period) (see the electronic supplementary material, figures S4 and S5) and frequency-tagging (based on the fact that periodic recurrence in a signal can be identified in the frequency domain as narrow-band peaks of energy centred at the frequencies corresponding to the pulse period and its harmonics).

These different methods and their respective assumptions, advantages and pitfalls are illustrated and further discussed in the electronic supplementary material, figure S4. In order to make valid conclusions about pulse prominence, it is crucial to consider these strengths and weaknesses, as well as the nature of the analysed signals. In many cases, the different measures might be used in a complementary way to provide better insight into pulse representation within a signal.


Taking into account pulse prominence in the physical input

In order to investigate the nature of the mapping between the sensory input and internal metric pulses, the physical properties of the sensory input itself must be taken into account. How prominent a pulse is within the physical input has been estimated, for example, using methods based on contrast, frequency-tagging or autocorrelation. Investigating the sensitivity of the perceptual system to the periodicity of various input features has contributed to understanding the mapping from rhythmic input to internal meter, and has led to the development of extensive models of pulse and meter perception. However, it is important to note that the aims of analysing pulse prominence in the physical input also go beyond providing a comprehensive model of perceptual experience. In fact, analysing the physical stimulus is critical to capture the relevant transformation underlying the mapping from rhythmic input to internal meter. The term ‘transformation’ is thus used here to emphasize the range of neural processes from the peripheral receptors to cortical pathways, which are involved in the mapping from physical input to meter by gradually transforming the internal representation from faithful tracking of input physical features towards higher-level behaviourally relevant categories (metric pulse(s) in our case).

There is converging evidence that the brain can faithfully track modulations of various input features. Hence, observing a prominent periodicity in behavioural or neural responses may be trivially explained if this periodicity is already prominent in these physical features. Therefore, quantifying the prominence of periodicities in the acoustic input is critical to avoid such trivial conclusions. In the case of metric pulses, this can be done by directly comparing the prominence of metric pulses in signals representing a chosen input feature (e.g. amplitude envelope) and the elicited response (e.g. EEG activity, or finger tapping). This is valid if the measure under comparison is sensitive to signal properties that are relevant to the functional definition of the phenomenon (here the three properties making up periodic recurrence: self-similarity, contrast and regularity), while generalizing across units, scales and different possible representation formats. As discussed in the electronic supplementary material, if used carefully, measures of pulse prominence based on frequency domain may fulfil these criteria. Moreover, these methods can be used to make valid comparisons between signals captured from different brain regions at different spatial scales (including neuronal firing rates, local field potentials, narrow-band power fluctuations), as well as overt behaviour (e.g. finger tapping).

In the following section, we discuss recent evidence based on capturing and directly comparing prominence of metric pulses in sensory inputs, elicited neural activity and behavioural outputs. Together, this evidence suggests that depending on input properties and context, the prominence of particular metric pulses may be gradually enhanced throughout the auditory pathway and the dorsal processing stream linking temporal, parietal and premotor cortices, thus providing a neural basis for mapping between external rhythmic signals and internal periodic pulse representations.


A range of processes involved in mapping from sensory input to metric pulses

The mapping from sensory input to internally represented meter has been often treated as a general ability. In other words, it is common to ask whether, for instance, non-human animals or human newborns can perceive the pulse (or a set of metric pulses) when listening to music. However, there is increasing evidence that meter perception may be conceptualized as multiple processes which may be engaged differently depending on the nature of the sensory input and context. These different processes can be described in terms of what the perceptual system does to map a sensory input onto an internal meter, and can be organized within four levels in which internal metric pulses are mapped (i) one-to-one with periodic input (level 1), (ii) with strongly periodic input (level 2), (iii) with weakly periodic input (level 3), and (iv) based on learned flexible associations (level 4). It is important to note that the boundaries between these proposed four levels are not categorical, but the processes involved at different levels might be involved in a graded fashion depending on the stimulus and context. Still, this four-level structure may constitute an insightful way to organize the growing and diverse body of empirical evidence on rhythm processing into a coherent framework, and guide future research. For example, the nature of the constituent processes making up each level remains to be identified, together with their specific constraints that may shape the mapping from specific inputs to specific internal meters. Moreover, the neural substrates underlying these constituent processes, how these processes differ between individuals and across species, and develop over the lifetime, remain largely unknown.

Finally, this conceptual four-level framework is generally compatible with influential theories, such as the neural resonance theory (NRT), the sensory-motor theory or predictive coding, which propose computational models to explain the processes highlighted across the four levels. Thus, the current aim is not to propose an alternative to these models. Rather, the goal of the proposed framework is to organize the empirical data these theories need to account for and to highlight the diversity of functional processes underlying rhythmic behaviour across individuals and species. Similar multi-level conceptual frameworks have stimulated progress in understanding phenomena such as theory of mind or language.


Level 1: one-to-one mapping internal metric pulse with periodic input

At the most fundamental level, the metric pulse is directly represented already in the sensory input (as illustrated in b). This includes notionally isochronous, metronomic stimuli that contain periodic modulations of a physical feature. One-to-one mapping from such inputs onto internally represented pulses can be considered a fundamental ability for meter processing and has been observed across a number of species, including humans, but also insects.

Recent findings also demonstrate that macaque monkeys have the neural machinery to map a metronomic (auditory or visual) stimulus onto an internal pulse representation, and coordinate tapping one-to-one with this pulse (a). Macaques show proper period matching, switching flexibly their tapping rate across a wide range of stimulus periods (450–1000 ms). Critically, they are capable of precisely timing their taps, such that they consistently occur slightly before the individual brief stimuli (e.g. tones or visual flashes) making up the periodic pacing sequence. The ability to produce negative tapping asynchrony provides strong evidence that macaques do not simply react to the stimuli, but rather internally represent input period and use this internal representation to precisely time their movement. A similar predictive behaviour has been observed when monkeys were trained to synchronize their saccadic movements or to internally calculate the position of a stimulus within a sequence of isochronously presented visual stimuli.

These observations support the view that monkeys have a sensory-motor system with all the anatomical and neurophysiological properties to compute the fundamental processing steps for one-to-one temporal coordination with a periodic stimulus. Firstly, they must be able to extract the periodicity from a dynamically changing feature of the input. Hence, the characteristics of the relevant sensory system may constrain the ability to extract periodicity from inputs within specific modalities and limit the extraction process to specific input features. For instance, the spontaneous preference to coordinate tapping with visual compared to auditory metronomic inputs observed in monkeys might be partially driven by the lower sensitivity of their auditory system to low-frequency temporal modulations in acoustic inputs. However, the auditory cortex of monkeys is still capable of spontaneously extracting the regularity of isochronous acoustic sequences, as evidenced by neural responses to sound omissions in an auditory metronome captured by scalp EEG on macaques. Moreover, the fact that macaques show human-like frequency-following EEG responses elicited by fast acoustic periodicities suggests that their auditory system can precisely encode fine sound timing, thus providing a critical basis for coordination of movement with incoming acoustic inputs. Secondly, the periodicity extracted from the sensory input must be mapped onto an internal pulse-like representation of time. Converging evidence suggests that the core timing network comprised by the cortico-thalamic-basal ganglia skeletomotor circuit (CTBGc) constitutes the neural underpinning of an internal pulse representation. Specifically, the medial premotor cortex (MPC), composed of the supplementary motor cortex proper and the presupplementary motor area, is a key area for the conformation of an internal pulse signal. Although the neural basis of these processing steps is still fairly unknown, the Rhesus monkey is a great model to study the dynamical interplay between bottom-up and top-down signals, using the simultaneous high-density single-cell recordings at different node levels of the beat-based timing audiomotor circuit. In fact, critical observations have already been made in the primate MPC regarding the representation of a metric pulse during rhythmic tapping.

A key property of MPC neurons during rhythmic tapping to a metronome is the relative representation of pulse timing. Cells that encode elapsed or remaining time for a tap show up–down ramping profiles that span the produced time interval, scaling in speed as a function of pulse period. Interestingly, neurons encoding elapsed or remaining time are tuned to the tapping rate, generating period-dependent subpopulations for pulse processing within MPC. These neural signals are far from static. MPC cells are recruited in rapid succession producing a progressive neural pattern of activation (called moving bumps) that flexibly fills the time interval corresponding to one pulse period (b). This neural pattern may thus provide a relative representation of how far an interval between two successive metronome events has evolved. Another critical aspect of the MPC periodic clock is that it resets on every pulse period cycle. Thus, the progressive pattern of activation starts with a group of cells, migrates to other cells during the timed interval, stops with the last group of cells and simultaneously is initialized for the next produced interval with the previous initial set of cells. The neural cyclic evolution and resetting are more evident when the time-varying activity of MPC neurons is projected into a low-dimensional state space (c). The population neural trajectories show the following properties. First, they have circular dynamics that form a regenerating loop for every produced interval. Second, the periodic trajectories increase in amplitude as a function of the input period. These period-dependent increments in the trajectory radius are the result of a larger number of neurons within a moving bump. Finally, the population neural trajectories converge in similar state space at tapping times, resetting the pulse-based clock at this point. Hence, the convergence to this neural attractor state could be the internal representation of the pulse that is transmitted as a phasic top-down predictive signal to the auditory areas before each tap. In addition, the population state during pulse-based predictive timing indicates the traversed proportion of an interval (relative timing) instead of its absolute magnitude. Consequently, these population dynamics can be the fundamental primordium of an internal signal of meter in humans, generating a predictive, relative-timing and flexible pulse signal within the MPC.

These findings are compatible with recent observations that low-dimensional population trajectories constitute a general mechanism to encode time in primate frontal cortices. Yet, the establishment of an internal pulse representation is linked to a specific type of dynamics in the form of regenerating loops, which is distinct from the activity that emerges during interval reproduction tasks where the speed of dynamics is adjusted according to the timed interval. This showcases how frontal motor regions can encode time predictively with a great deal of flexibility, thus supporting adaptive behaviour in a context-sensitive way.


Adaptation and anticipation mechanisms

In the real world, rhythmic inputs that allow one-to-one mapping of a metric pulse are not perfectly periodic. Rather, ecologically valid stimuli often contain small variations in time-locking to a strictly isochronous pulse period, or tempo drift (i.e. gradual systematic change of the pulse period delivered by the input). Hence, real-time mechanisms must be used to maintain the precise one-to-one temporal coordination between the input and internal pulse representation (and consequently between the input and overt behaviours that use the internal pulse as a temporal reference). Studies of externally paced finger tapping responses (the sensorimotor synchronization paradigm) have revealed that these mechanisms include reactive error correction processes entailing phase and period correction. Moreover, additional online mechanisms include anticipatory processes that allow the timing of upcoming sensory events to be predicted during ongoing tempo changes. These processes may be engaged differently depending on attentional resources, individual characteristics and task demands. Temporal adaptation and anticipation are nevertheless fundamental processes, and evidence for their operation has been observed in the macaque monkey. In humans, adaptation and anticipation mechanisms are also sensitive to hierarchical metric structures, and can use multiple periodicities in the stimulus to stabilize performance.


Going beyond one-to-one using grouping and subdivision

Research has identified two fundamental processes that allow going beyond one-to-one mapping between internal pulses and an external periodic input. Subdivision provides an internal representation of pulses with faster periods than the input, whereas grouping provides an internal representation of pulses slower than the input period. Both grouping and subdivision open to possible simultaneous internal representation of multiple pulses, a cornerstone of meter processing in humans. Importantly, subdivision and grouping seem to be engaged spontaneously in humans. Moreover, both processes seem to be biased to binary ratios, although this may be influenced by long-term exposure and input properties.

Despite these intrinsic biases, humans show extraordinary flexibility to employ subdivision and grouping processes based on top-down intention. This is evidenced by finger-tapping experiments, and studies capturing neural responses using the frequency-tagging approach and contrast-based methods. Furthermore, musically trained individuals show similar flexibility in controlling the phase of internal pulse representation with respect to the input, as well as the phase with which overt movement is coupled to this internal representation. Such top-down flexibility is an important characteristic of human coordination abilities, which could be built upon fundamental mode-locking mechanisms proposed by neurodynamical models. This human-specific top-down flexibility can be used to investigate the limits in the range of absolute pulse periods that can be internally represented, while partially controlling for limits inherent to the measured secondary process (e.g. biomechanical limits of movement). For example, grouping has been used to reveal slow limits of absolute pulse periods, whereas mental subdivision and antiphase tapping has been used to reveal fast limits (for a review).


Excluding passive reactions to the input

A common concern with one-to-one mapping is to rule out the possibility that the system is being passively driven by the input. As discussed above, a perfectly periodic sensory input may be trivially expected to give rise to a perfectly periodic response (either neural or behavioural). Hence, a requirement for zero or negative asynchrony between the input and response has been proposed, to ensure that the response ‘predicts’ the input instead of passively reacting to it. This approach can be easily applied to transiently changing signals where the phase of the input and the response can be located at specific time points of the signals based on reasonable assumptions (e.g. one-to-one finger tapping to brief metronome sounds).

However, locating the relevant time points may be difficult with smooth continuous signals. Moreover, beyond the conventional one-to-one finger tapping paradigm, it is often not feasible to determine the target time points in the input. In spontaneous one-to-N tapping with a fast metronome, for example, it is often difficult to know which metronome ticks are the targets. In fact, even in one-to-one coordination, ‘predictive’ responses can be simply considered a precisely timed ‘reactive’ responses to previous events in the input. Nevertheless, it is evident that most tapping behaviours described in humans and non-human primates are not simply reactive responses. When the periodic input stops, subjects can continue to tap with a very similar period (if instructed or trained appropriately). Thus, the neural representation of the pulse can be studied in a synchronization-continuation task, where initially the subjects synchronize movement to a periodic stimulus, followed by an internally driven epoch, where the neural pulse runs endogenously in the absence of the auditory input. Moreover, the possibility of passive reactions can be excluded when the mapping from input to internal meter is not one-to-one.


Level 2: mapping internal metric pulse with strongly periodic input

In human music, rhythmic inputs are rarely metronomic, and hence do not allow one-to-one mapping from the stimulus to internal representation of a metric pulse. Yet, the physical structure of these rhythmic stimuli commonly contains prominent representation of particular metric pulses, and therefore, they can be classified as strongly periodic. A large number of studies have shown that human listeners spontaneously detect (or extract) prominent input periodicities and directly map the internal representation of metric pulses onto these periodicities (example provided in b). Hence, particular pulses prominently represented in an input strongly bias the periods and phase of the perceived meter, and thus allow the establishment of consistent temporal references across individuals. The process of metric pulse extraction has been successfully captured in a number of models, including implementations based on rules and filterbanks.

Besides humans, the ability to detect prominent periodic modulations in strongly periodic inputs and map them onto strictly periodic movement patterns has been observed in certain bird species, and in a sea lion after extensive training. However, such behaviours have not been observed yet in non-human primates. As evidenced by scalp EEG recordings, human brain spontaneously internalizes prominent pulses in a strongly periodic sound input and differentially responds to unexpected sound changes depending on their alignment with the phase of these extracted pulses. However, such differential responses were not elicited in macaque monkeys as they passively listened to the same auditory stimuli, indicating that their ability to map internal metric pulses onto sensory inputs may be restricted to the most fundamental level 1.

It remains possible that non-human primates could learn to perform level-2-like mappings with appropriate training procedures, which represents an exciting challenge for future studies. In fact, recent findings support the notion of certain level 2 abilities in monkeys. For example, electrophysiological recordings in the basal ganglia indicate that monkeys can chunk the beginning and end of isochronous and randomly timed (reactive) tapping sequences. Moreover, preliminary observations of EEG β oscillations (frequency range 12–20 Hz) in macaques reveal magnitude dynamics that indicate a spontaneous grouping process by two intervals during passive listening to isochronous stimulus sequences. Nevertheless, more research in the animals' natural setting is needed to document whether different species of birds, cetaceans and monkeys show spontaneous abilities to perform a level-2 mapping. The use of a similar research framework across species with the new video and audio pattern recognition algorithms using deep learning are promising avenues to shed light into this important subject.

Based on the available evidence on cross-species differences, it has been hypothesized that meter processing beyond level 1 may critically depend on robust connections between auditory and motor brain regions (electronic supplementary material, figure S6). Yet, these abilities may be also shaped by neural mechanisms widely shared across species, particularly by transformations of sound representation owing to basic nonlinear mechanisms along the auditory pathway. These nonlinearities further enhance particular periodicities prominently represented in the acoustic input, hence providing additional constraints on the space of metric pulses that may be possibly mapped onto the acoustic input.

In addition to the enhancement of prominent periodicities in the physical input by subcortical mechanisms, the mapping of metric pulses can be biased by similar constraints on absolute pulse periods as have been described for strictly periodic inputs. These absolute period constraints have been further corroborated by studies capturing EEG responses to non-isochronous auditory rhythmic sequences. When otherwise physically identical inputs were speeded up, the brain transformed the inputs by selectively enhancing periodicities in the frequency range where spontaneous emergence of pulse representations has been previously shown in behavioural studies. Collecting finger tapping responses in the same participants confirmed functional significance of this neural transformation, as participants spontaneously changed their tapping period according to periodicities most prominent in their neural responses, but not necessarily in the physical structure of the input. The ability to extract and amplify slow periodicities from fast acoustic sequences may not only rely on processing along the auditory pathway, but also on connections to the cerebellum, which is critical for the extraction of precise temporal information from dynamic modulations of input features.

In summary, mapping inputs with prominent periodicities in their physical structure to internal metric pulses may rely on a number of neural mechanisms, including subcortical nonlinearities, cerebellar processing and a frequency tuning curve of the involved neural audiomotor network.


Level 3: mapping internal metric pulse with weakly periodic input

While many musical rhythms contain prominent representation of specific pulses in their physical structure, this is not a general rule. In fact, it is quite common to encounter rhythms where no clear periodicity directly stands out. These rhythmic inputs have often been treated as inducing in some ways weaker internal representation of metric pulses, or it has been assumed that metric pulses are not mapped onto such inputs at all. Contrary to these views, humans seem capable of mapping a stable internal representation of metric pulses onto such weakly periodic inputs (example provided in b), as observed in spontaneous finger tapping paradigms.

Over the past 10 years, a growing number of studies investigated neural responses to weakly periodic inputs using EEG combined with frequency-tagging (for a review). This approach is particularly well suited for this category of inputs because prominent representation of metric pulses in the neural responses cannot be easily confounded with passive reactions to input features. These studies provide converging evidence that the brain transforms weakly periodic inputs by selectively enhancing the representation of metric pulses (for similar data obtained with magnetoencephalography). In other words, this transformation of the input by the neural system seems to act as a sort of ‘periodization’ of the input towards the perceived metric pulses. This process of internal periodization is functionally relevant, as the periods of enhanced pulses closely correspond to those observed in finger-tapping responses of the same participants, when stimulated with identical acoustic inputs in a separate behavioural session.

Importantly, this periodization is unlikely to be explained by low-level processes in the early stages of the auditory pathway. Indeed, responses predominantly reflecting early auditory processing (i.e. brainstem auditory responses) isolated from scalp EEG signals closely track the acoustic input, hence showing little prominence of metric pulses for weakly periodic inputs. This result is also corroborated by computational models of subcortical auditory processing, which provide a biologically plausible estimate of the output of neural populations at the level of the inferior colliculus in response to weakly periodic inputs. By contrast, these neural representations are critically transformed at the cortical level, as reflected by significantly enhanced pulse periodicities in responses to weakly periodic inputs captured directly from Heschl's gyrus (primary auditory cortex) in human participants using intracerebral EEG. Together, these results thus indicate a gradual transformation from subcortical auditory regions to higher-level regions.

Humans are capable of mapping internal metric pulses onto weakly periodic inputs, as evident in numerous musical contexts. However, this mapping might be less spontaneous than mapping meter onto strongly periodic inputs (level 2), thus indicating possible engagement of different processes. This hypothesis is corroborated by tapping studies suggesting that long-term musical training may significantly improve the ability to map meter onto weakly periodic inputs. These results suggest that differentiating strongly and weakly periodic inputs might significantly improve batteries aimed to test individual differences in meter processing. Similarly, acknowledging the prominence of metric pulses within the physical structure of the rhythmic stimulus might lead to important insights in studies testing meter processing in non-human animals or human infants.

Determining how exactly the brain maps a metric pulse that is not prominently represented in the physical structure of the stimulus remains an important goal for future empirical investigations. One hypothesis might be that if other (faster and/or slower) pulse periods are still prominent in the stimulus, the system could extract them and map onto internal pulses. From these, additional pulses might be bootstrapped by processes of grouping and subdivision to create a coherent metric set. While slower periodicity in the stimulus can be driven by cyclic repetition of a rhythmic pattern, fast pulse period can be cued by rapid streams of events. Both of these are common in musical styles where metric pulses with intermediate periods are weakly represented in the acoustic input. Such mechanisms have been described in neurodynamic models as mode-locking of coupled oscillators, which can reconstruct metric periodicities that are weak (or even completely absent) in the physical stimulus. Notably, NRT has yielded promising models which posit entrained oscillation as a parsimonious explanation of behavioural and neural data across levels 1–3. These mathematical models are based on a physiologically plausible description of neural dynamics, yet they also rely on assumptions that still need to be demonstrated by neurophysiology. For instance, the existence of two interconnected gradient frequency networks in the human brain, necessary to model level 3 mappings, remains to be established. In fact, recent neuroimaging work failed to observe gradient network dynamics in human premotor regions, which was predicted by previous modelling. Similarly, neural dynamics observed in monkey frontal cortices might not be readily described as a resonating gradient network. Hence, while neurodynamic models are powerful to explain data across the levels proposed in the current review, it remains to be systematically shown which parameters and parts of the network architecture are necessary to account for meter mapping at each level. A critical part of future work would be to show how these predictions correspond to the neurophysiology of different species, in order to explain why only some animals seem to achieve certain levels of the framework (as already pointed out in).


Level 4: mapping internal metric pulse based on learned flexible associations

At level 3, the ability to map metric pulses onto weakly periodic inputs was conceptualized as a general skill; hence, it is expected to generalize across sensory inputs. In this sense, a skilled individual may successfully map a set of stable metric pulses onto rhythmic inputs from a particular musical tradition (e.g. music based on Afro-Cuban bembe where the sound modulations simultaneously represent pulse sets with periods in relation 2: 2: 3 and 2: 3: 2; b). However, while plausible, the meter mapped by this individual may be different from the meter that would be typically mapped by enculturated listeners (2: 2: 3 meter). This illustrates that humans can use a range of indirect cues to precisely constrain the parameters of the internal metric pulses. This may be based on learned arbitrary contextual mappings between specific rhythmic patterns and specific metric pulses, as evidenced by a recent study of musical corpora. Indeed, certain rhythmic figures are often characteristic of specific genres (e.g. claves or time-line patterns in music influenced by African tradition). Hence, recognizing these figures could serve as a reliable cue to particular meters, along with numerous other cues such as particular timbres, harmonies, but also social contexts.

The associative processes at level 4 are critical to enable enculturated individuals to share temporal reference in the form of metric pulses during musical coordination behaviours, despite little direct periodic cues in the sensory input, which is characteristic for numerous musical traditions. In fact, these learned mappings might even allow the listener to go ‘against’ the direct cues in the input, for instance, in ska and reggae (where a metric pulse is typically perceived in antiphase with prominent modulations in the musical stimulus). Based on the data from laboratory studies, such associative flexible mappings may be learned through multimodal exposure to musical auditory inputs accompanied by periodic vestibular stimulation resulting from active or passive movement. Similarly, evidence from EEG frequency-tagging suggests that learning to move along a rhythmic input in a way that emphasizes particular metric pulses leads to enhanced representation of those pulses in the EEG activity elicited while the participants subsequently listen to the same rhythmic input without moving. These results have been successfully replicated in neurodynamic models of multi-frequency networks with Hebbian plasticity, thus offering a biologically plausible mechanistic explanation. Whether the biases towards particular meters acquired through multimodal exposure and body movement remain stable over time, to what extent they generalize (e.g. across tempi) and whether they become specifically associated with particular input features (e.g. rhythmic pattern or timbre) remains to be investigated in future studies.


Summary and perspectives

Meter has developed in Homo sapiens as a robust, yet highly flexible perceptual system that allows stable temporal coordination of musical behaviours among individuals, while also allowing for creativity and aesthetic complexity. Meter has been studied for a number of decades, yet the assumptions and pitfalls of different approaches used to empirically measure its internal representation are sometimes not explicitly acknowledged. The current discussion of methods that allow direct comparisons of meter representation between sensory inputs, neural activity and behavioural outputs is intended to encourage their careful use and further development. As reviewed in the current paper, these methods constitute powerful tools to study the nature of the mapping between external sensory inputs, and internal representations.

The ability to map internal metric pulse (or pulses) onto external rhythmic inputs and to use this internal representation for movement coordination has been considered a rather unitary phenomenon, exclusively present in humans and few other species of mammals and birds. However, a recent hypothesis, namely the gradual audio-motor evolution (GAE) hypothesis, proposed a more continuous view according to which meter processing emerged gradually in the primate order, peaking in humans but present in simple forms across other non-human primates (for a detailed description). Based on available empirical evidence, we have proposed a concrete framework to organize the progressively more complex forms of meter processing within four key levels. The simplest form of meter processing, here identified as level 1, is already present in monkeys, while more intricate forms of mapping between sensory inputs and internal meter seem to be fully developed in humans, supporting coordination in a flexible, culturally appropriate way, even in response to weakly periodic stimuli. GAE predicts that these human abilities evolved through a gradient of functional and structural changes within the CTBG circuit and across all the audiomotor pathways (electronic supplementary material, figure S6). Future work needs to identify the particular nature of these changes, and how they support the levels of our proposed framework. This framework might be also useful to organize previous evidence on inter-individual and developmental differences in rhythmic musical behaviours, and to integrate these findings with data from comparative studies across species.

Meter processing is a phenomenon that depends on a dynamic interaction between auditory and motor systems in the brain. In this regard, GAE suggests that the astonishing ability to perceive meter in humans is owing to their massive and dynamic flow of information between the auditory cortex, the basal ganglia and the frontal lobe (electronic supplementary material, figure S6). Critically, more complex forms of meter processing reviewed here (particularly levels 3 and 4) do not simply require a precise flow of information, but this information must be transformed to allow for a mapping from sensory inputs that are not strictly periodic onto internal periodic representation of time in the form of metric pulses. Hopefully, the proposed four-level framework will guide future investigations of processes involved particularly at these more complex levels, which have received very little attention until recent years.

It can be expected that recent conceptual, methodological and analytical advances in systems neuroscience will provide novel insights into the nature of the mapping between external sensory inputs, internal representations and overt behaviour. In particular, the access to high-density multisite recordings that allow simultaneous longitudinal recording across sensory, associative, and motor areas in behaving animals is likely to move us a critical step forward in our understanding of information processing in the central nervous system and the neural basis of cognition. For example, an emerging view posits that the neural substrates of behaviour can be captured at the population level, considering the time-varying patterns of activity of large numbers of neurons as states of a dynamical system. Thus, the projection of neural population responses into a lower dimensional subspace defines neural trajectories that can reveal the computational strategies employed by different brain regions during cognition. Similarly, the behaviour induced by the experimental task can be characterized in a space whose axes correspond to the measured behavioural variables. Hence, capturing neural substrates of the behaviour relies on describing the dynamic relationship between the intrinsic neural trajectories and the behavioural state patterns. In the context of this review, we hypothesize that in musical scenarios, the mapping between the dynamic neural population states representing metric pulses and behavioural states may take complex forms, particularly in humans who demonstrate flexible higher dimensional movement trajectories such as dance. Critically, it is expected that the mapping from the dynamic features of the sensory input onto neural population trajectories would be increasingly indirect when representing metric pulses from isochrony (level 1) all the way to flexible learned associations (level 4). To better understand these mappings, the analytical tools described for frequency-tagging on EEG signals can be applied to sensory inputs and the neural and behavioural state trajectories. A promising way to test these general hypotheses would involve large-scale recordings in the audiomotor system of humans and non-human animals performing tasks covering the proposed four-level framework.

In summary, the proposed conceptual framework, combined with recent advances in systems neuroscience and the methodological approaches reviewed in the current paper, may yield new empirical data to critically test and constrain mechanistic models of pulse and meter. Therefore, we hope the current review will encourage further debate in the field between proponents of different theories, using our proposed four levels as scaffolding to probe and further develop models of rhythmic behaviour.


Vocal production learning in mammals revisited

Vincent M Janik, Mirjam Knörnschild — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2021. PMC8419569, CC BY 4.0.

Vocal production learning, the ability to modify the structure of vocalizations as a result of hearing those of others, has been studied extensively in birds but less attention has been given to its occurrence in mammals. We summarize the available evidence for vocal learning in mammals from the last 25 years, updating earlier reviews on the subject. The clearest evidence comes from cetaceans, pinnipeds, elephants and bats where species have been found to copy artificial or human language sounds, or match acoustic models of different sound types. Vocal convergence, in which parameter adjustments within one sound type result in similarities between individuals, occurs in a wider range of mammalian orders with additional evidence from primates, mole-rats, goats and mice. Currently, the underlying mechanisms for convergence are unclear with vocal production learning but also usage learning or matching physiological states being possible explanations. For experimental studies, we highlight the importance of quantitative comparisons of seemingly learned sounds with vocal repertoires before learning started or with species repertoires to confirm novelty. Further studies on the mammalian orders presented here as well as others are needed to explore learning skills and limitations in greater detail.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Vocal learning in animals and humans’.

Keywords: vocal communication, Cetacea, Pinnipedia, Chiroptera, elephants, primates


Introduction

Vocal production learning, the ability to modify the structure of vocalizations as a result of hearing those of conspecifics or sometimes other species, either live or from a recording, has received concentrated research attention in birds since the advent of the sound spectrograph in the 1950s. In mammals, evidence for this ability was less forthcoming. In 1997, Janik & Slater summarized evidence for vocal learning in mammals for the first time, with an updated version focusing on vocal traditions published 6 years later. Since then, review chapters have been specific to different mammalian orders, with the most comprehensive compilation published in 2014. One of the key issues in all of these reviews was what kind of evidence provides sufficient and satisfactory proof of vocal production learning. The most challenging problem is often to exclude usage learning, the ability to produce an already existing call or song type in a new context. Seemingly novel vocalizations are best compared against baseline recordings from before their presentation to an individual to evaluate novelty. This clearly is easier when animals copy other species such as human speech sounds or even non-biological or artificially generated noise as sometimes used in experimental studies. Often multiple studies investigating the same species provide the best evidence for vocal production learning.

Another challenge in the study of vocal learning is the tremendous variety of sound production mechanisms and techniques among animals. Birds and mammals employ similar mechanisms to produce sounds, but birds use a syrinx capable of producing two sounds at the same time while mammals usually use a larynx that is structurally different and does not have this dual voice capability. Within mammals, the larynx is widely used, but in some cases, different structures take over. Odontocetes produce sounds with specifically evolved phonic lips in their nasal passages and in elephants, the trunk may be used as a sound source. In primates, lip smacking or unvoiced speech sounds are created by using parts of the mouth. Janik & Slater distinguished between effects of the respiratory, phonatory and filter system on vocalizations. They highlighted that control over the respiratory system can influence the source level and duration of a vocalization, while only the phonatory and filter systems can have a substantial influence on spectral structure. However, changes in the respiratory system can also alter frequency parameters as in amplitude modulations adding side bands to signals or increased source levels leading to subtle increases in fundamental frequency. Furthermore, the influence of the filter system which affects parameters of sounds after they have been produced by the phonatory system can be substantial, such as in human vowel production. Most examples given in our review appear to be cases of phonatory control, i.e. control over changes in frequency parameters that are indicative of direct control over the larynx or other production mechanisms used unless stated otherwise.

In our review, we revisit vocal production learning in mammals to summarize evidence published in the last 25 years. Only for species that have had no superseding evidence published since 1997 will we cite the earlier literature to provide a complete overview of this ability in mammals. Thus, this and the 1997 review should be read in conjunction if interested in complete coverage of the subject. Apart from studies that clearly show the copying of novel sounds (such as in copying of other species) or copying of different call or song types in different experimental groups of animals, we also summarize data on vocal convergence. Convergence is often relatively subtle, usually affecting individual parameters within a call or song type. The underlying mechanisms of convergence are often unclear since different animals could use the same version of a vocalization because they are in the same motivational or physiological state (e.g. fearful animals often produce vocalizations with higher fundamental frequencies). In such cases, learning does not need to be involved. If learning is involved, it could be usage rather than production learning since the converged versions of vocalizations are rarely novel. Nevertheless, we think that convergence deserves further attention in the context of vocal learning recognizing that the delineation between different sound types is not always clear. Vocal learning skills can be restricted to specific parameter modifications or allow for copying of different species with a range of skills in between. On this continuum, convergence could indicate a limited production learning ability. We therefore include studies in which at least two different, independent experimental groups show convergence towards different acoustic models as potential evidence for vocal production learning. Ideally, these models are provided by the experimenter but studies in which groups converge on different group calls using sounds of group members as models can give similar evidence. It is important to note, however, that such evidence is only convincing when coming from highly controlled studies. Parameters like food availability, pressure from predator or competitor species, and group composition can create differences in stress or motivation of group members, potentially leading to acoustic differences without the influence of vocal production learning.

To be complete, we also report deafening and isolation studies, but we consider their interpretation to be problematic. To infer vocal production learning, it is not sufficient to show that the vocalizations of deafened or isolated animals develop abnormally. The abnormal development could also be caused by stress and/or sensory deprivation; the latter is especially relevant for echolocating taxa. Unlike Janik & Slater, we will not include data on dialects or geographic variation unless vocal learning has been demonstrated since such variation can arise from vocal learning as well as a multitude of other factors, including founder effects, habitat differences influencing vocalization choice or through genetic drift. Similarly, we do not include studies describing developmental changes unless vocal production learning rather than maturation or usage learning has been demonstrated or claimed. What we aim for here is to summarize the best available evidence for vocal learning in mammals.


Cetaceans

Good evidence for vocal production learning in toothed whales comes from bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus). The most convincing reports demonstrating this ability are training studies in which animals were conditioned to copy tonal, computer-generated model sounds. While pre-test repertoires were not presented, some of the models were unlike dolphin whistles described before, including abrupt frequency changes between unmodulated tones and instantaneous changes in the direction of frequency modulations. The animals were able to copy such whistles with good accuracy. More recent studies focused on how learning influences whistle development in this species. Bottlenose dolphins develop individually distinctive signature whistles (a) which are novel and distinctive frequency modulation patterns broadcasting the identity of the caller. Fripp et al. found that signature whistles of bottlenose dolphins in the wild were more similar to those of members of their population than to whistles of a captive colony. This suggests the use of vocal learning in signature whistle development, possibly by using a model and then changing it to achieve distinctiveness. However, differences between captive and wild dolphin whistles could be caused by other factors. Miksis et al. showed that signature whistles of captive dolphins seem to contain parts resembling the constant-frequency bridge whistles used by animal-care staff during training. This shows that there can be a consistent difference between captive and wild dolphin whistles, most likely due to vocal production learning influencing whistles depending on the acoustic environment. Learning also likely plays a role in whistle matching in which different animals produce the same whistle type in quick succession. Signature whistles are often used in these interactions. Since every animal develops its own novel and distinctive signature whistle, vocal production learning appears to be the only way in which others could acquire these whistles to use in matching interactions.

Other delphinid species may have similar skills but only a few have been studied to date. One example is an orphaned, captive Risso's dolphin (Grampus griseus) that was found to produce whistles more similar to those of bottlenose dolphins it was housed with than to whistles of wild Risso's dolphins. Vocal production learning in the largest delphinid, the killer whale (Orcinus orca), has been studied in more detail. Adamson et al. performed a learning experiment similar in design to the training studies on bottlenose dolphins in which animals were trained to copy model sounds consisting of human words and sounds of other killer whales. While the killer whale's copies resembled several parameters of model sounds, copying accuracy was surprisingly low in others when compared to vocal learning studies on other species. An important component in vocal production learning studies is a quantitative comparison of model sounds with the existing repertoire of the animal before tests begin, especially when copies are of low fidelity. This is important to demonstrate production learning rather than usage learning. Such an analysis was part of this study, but the similarity was only assessed by a human judge and not by the quantitative methods used to identify copies in this study. Another study focused on changes in the repertoire of calls used by captive killer whales and found that the use of calls in juvenile whales changed over time and that they learned new call types. Two juvenile males born in captivity started to associate with and produce calls of an unrelated, adult male over the course of the study.

In another captive study, killer whales housed with bottlenose dolphins also changed their click and whistle patterns so that they resembled those produced by bottlenose dolphins, a good indicator for usage learning. In addition, one animal started to produce a repeated whistle that the bottlenose dolphins were trained to produce for public shows. While trainers had reported that the killer whale did not produce such sequences before, it is unclear whether the relatively simple modulation pattern of the whistle in the sequence was already present in the whale's repertoire before. Thus, this study provides good evidence for usage learning but is not conclusive on production learning.

In the wild, killer whales have been found to copy calls of other pods but it is not always clear whether these are cases of usage or production learning. A wild killer whale apparently copying a California sea lion (Zalophus californianus) has also been reported. The assumed copies had harmonics above 4 kHz which are usually not found in sea lion barks underwater but a quantitative analysis of similarity was not provided and distant sea lions could have been responsible. Perhaps the most convincing evidence for killer whale production learning in the wild comes from observations that members from different pods have been observed to change the structure of a shared call type in parallel over a 12-year period while leaving another analysed call type unchanged. This gradual change is similar to that found in songs of Northern Hemisphere humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae) and provides evidence that learning is taking place.

Vocal learning in belugas (Delphinapterus leucas) had been described anecdotally in the past, but more detailed studies have been published since. Ridgway et al. reported sounds that appeared to mimic human speech sounds in a trained beluga. These copies sounded distorted and model words could not be recognized, but the authors stated that these sounds resembled human speech as heard underwater when divers communicated with each other. Unfortunately, a quantitative comparison was not provided. Murayama et al. trained a beluga to copy model sounds presented to it. These sounds included human speech sounds and computer-generated tonal sounds. Even though all models were presented in air, the authors reported good copying skills, but only compared copies to all possible model sounds without a comparison with the pre-training repertoire of the animal. Panova & Agafonov reported a beluga producing copies of bottlenose dolphin signature whistles after being kept with them in the same pool. The similarity between models and copies was high, but no recordings of the beluga from before the introduction or from control groups were available. In such cross-species copying tests, comparisons with baseline repertoires may seem less important. However, many mammals produce sounds similar to those of other species, including humans, in their repertoires, so that usage learning may influence these results to some extent.

Studying vocal learning in baleen whales is much more challenging. Nevertheless, male humpback whales appear to provide good evidence for vocal production learning in how they modify their song types over time. In the Northern Hemisphere, song type change is slow but all males in a population produce the same song type at any one time, which seems difficult to achieve without learning. More recent studies in the Southern Hemisphere showed that a communal change in song type can be more rapid, with the entire song changing completely for all singers within little over a year. Interestingly, different breeding aggregations represent distinct populations in the Southern Hemisphere but males have been observed to switch between them, a pattern prevented by land barriers in the Northern Hemisphere. Each of these populations has its own song type, but song types that are found in one population tend to be picked up by others to the east in later years. Some authors suggest that humpback whales may have a finite number of song elements that they recombine through usage learning but considering the gradual changes in song types especially in the Northern Hemisphere, vocal production learning seems to be a more likely explanation for the changes observed.

While early work on bowhead whales (Balaena mysticetus) around North America found a similar pattern of communal song type change from year to year as described for humpback whales, with just one song type in each season, more recent work has shown that bowheads can sing more than one song type per year. In Fram Strait, bowhead whales sang multiple song types in a season and appeared to share song types. The occurrence of specific song types on an acoustic recorder in the area was almost sequential through the year and no song type was recorded in more than one season over an observation period of four years. Bowhead whale singing patterns, while different from humpback whales, would be difficult to explain without evoking vocal production learning.


Pinnipeds

Pinnipeds are well known for their trainability in captivity and a number of studies have shown that they are capable of usage learning as demonstrated by conditioned production of calls in their repertoire. Training studies on harbour seals (Phoca vitulina) and walrus (Odobenus rosmarus) have also shown that they can invent calls as judged by a trainer and increase the variability of their calls when rewarded accordingly. Evidence for vocal production learning in pinnipeds comes from studies using human speech as templates. An early observational study on two harbour seals (Phoca vitulina) showed that they could acquire human words when raised by human caretakers. A study on three grey seals (Halichoerus grypus) investigated this ability in phocid seals experimentally, training one animal to copy melodies and two to copy human vowels. The animals shifted the formants in their calls to achieve vowel matches, which constitutes filter learning. All seals were recorded from birth and could also be trained to produce seal calls at frequencies outside of their baseline repertoire or the repertoire described for the species. A subsequent study on wild grey seal pups demonstrated that vocal production learning influenced the development of their pup calls. Independent groups of animals copied unknown frequency modulation sequences and individual calls played back to them depending on the kind of playback they were exposed to.

Observational evidence in the wild is harder to come by. While geographic variation is common in phocid seal calls, a detailed study of what appeared to be Northern elephant seal (Mirounga angustirostris) dialects turned out to be the result of a population bottleneck and founder effect. The same breeding rookeries recorded nearly 50 years later revealed that the differences found between them in the earlier studies had disappeared, replaced by a much greater call variability between males than found before. Nevertheless, one study on Southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) provided evidence that males learn at least temporal parameters of their dominance calls from successful conspecifics in wild breeding aggregations.


Elephants

Elephants are a relatively new addition to the list of mammalian vocal learners. A first report documented an African elephant (Loxodonta africana) kept with Asian elephants (Elephas maximus) producing chirping sounds similar to those of Asian elephants, and an adolescent African elephant in an orphanage copying the duration and frequency bandwidth of truck sounds. In both cases, copies were more similar to the model than to other conspecifc sounds and involved modifying frequency as well as temporal parameters. Another study described the vocalizations of a single Asian elephant copying human speech sounds in a zoo. In this latter example, the animal used its trunk to change the shape of its mouth cavity to copy human vowels. Wild elephants are not known to modify vocalizations this way, making this a very unusual example of vocal copying mediated not by control over the vocal production apparatus but over trunk musculature.


Bats

Echolocating greater horseshoe bats (Rhinolophus ferrumequinum) emit a very narrowly defined resting frequency (RF) in the prominent constant-frequency component of their echolocation calls, which is different in experimentally deafened individuals. An observational long-term study showed that the RF decreases over an individual's lifetime in the wild. Interestingly, in recordings of echolocation calls of mother–pup pairs, a pup's RF was similar to the current RF of its mother, indicating call convergence. The RF of mothers and pups were correlated, and pups of young mothers had a higher RF than pups of the same mothers later in life. Correspondingly, RF in the Taiwanese leaf-nosed bat, Hipposideros terasensis, appears to be influenced by conspecifics. Bats that were experimentally transferred to a new colony adjusted their RF after 8–16 days to the resident bats' RF. However, it is unclear if transfer-induced stress may have affected the bats’ RF.

Greater spear-nosed bat (Phyllostomus hastatus) females produce noisy screech calls which encode a group-specific signature to facilitate group cohesion during foraging. The group signature results from a call convergence of all group members. In a transfer experiment, captive subadult females were assigned to two new social groups, replicating the dispersal pattern of subadult females in the wild. The screech calls of all group members changed mainly in peak frequency and spectral shape, converging to maintain two different group-specific vocal signatures. As the potential effects of maturation, physical environment or genetic relatedness on call convergence were controlled for, auditory input from conspecifics appears to be the crucial factor for the acquisition of the observed group-specific signatures. Such convergence within but not between highly controlled groups can indicate vocal production learning if usage learning can be excluded.

In an experiment on pale spear-nosed bats (Phyllostomus discolor), adult bats were trained to match an auditory target (a frequency-shifted social call from their repertoire) which required them to lower the fundamental frequency of their social calls. Once lowering the fundamental frequency was no longer required to receive a reward, most bats resumed calling with higher fundamental frequencies. One individual, however, raised the fundamental frequency of its calls again only after the frequency of the auditory target was raised as well, thus demonstrating it paid attention to the auditory experience provided by the target.

Captive, adult Egyptian fruit bats, Rousettus aegyptiacus, exposed to continuous broadband noise for two weeks reacted by shifting their call frequency upwards. This shift was persistent for several weeks after noise cessation, suggesting that adult bats showed vocal plasticity. This plasticity could be caused by vocal usage learning or vocal production learning. In a different study, pups raised in relative acoustic isolation (i.e. only with their mothers) had a delayed vocal repertoire maturation, producing calls with a higher fundamental frequency and greater variability than control pups that were raised with auditory feedback from more co-housed conspecifics. In the same study, three additional pups raised in isolation but with exposure to playbacks of low-frequency adult calls also produced the lower frequency calls. However, differences in isolation studies are often difficult to interpret and hearing adult calls could simply reduce stress levels and facilitate normal vocal development. In a follow-up study, pups housed only with their mothers were raised with three different playbacks of conspecific calls that differed in their fundamental frequency. This experiment demonstrated call convergence in which pups produced calls with different fundamental frequencies depending on their auditory input. This convergence towards different sound types is consistent with vocal production learning but difficult to interpret because all analysed sound types were pooled and not considered separately. It is possible that bats instead chose different call types from their existing repertoires to achieve this outcome.

Greater sac-winged bat (Saccopteryx bilineata) pups produce multisyllabic isolation calls which encode individual and group-specific differences (b). In an observational study on captive groups, the isolation calls of free-living pups from seven different social groups converged in spectral composition towards the isolation calls of their respective group members. As potentially confounding effects on call convergence were ruled out (i.e. maturation, physical environment and genetic relatedness), auditory input from conspecifics appears to be the crucial factor for the group-specific signature. Pups of both sexes not only produced isolation calls but also very long ‘babbling bouts’, i.e. sequences containing precursors of most adult syllable types. One conspicuous adult vocalization type, the multisyllabic territorial song of males, first appeared in rudimentary form in pups' babbling bouts and subsequently transformed into fully developed song, showing the same syntactical and spectral composition as the adult song. The territorial song consists of up to six different syllable types, the most prominent being the buzz syllable. Regarding their spectral characteristics, buzz syllables of free-living pups from seven different social groups became more similar to, and finally strongly resembled, the buzz syllables from adult males belonging to the pups’ respective social group but not to other social groups in the vicinity. When pups produced buzz syllables for the first time, they had already been exposed to singing males for two to three weeks. This auditory input guided the pups' attempts to copy the male song, a task they mastered after another seven to nine weeks. The observed similarity of buzz syllables from pups and adult males was irrespective of whether pups were related to singing males or not, thus demonstrating the importance of auditory input and hence vocal production learning for song acquisition. Intriguingly, pups of both sexes learned to sing even though only males sing as adults. Overall, the process of copying tutor song and the pronounced vocal practice phase in S. bilineata shows interesting parallels to song learning in oscine songbirds.


Primates

Primates have long been a major focus for studies on vocal learning. Clearly humans have advanced vocal learning skills and we would therefore expect to find this in other primates as well. However, evidence for the occurrence of vocal production learning in nonhuman primates has not been forthcoming. From a considerable body of work, it is clear that vocal learning abilities in nonhuman primates are much more limited than in humans. In all cases of nonhuman primate vocal modifications, it appears that animals produced altered versions of calls that were already in their repertoire.

The production of such novel signals has been reported in captive primates using filter structures such as lips, cheeks and the tongue. Koko, a western lowland gorilla (Gorilla gorilla), raised and cared for by humans without other gorillas produced a large repertoire of such sounds such as blows, huffs and coughs. Similarly, ten orangutans (Pongo spp.) in human care have learned a whistle and two of them matched temporal parameters of whistles produced by humans. One orangutan also managed to match aspects of frequency modulation in a so-called wookie call. These calls have been described in captive animals but they strongly overlap with calls in the natural repertoire of orangutans and their production involves the larynx. In a training experiment, the same orangutan produced high- and low-frequency versions of the wookie call in response to high- and low-frequency versions produced by humans. While the frequencies used by humans and organutans did not match, this behaviour suggests the animal was trying to copy the human model. Wild orangutans also appear to have greater geographic variation in call structure than other species but learning has not yet been demonstrated as a cause of this variation.

The main body of recent evidence for vocal flexibility in nonhuman primates comes from studies on vocal convergence within call types. Several studies reported greater acoustic similarities between closely associated animals that were not genetically related than between non-associates, including grey mouse lemurs (Microcebus murinus), Campbell's monkeys (Cercopithecus campbelli), Guinea baboons (Papio papio) (c) and chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). To further investigate the process of convergence, studies have documented call characteristics before and after housing animals with previously unknown conspecifics. In pygmy marmosets (Cebuella pygmaea), three out of four individuals showed call convergence after being paired with a new animal. Similarly, trill and phee calls of eight common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus) became more similar between two groups once they had been placed into acoustic contact. Thirteen chimpanzees showed convergence over several years in their food grunts after being housed together. All of these subtle changes were consistent and long-lasting. Short-term convergence of calls in social interactions has also been found in interactions of chimpanzees and Diana monkeys (Cercopithecus diana). However, as mentioned before, subtle changes within call types can also be caused by other effects, especially in the wild where group composition and environmental factors are not controlled for. For food call convergence in chimpanzees, it has been convincingly argued that the reported new variants of food calls were already in the animals repertoires before a change in use was observed, which would make this an example of usage learning. Furthermore, changes in acoustic parameters can be caused by changes in arousal or motivational state over time in which case learning does not need to be involved. While there were good arguments to exclude arousal changes as an explanation in the chimpanzee example, it is a valid alternative explanation in many cases of subtle vocal changes. Nevertheless, these cases of convergence are intriguing and further work on the mechanisms behind them are needed to assess when vocal learning might be involved.

Many recent studies also provide examples of primate vocal plasticity in other domains. Usage learning has been reconfirmed with more advanced methodology in recent studies in which common marmosets were trained to produce calls from their repertoire in response to conditioned signals and chimpanzees found to incorporate raspberry sounds into their call sequences. Furthermore, captive chimpanzees learned to use sounds to get attention from humans, and which sounds they used could be conditioned with selective rewards. Finally, a lack of consistency in vocal responses by parents can delay the vocal development in common marmosets. All of these examples show flexibility in vocalizations. Yet, the overall structure of nonhuman primate vocalizations has been shown to be comparatively stable within species.


Other mammalian orders

As in primates, vocal convergence in other mammalian taxa leads to more subtle acoustic changes than have been reported for cetaceans, pinnipeds, elephants and bats. Naked mole-rats (Heterocephalus glaber) modify the frequency modulation of their most common call type, the soft chirp, based on the auditory input from conspecifics they grow up with. Naked mole-rats live in multigenerational, eusocial colonies. Soft chirps function as contact calls and encode a group-specific signature that mediates antiphonal calling between group members. Experimentally transferred pups adopt the signature of their foster colony, indicating call convergence which is not driven by genetic relatedness. Moreover, the colony signature in soft chirps deteriorates when the matriarch of a colony is replaced, further highlighting the importance of conspecific influences on call convergence.

Good evidence for convergence was also reported for ungulates. The contact calls of captive pygmy goat (Capra hircus) kids converged towards the calls of fellow kids in four different social group over the course of 35 days after birth. Call convergence led to changes in fundamental frequency and formant structure. When assessing the group-specific signature, genetic and environmental effects were controlled for and could not explain this pattern.

Male common house mice (Mus musculus) from one genetic strain, B6, decreased the peak frequency of their songs' dominant syllable towards that of males from another strain, BxD, when housed under competitive social conditions (i.e. one male from each strain together with one female from the one or the other strain). The behavioural function of the observed shift is unclear and stress could have influenced call changes. While it is possible that mouse song is influenced by the acoustic environment, other studies clearly demonstrated that mice do not need auditory input for song development. Both genetically deaf mice and experimentally deafened mice developed normal song and cross-fostering did not influence song characteristics. Correspondingly, a mouse strain lacking its cerebral cortex also developed normal song, indicating that song production in mice is controlled by subcortical structures such as the striatum and the midbrain.


Conclusion

Since the last review, a considerable number of studies have reported new results on vocal learning in mammals. With more detailed evidence available, it becomes apparent that vocal production learning is not an all or nothing skill but that it can influence vocal behaviour to different degrees. Looking forward, the key issue to address is the variability in learning skills between species. For this, we need to find a standardized approach to mapping out an animal's acoustic space, i.e. the kinds of sounds its production apparatus could theoretically produce and compare it to limitations when it comes to copying sounds. Training methods based on vocalizations already present in an animal's repertoire that then get modified once the subject learns to associate a specific modification with a reward, may be the way ahead. An alternative or complementary approach may be the more exact analysis of copied sound patterns in the wild, especially in species that are not easily trained such as large whales. It is apparent that the vocal production learning abilities of cetaceans, seals, elephants and some bats are more pronounced than the examples of subtle convergence within call types found in other orders. Convergence usually only requires comparatively minor adjustments, so that usage learning appears sufficient to achieve them. Alternatively, such convergence may be a result of a shared physiological state not requiring learning. Nevertheless, minor changes may still be mediated by direct connections between the neocortex and the vocal production apparatus and deserve further study. Whether convergence and other subtle adjustments use the same neural mechanisms as vocal production learning is one of the key questions in this field (Vernes et al.). Only by focusing on the degree of sharing in mechanisms will we be able to classify learning patterns in a biologically sensible way. If the same mechanism is used, differences may only occur in degree but not in kind of learning.

We did not revisit the contexts in which learned sounds are used or in which vocal learning may have evolved. These have not changed fundamentally since the review by Janik & Slater (but see Caruso et al. for a broader look at contexts). Vocal convergence in the development of social relationships and potential adjustments animals make to cope with added noise in the environment have been highlighted as possible additional contexts for vocal learning. Convergence in the context of social bonds has been included by Janik & Slater in recognition contexts but may deserve separate consideration. Furthermore, adjustments to noise may have paved the way for greater vocal control and could have been a stepping stone in the evolution of vocal learning. Alternatively, such reactions could be genetically encoded with little influence from learning. Further study is needed to make these distinctions.

One of the main outcomes of bringing together all the evidence for or against a particular trait is a recognition of different methods and approaches used in its study. A common theme in studies on vocal learning is the often superficial treatment of comparisons to the existing repertoire. Sometimes data from before tests began are not available, but a substitute can be the comparison with the species repertoire in general. Unfortunately, such comparisons are often not as detailed as those used when trying to demonstrate similarities between a model and a match. Comparisons to before tests started or to the species repertoire are crucial when trying to decide whether vocal production learning leads to the rise of a new vocalization or whether the animal uses already existing calls or songs to achieve a match through usage learning. The general conclusion from our revisit of this subject though is that the increased number of studies on vocal production learning in mammals helps to confirm the degree to which vocal learning is present in each particular order. Repeated studies showing advanced or limited learning skills help to paint the picture of how vocal learning has evolved and what its role is in the complexity of each species' communication system.


Data accessibility

This article has no additional data.


Authors' contributions

This review was written collaboratively.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

This article has no additional data.


The multi-dimensional nature of vocal learning

Sonja C. Vernes, Buddhamas Pralle Kriengwatana, Veronika C. Beeck, Julia Fischer, Peter L. Tyack, Carel ten Cate, Vincent M. Janik — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2021. PMC8419582, CC BY 4.0.

How learning affects vocalizations is a key question in the study of animal communication and human language. Parallel efforts in birds and humans have taught us much about how vocal learning works on a behavioural and neurobiological level. Subsequent efforts have revealed a variety of cases among mammals in which experience also has a major influence on vocal repertoires. Janik and Slater (Anim. Behav. 60, 1–11. (doi:10.1006/anbe.2000.1410)) introduced the distinction between vocal usage and production learning, providing a general framework to categorize how different types of learning influence vocalizations. This idea was built on by Petkov and Jarvis (Front. Evol. Neurosci. 4, 12. (doi:10.3389/fnevo.2012.00012)) to emphasize a more continuous distribution between limited and more complex vocal production learners. Yet, with more studies providing empirical data, the limits of the initial frameworks become apparent. We build on these frameworks to refine the categorization of vocal learning in light of advances made since their publication and widespread agreement that vocal learning is not a binary trait. We propose a novel classification system, based on the definitions by Janik and Slater, that deconstructs vocal learning into key dimensions to aid in understanding the mechanisms involved in this complex behaviour. We consider how vocalizations can change without learning, and a usage learning framework that considers context specificity and timing. We identify dimensions of vocal production learning, including the copying of auditory models (convergence/divergence on model sounds, accuracy of copying), the degree of change (type and breadth of learning) and timing (when learning takes place, the length of time it takes and how long it is retained). We consider grey areas of classification and current mechanistic understanding of these behaviours. Our framework identifies research needs and will help to inform neurobiological and evolutionary studies endeavouring to uncover the multi-dimensional nature of vocal learning.

This article is part of the theme issue ‘Vocal learning in animals and humans’.


Introduction

Interest in vocal learning skills has been with us from the beginning of animal behaviour research, with scholars as early as Darwin recognizing the role of learning in the development of bird song and its parallels with human vocal performance. Janik & Slater introduced a framework that distinguished between vocal usage learning, in which existing signals are given in a new context or sequence, and vocal production learning, in which signals are modified in form after experience with the signals of others. Petkov & Jarvis noted the continuous nature of this trait, and others have further explored these ideas. Yet, with more studies providing empirical data, the limits of the initial frameworks become apparent. We build on the definitions proposed by Janik & Slater to refine the categorization of vocal learning in light of the advances made since its publication. Our motivation is that, despite the advances made in the last 20 years and more of research since the first publication of this framework, identifying which species are vocal learners still remains a challenging task. Outside the few highly studied and easily recognizable vocal production learners, membership of this select club is still hotly debated. Furthermore, despite most researchers agreeing that vocal learning is not a binary trait, a satisfactory typology of its components is still lacking.

Vocalizations may vary for a range of reasons, but vocal learning crucially requires a learning process to be the driver of such variation. Although many definitions of learning exist, we have adopted the definition of learning as a modification of an individual's behaviour owing to information memorized from previous experience. Vocal production learning was defined by Janik & Slater as the production of modified or novel vocalizations, as a result of learning from the experience of the acoustic signals of others. Central to this definition is that auditory input from a model sound leads to the formation of a memory of the sound (a template), to which the vocal output is compared. We maintain this definition and highlight that the auditory model may be a range of sounds including vocalizations produced by another animal (recorded or live), synthesized playbacks or even non-vocal mechanical sounds (e.g. lyrebirds' imitation of a chainsaw or camera shutter).

We classify behavioural changes associated with vocal learning into a cluster of discrete dimensions and then consider how these behaviours relate to evidence for or against underlying mechanisms. This approach explicitly acknowledges that there may not be a single vocal learning phenotype, rather multiple components, expressed to different degrees. We first consider cases where changes in vocalizations may be occurring that are not the result of learning, to distinguish them from learned modifications (§2). We then explore the definitions of, and distinctions between, vocal usage learning and vocal production learning. Usage learning is a form of contextual learning in which a signal is produced in a new context as a result of experience. This term covers a range of behaviours where the context may refer to environmental or behavioural contexts (natural or artificial), and can include positional contexts (i.e. position in a sequence of calls). For usage learning (§3), we consider two dimensions: how vocalization context (behavioural contexts and positional context) or timing (call timing and rhythmicity) is learned. For vocal production learning itself (§4), we describe three dimensions: the copying of auditory models (convergence or divergence on model sounds, accuracy of copying), the degree of change (type of vocal modification and breadth of learning) and timing (when learning takes place, the length of time it takes and how long it is retained). We also consider the grey areas that currently hinder clear classification (§5), our current mechanistic understanding of these traits (§6) and outstanding questions for future research (§7 and).


Non-learned inputs into vocal variation

To make headway in the identification of vocal learning, it is necessary to first recognize other factors that may contribute to variation, but that do not involve the learned adjustment of vocal output.


Variation in response to the acoustic environment

Animals modify the intensity, frequency, duration and repetition of their signals to compensate for variation in acoustic conditions in their environment. If these adjustments involve immediate audio-vocal feedback rather than memorized information from previous experience, they would not be classed as learned changes, based on the definition of learning applied herein. This includes phenomena such as the jamming avoidance response of some bat species.

Highly sophisticated or precise vocal change in response to auditory input does not necessarily indicate that the change is learned. One sophisticated phenomenon that involves auditory–vocal feedback but is not generally defined as vocal learning is the Doppler shift compensation (DSC) of Rhinolophid bats. When a bat hears a Doppler-shifted echo, it precisely modifies the frequency of its call so that the echo stays in a preferred frequency band. DSC is achieved by auditory–vocal feedback mechanisms in the midbrain that do not require learning under our definition. Thus, to classify observed vocal variation in response to environmental sounds, it is critical to determine if the change is a non-learned response (such as DSC), or whether the animal employs a learning process to modify its vocal output.


Controlling for other sources of acoustic variation

Changes owing to physical growth and maturation, rather than changes in auditory experience, can cause a shift in vocal characteristics (e.g. fallow deer (Dama dama)). Changes in arousal, stress, disease and hormonal or emotional state can also account for changes in acoustic structure. For example, the rate of parental vocal input was shown to positively affect the rate of vocal maturation in common marmoset young. These differences may be explained by an increased effort in practising driving an existing developmental programme more rapidly. Stress, e.g. induced by separation, can have a direct impact on the spectral structure of calls in common marmosets and the rate of parental vocal input can have a stress alleviating effect. Acoustic features of calls may also be influenced by the reproductive state of the subjects. Therefore, the contribution of physiological and morphological factors to changes in vocalizations should be considered before inferring vocal learning.


Vocal usage learning

Usage learning and vocal production learning are two different facets of how learning can affect vocal behaviour. Usage learning can be applied to existing vocalizations or those acquired by vocal production learning, and some animals are capable of both. So, while usage and production learning can co-occur, usage learning does not itself require vocal production learning. For instance, if a young animal learns to restrict the use of an alarm call to a specific set of predators, but the alarm call itself does not require learning to develop, this is a clear example of usage learning. However, if an animal learns to produce a novel vocalization to signal the presence of predators this would involve vocal production learning (to learn the novel vocalization) and usage learning (to learn the context in which to employ it).

Vocal usage learning appears to be fairly common in mammals and birds. Adret and Janik & Slater highlighted usage learning in a broad group of species including parrots, chickens, budgerigars, mynahs, cats, dogs, rats, lemurs, sea lions and dolphins. More recent studies add bats, elephants and seals to this list. Nevertheless, usage learning can take various different forms and levels of complexity and describing these quite diverse phenomena under the label of usage learning does not imply that a single mechanism or the same one underlies them all. For example, primatologists have proposed that non-human primates have a special propensity for usage learning that is a precursor to learning in human language development. Below we describe some of the different contexts in which the use of signals can change through usage learning.


Learning to use calls in a new context

The most widely recognized form of usage learning is learning to produce an existing call in a new environmental context. A clear example of this is a study on European blackbirds (Turdus merula). Perceiving a mobbing conspecific together with a novel, harmless stuffed bird (a honey eater) induced blackbirds to mob the innocuous object using specific mobbing vocal behaviour (e.g. ‘duck’ calls) normally given to predators. This behaviour could be culturally transmitted along a chain of at least six individuals.

A common way of demonstrating learning to use calls in a new context is by training an animal to produce vocalizations in response to a conditioned stimulus such as an arbitrary hand or light signal, which can be considered a fairly simple form of contextual usage learning. Studies on a variety of species used such a method to demonstrate conditioned control over a single call type. More sophisticated control over vocal usage was shown by crows that were able to produce or withhold vocalizing to different colour cues. Rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta), gray seals (Halichoerus grypus) and bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) were even able to learn to produce more than one call type in response to different arbitrary signals. Note that, in the case of the dolphins, these were novel synthetic calls that were learned and used in an arbitrary context, suggesting a case where both vocal production and usage learning were occurring. Another method is to link food delivery to the production of specific signal parameters without training animals to respond to specific signals. Pale spear-nosed bats (Phyllostomus discolor) shifted to rewarded versions of their social calls in such a setup.

Identifying usage learning in the wild is more challenging. Animals often change how they use calls, as well as which calls they use over the course of their development but as before it is difficult to distinguish changes caused by maturation or stress from those caused by learning. Natural experiments can help here when populations differ in the number of examples provided to a developing animal. For example, groups of vervet monkeys (Cercopithecus aethiops) with more intergroup encounters learned the correct use of ‘wrr’ calls more quickly than groups with fewer encounters. Another interesting context in which usage learning might occur is the deceptive use of calls. For example, several species occasionally produce alarm calls in the absence of any predators, often gaining access to food in the process. If shown not to be a production error, the development of this behaviour is likely to involve usage learning. Fork-tailed drongos (Dicrurus adsimilis) also produce alarm calls of different species depending on what species are in their audience. Drongos use production learning to acquire the alarm calls of other species, and usage learning to learn the context in which they are given. Developmental studies of these behaviours will be able to shed further light on the role of usage learning in such contexts.

Animals may also learn to produce calls in a new positional context or sequence. This can involve the sequencing of calls from an existing repertoire or the sequencing of novel calls acquired through vocal production learning. The arrangement of calls can be in simple sequences, or can apply complex syntactic rules. Arranging or rearranging the sequence of calls or song elements might occur in various ways and through various mechanisms. Depending on the process involved in specific cases, such sequencing may be classified as usage learning or as production learning, or may not fit neatly into these categories. For this reason, we address sequence learning in §5 and acknowledge we need a deeper understanding of the mechanisms underlying sequence learning in the future.


Learning timing of call use: vocal interactions and rhythms

Coordination of call timing is widespread across the animal kingdom, from coordination of utterances in human conversations, to temporally entrained advertisement calls of male frogs. Duetting may involve temporal coordination such that vocalizations overlap, or occur in a turn-taking pattern with calls and their responses being produced within a limited time window. The widespread nature of this ability has suggested it as relevant for the evolution of communication in animals and humans. However, turn taking does not necessarily require learning and it is important to make a distinction between those temporal entrainments that are learned, those that are not learned, and those for which learning has not yet been demonstrated.

Temporal coordination of calls often develops very early, making it challenging to determine if the behaviour is learned or not, but examples where call timing influenced by learning is particularly apparent are in the development of duetting displays in birds and mammals. Some bird species produce simple call and response vocalizations, while others produce highly sophisticated duets that are so precisely timed that it can be difficult to tell when one bird stops singing and another continues the song. In canebrake wrens (Cantorchilus zeledoni), juveniles start duetting by singing together with adults, and their coordination of songs becomes better over time. Furthermore, adults that acquire a new partner have poor coordination directly after pairing, but this improves the longer they duet together. The same has been found in gibbons. These findings suggest that canebrake wrens and gibbons learn the appropriate temporal coordination for duetting.

Human and non-human primates (e.g. common marmosets) demonstrate vocal turn-taking behaviour from early in life. Many other mammals such as cetaceans, bats, elephants, meerkats and naked mole rats also show turn-taking behaviour, although in most cases learning of timing has not been definitively demonstrated in mammals. By contrast, there are some vertebrates where temporal vocal coordination can clearly be attributed to a central nervous system oscillator that is responsive to call perception, rather than a learned mechanism, such as in rhythmic calls of some anurans or suppression of motor pattern generators in response to hearing conspecific calls in monkeys.

Another form of usage learning found in human speech and song is copying novel rhythms in vocalization patterns. Learning to produce novel vocal rhythms has not been demonstrated in animals even though examples of entrainment of motor responses to acoustic rhythms exist. Zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) can create a type of rhythm by predicting the timing of a regular jamming signal and adjusting their own vocalizations to avoid it. They can also learn to distinguish perceptually between a specific isochronous and irregular beat pattern, but do not generalize this to tempo changes of the same patterns, suggesting that they do not have a representation of the global rhythm. Sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus) use rhythmic patterns of clicks, called codas, for communication. Codas are shared across multiple groups, with multiple sympatric vocal clans in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. This distribution of codas suggests that whales learn group-distinctive calls through memorizing the rhythmic patterns of their click sounds. Sperm whales are able to precisely time their clicks to match the depth sounder on a ship, but learning of rhythmic patterns like those of codas has not been demonstrated. Birds and mammals clearly pay attention to aspects of rhythm in conspecific vocalizations but production studies demonstrating vocal learning of rhythm in animals are still missing.


Constraints and flexibility of usage learning

Training animals to produce their own vocalizations on command is a common way of demonstrating usage learning. As noted above, many species have demonstrated this ability, but few studies have explored how flexible this form of learning is. For example, many species have been trained to produce a signal from their own repertoire on command, but it is unknown if they could be trained to use all of their existing call types in this fashion, or only some of them. The level of difficulty of usage learning in such studies is often reflected in the time required to learn to produce existing calls in response to different signals. In relation to sequence learning, it is also an open question whether animals are able to re-arrange all elements in a sequence arbitrarily or whether there are constraints. There are often predispositions in bird song learning for conspecific song elements and structure. It is, therefore, likely that there are limits to how units are recombined since models with unusual syllable combinations may not fit the species template for the conspecific song. More studies are needed to explore such limitations systematically.

A good example of complexity in usage learning is the fine tuning of the contexts in which vervet monkeys give alarm calls during their development. While they seem to be predisposed from birth to produce an aerial alarm to threats in the sky, the attention to detail required to learn the correct predator species for the call moving from broader categories to more specific ones is considerable. This probably relies on different neural processing than that involved in learning to produce an unspecified vocalization on command in a conditioning test. The most detailed documentation of usage learning complexity comes from language studies with grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus) that had to harness usage learning to use human words (which were initially acquired by production learning) to refer to objects and give information about their properties. While speech learning in grey parrots is impressive, their usage learning abilities are not unbounded. For example, the acquisition of multiple labels for the same object is much more difficult than the learning of the initial label. All of these examples are case studies in which usage learning was part of a larger investigation of cognitive skills.

To conclude, it is clear that the term ‘usage learning’ covers a broad category of phenomena, most likely involving a range of different mechanisms. A more systematic investigation of usage learning, its diversity, complexity and its constraints would be of great value.


Vocal production learning

The classical view of vocal production learning is based on studies of humans and songbirds. In this process, the animal uses auditory input from a model sound to produce copies of various degrees of fidelity, depending on the species. Producing a copy of an auditory model is also known from other animal groups, such as parrots, pinnipeds and dolphins. These represent clear cases of vocal production learning, where it can be directly shown that individuals exposed to different model sounds start selectively producing what they have heard. In most songbirds, the neural representation of the model is built up from several exposures and stored as the ‘template’ on which later vocal production is modelled. However, there are also examples in which the copying of a model is almost instantaneous, suggestive of an ability for real-time vocal matching. It is not always clear whether this results in a longer lasting or a perhaps more transient neural representation of the auditory model.

Our definition of vocal production learning requires auditory input. However, it is important to note that this does not imply that auditory cues are the only factors involved in this learning process. It has been clearly shown that other factors, such as social interactions, can influence how effectively animals learn during vocal production learning. In humans and songbirds, learning is more effective when interaction with a live tutor is possible, compared to auditory only or even audio-visual playback on a screen. As such our definition denotes only the requirement for exposure to an auditory model to form a template during vocal production learning, and should not be interpreted as an exclusion of other contextual factors that clearly play an important role in this process.

Starting from the aforementioned definition, we consider vocal production learning to be an ‘umbrella’ term covering a number of behavioural dimensions, many of which appear to be continuous, while others are discrete. Below, we break down vocal production learning into dimensions to produce a more fine-grained view of this complex behaviour and to show how these dimensions can alter vocal outputs in different ways. In doing so, our aim is to produce a behaviour-focused framework within which it would be possible to categorize the varied vocal production learning abilities of different animals, facilitate inter-species comparisons of these behaviours and ultimately, elucidate the underlying mechanisms.


MODEL: vocalizations converge on or diverge from the model

The examples of vocal production learning given above result in learning to make vocalizations more similar to an auditory model. However, vocal production learning can also involve modification of vocal outputs so that they become different from the auditory model. Diverging from the model can be beneficial if the vocal learning serves to produce a signal necessary for individual recognition that should be species typical, yet distinct from others that they encounter. Bottlenose dolphins use vocal learning in the development of individually distinctive signature whistles seemingly by modifying whistles that they have heard in their environment. Rapid call convergence and divergence has been observed in playback experiments with several parrot species. The degree and direction of the resulting changes seems to depend on the social dynamics of the species and individuals concerned. To diverge from a model, a template based on the model would still form, but the vocal outputs would be modified to avoid similarity to the template. It is possible that a second auditory template could form if reliable production of the divergent vocalization is needed. In practice, it may be difficult to determine whether an observed divergent vocalization is the result of active modification to differ from a model, or matching to another model that is unknown to the observer. While convergence on a model is the most widely (and easily) observed behaviour, further work is needed to determine the spread of, and mechanisms underlying, divergence from a model.


MODEL: accuracy of the copy

The fidelity of a copy produced during vocal production learning has previously been well laid out in relation to song learning in birds by Beecher & Brenowitz. They describe a continuum from high fidelity (faithful imitation), to medium fidelity (improvisation that introduces variation to sounds copied from a tutor), to low fidelity (invention that is species typical but does not resemble a tutor, and may not even require a tutor). In this latter case, the bird may still require exposure to songs in order to produce a species-typical song. For instance, grasshopper sparrows (Ammodramus savannarum) must have heard normal songs in order to develop normal, species-typical warble songs instead of impoverished songs with abnormal warble notes. Nevertheless, the songs resulting from exposure to a tutor do not resemble the tutor song more than they resemble another normal grasshopper sparrow song. So, there is an effect of experience, but it does not translate into copying. In a species that produces excellent copies of model sounds heard earlier a clear template must have been formed. In a species requiring exposure to song, but not resulting in copying, the exposure may be needed to stimulate the development of a latent song programme or to learn the appropriate characteristics of species-typical songs. These different outcomes of exposure suggest different underlying processes by which experience can influence vocal development and these contrasting phenomena need further exploration.

There may be circumstances where copying fidelity is of more or less importance during vocal production learning. For example, learning that results in convergence towards a model (see the previous section) may require medium to high fidelity because accuracy brings benefits to the copier. An adaptive need to diverge from a model may employ precise avoidance of the model, or could employ low fidelity copying in combination with improvization or innovation. For example, bottlenose dolphins address each other by copying their individually distinctive signature whistles. While the overall modulation pattern of model whistles is produced accurately in these copies, multi-dimensional scaling of specific acoustic parameters of copies often result in substantial differences from the whistle that is being copied, suggesting a possible use of such mechanisms to make copies recognizable as such to eavesdroppers. In some species of songbird, the ability to accurately imitate song elements or sequences of song elements may be targets of inter- and intra-sexual selection because it could signal aspects of individual quality and fitness, including motivation and/or ability to attend to social cues, use social information and form social bonds.

Importantly, when assessing the precision of the match and the importance of fidelity, we must strive to consider this from the animal's perspective. Although we may be able to quantify subtle differences on a spectrogram, differences in the fidelity of a copy are only relevant when and if the study species can perceive a difference. Conversely, using our own assessment of a ‘good’ match may lead to overlooking important features that are relevant for the study species.


DEGREE: type of vocal modification

Production learning may involve modifications of existing vocalizations or the production of completely novel vocalizations. In addition, vocal outputs can be modified by learning individual calls or learning sequences of calls (see §5 for further discussion of this issue). In all these cases, a key challenge is to determine what constitutes a novel sound pattern. In determining whether the vocalization observed is a novel sound, or a modification of an existing sound, the complete vocal repertoire for an individual is needed. While this requires knowledge of an individual's repertoire before it has been exposed to the learning experience, this knowledge can seldom be claimed to be complete because it is very difficult to be sure that all rarely used vocalizations or heavily context-specific vocalizations have been captured. However, in practice, larger qualitative or quantitative changes in vocal structure, in particular, when they are towards some identifiable model, will be strong indicators of learning. In the cases of animals imitating human speech or a songbird copying a mechanical sound, it is obvious that a novel vocalization is being produced. It is not yet known whether modification of existing calls and production of novel calls employ the same or different neural mechanisms, but this is a key area for future research, as understanding the mechanisms will be highly beneficial not only to better categorize the behaviour, but to understand how the behaviour arises.

Modification of calls can employ different physical mechanisms operating on the airflow, the sound-producing organ or the filtering vocal tract that can co-occur or to some extent independently affect a call's spectral structure. While duration and amplitude need control of the respiratory system this needs to be coordinated with the configuration of the sound source. Similarly, frequency modulation patterns are most prominently influenced by the phonatory system but increasing amplitude by controlling respiratory pressure can lead to an increase in frequency parameters and occurrences of nonlinear phenomena, again affecting the spectral structure. Another important way of learning to modify sounds is by changing the way in which the upper vocal tract filters or emphasizes parts of the signal produced by the sound source (e.g. the vocal folds in most mammals or syrinx in birds). Janik & Slater called this filter learning and highlighted its possible involvement in human speech owing to the importance of these structures to encode contrasts in vowels and consonants.


DEGREE: breadth of learning

Vocal learners differ greatly in the breadth or narrowness of the range of vocalizations they can learn to produce. Several songbird species are strongly biased towards learning to produce only species-typical vocalizations. Some animal species can mimic species-atypical sounds such as human speech (e.g. parrots, elephants, seals) and some bird species are able to mimic a huge range of sounds produced by different animals (e.g. mynah birds, starlings, drongos), or even non-biological sources in their environment. For example, lyrebirds can copy the sounds of a range of other animals or even a chainsaw or camera shutter from their environment. Beecher & Brenowitz refer to this variation in breadth of learning as the degree of canalization.

The breadth or narrowness of the vocalizations an animal can learn to produce may result from different selection pressures leading to a more or less narrow choice of models and vocalizations. Morphology may also preclude species from producing certain types of sounds because of the limitations of their vocalizing organ. Neural constraints may determine whether or not the animal recognizes sounds as a relevant model to attempt to copy and whether motor programmes are flexible enough to copy atypical models.

Environmental factors or motivation may also be key influences in determining the breadth of learning for many species. The social relationship between tutor and tutee and the presentation mode (live or playback) may affect the motivation to copy vocalizations. Similarly, under normal circumstances, and in the normal environment of the animal, it may be the case that only species-typical sounds are learned. However, under unusual conditions (e.g. captive rearing, atypical social bonding with heterospecifics), animals may mimic unusual sounds. Such a situation is exemplified by the individual cases of Hoover the harbour seal (Phoca vitulina), Koshik the Indian elephant (Elephas maximus) and most recently by a case of Ripper, an Australian musk duck (Biziura lobata), which were each observed to mimic human speech-like sounds. Seals, elephants and musk ducks are not routinely observed to mimic human speech, but in each of these cases, the individuals were reared in isolation from conspecifics and formed strong bonds with human keepers. It is hypothesized that in the absence of exposure to conspecific calls and because of the strong human social bonds formed, the animals were motivated to mimic human sounds that would not normally be considered a relevant model by these species. The age at which bonding occurred might also strongly influence whether a model is considered relevant (see also the section on timing below). In any case, these examples show us that the necessary peripheral morphology and the neural circuitry is present in seals, elephants and musk ducks, but that they will only mimic human speech sounds under extreme circumstances. As such, we must be careful to consider what an animal is ‘capable’ of doing if there is only an absence of evidence regarding the breadth of their vocal production learning capacity.


TIMING: when learning takes place

The age or seasonal context during which production learning can occur differs between species. In some birds, there is evidence that the formation of a template used for vocal learning may already start before they emerge from the egg. In the superb (Malurus cyaneus) and red-backed (Malurus melanocephalus) fairywrens, females give a specific call when incubating their eggs and chicks appear to incorporate these into their begging calls, suggesting that the calls are memorized in ovo. For several songbirds, the phase for song learning is well defined. For example, zebra finches and white-crowned sparrows (Zonotrichia leucophrys) form their song memory (template) predominantly during a juvenile sensitive phase. They progressively match their later vocal output to this template and when the songs are crystallized and stereotyped the birds are then no longer able to learn new songs. Other species, such as parrots are able to continue to learn new vocalization as adults, and some birds such as canaries or starlings go through a sensitive phase seasonally, learning new sounds or songs only during a specified annual window.

In mammals, the period during which vocal learning can take place has rarely been studied. Humans are able to learn novel sounds throughout their lifetime, but there appears to be a sensitive period for learning to distinguish or reproduce all aspects of the speech sounds of a language. Humpback whales and bottlenose dolphins are clearly capable of learning novel sounds throughout their lifetimes. Single case reports, such as those for Hoover the seal or Koshik the elephant, suggest that their production of learned vocalizations co-occurred with sexual maturation stages, but it appears likely in these cases that the learning of the auditory templates took place earlier in life as juveniles. Whether as mature adults they continued to add novel vocalizations is unknown. In a controlled experimental study, three grey seals less than a year of age were able to both learn and produce speech sounds while still juveniles. For most non-human mammals, controlled experiments or long-term monitoring have not been performed and these are crucial to allow the determination of sensitive periods for vocal production learning.


TIMING: length of time learning takes

Modification of existing sounds can involve a rapid ‘step-change’ or gradual changes over time to produce the desired vocalization. Both of these can ultimately result in novel call types, but one happens immediately, the other, gradually. Memorizing a template and shaping vocal output accordingly may each take time, but a template may also be memorized rapidly in some species with initial vocal output already matching the model. For example, dolphins can be trained to imitate novel artificial sounds after the first exposure to a synthetic playback sound, and a nightingale (Luscinia megarhynchos) may reproduce a series of different songs it has heard only 20 times. Converging on calls may also vary in the amount of exposure (trials) required. Some parrot species, such as the orange-fronted conures (Aratinga canicularis) can converge their contact calls towards a playback of a different contact call during a single playback session. Conversely, in pale spear-nosed bats, many trials over approximately 30 days were required to learn to produce a small pitch shift.


TIMING: how long the learning is retained

In the previous section, we discussed whether animals rapidly learn to produce a new call type, or gradually learn to modify their call to approach the properties of the template. Related to this dimension is also the question of whether the internal auditory template that the animal is aiming to produce is stored in long term or only short-term memory. It is clear that in many classical cases of vocal production learning, such as songbird song learning, the internal auditory templates are maintained in long-term memory. For many songbirds, it has been shown that the learning process consists of two phases, a first phase of sensory learning, in which an auditory model is memorized as a template, and a second phase of sensory-motor learning in which the template guides the developing vocal outputs. The songbird system thus puts strong emphasis on the long-term formation and use of a template.

Formation of a transient template in short-term memory would only allow for immediate matching of acoustic parameters or require repeated auditory input. If learning involves rapid production of new call types, such as in parrots and dolphins it is not always clear whether these templates are retained in long-term memory unless the resulting vocalizations are produced long term. Dolphins not only learn to imitate sounds immediately, but can be trained to use earlier mimicked sounds as object labels, indicating long-term storage of internal templates for these novel produced sounds. In the case of Alex, the African grey parrot, it seems likely that the internal templates for the words he learnt were stored long-term as these sounds continued to be produced over a long period. Tests of his comprehension and use of labels included objects that he might only see once per week, but he still could name them, so the internal templates were likely to have been retained at least this long. Differentiating between short- and long-term retention of learned templates will require experiments specifically designed to address this. For example, if matching to a sound that had been matched in the past is faster than the matching of a new sound, it would imply that some knowledge of the first template was retained in long-term memory. Exploring examples where short-term versus long-term retention of templates are observed could illuminate the mechanisms underlying these types of vocal production learning.


Grey areas in classification of vocal learning

Although we have endeavoured to produce a clear typology of vocal learning, some grey areas of classification remain. In some cases, it is not apparent if or when a learning process lies behind the observable behaviour. In other cases, the mechanisms behind behaviours identified as vocal variation, usage learning and/or production learning may be hard to distinguish between, or may even be co-occurring. In this section, we will discuss some of the outstanding ‘grey areas’ that hamper clear categorization of vocal learning across species.

In this paper, we have retained a reasonably strict definition that vocal production learning requires learning from an auditory model, and the formation of a template to which the vocal output is compared (see §4). However broader definitions of vocal production learning can be used in which the requirement for hearing an auditory model during the learning process is omitted. An example of learning under this broader definition may be in Horsfield's bronze cuckoo (Chalcites basalis). The offspring of this brood parasitic species are reared by a foster species and after a few days produce begging calls that are quite similar to those of host young even though no host young are present. Experiments showed that this is the result of the gradual changing of a ‘standard’ begging call so that it that becomes similar to host begging calls over a short period. As there are no offspring of the foster species in the nest, there is no auditory model available to guide the change. The mechanism underlying the vocal change is suggested to be a type of operant learning: parents are likely to provide more food when the chick begging call resembles what parents expect to hear from their offspring. If the cuckoo receives limited responses to its begging, it starts to produce more variable calls, which might be considered improvizations on the cuckoo begging call. Those variants resulting in more food being delivered become more common and may be further varied so that it reaches a version which results in stable parental feeding. In this case, one might say that if there is a template, it is not in the mind of the learner, but in the mind of the rewarder. Reward-driven changes in vocalizations have also been shown in systematic experiments on budgerigars, cowbirds, bats and pinnipeds. If the reward-driven changes are rather limited it is difficult to rule out that they were a consequence of usage learning, resulting in the production of a previously existing (but possibly rare) variant of a call. Conclusions on the production mechanism of apparently novel or idiosyncratic sounds are especially hard to draw where comparisons to the natural repertoire and its inherent flexibility in wild conspecifics are lacking. If, however, reward-driven changes result in vocalizations well outside the known range of a species, such reward-driven vocal production learning may employ different mechanisms from those that rely on exposure to and subsequent matching of an auditory model by the learner.

Animals and humans may use a variety of learning mechanisms to learn to produce new sequences of vocalizations. In animal communication, learning sequences may involve simple linear arrangements of a small number of vocalizations (e.g. in primates), or more complex arrangements such as songs that can involve combining calls or song syllables into repeating subunits of phrases or themes, some of which display complex syntax (e.g. birds, whales). One example is Bengalese finch (Lonchura striata var. domestica) songs, which consist of syllable sequences that can be arranged in various orders, the sequence of which is affected by experience. In some animal species, the rearrangement of vocalizations alters the functional response, which has been suggested to represent a simple combinatorial syntax (e.g. pied babblers (Turdoides bicolor)). If an animal is reinforced to produce two vocalizations in a specific order, then associative learning can lead to sequence learning, and this would be categorized as usage learning. Sequence learning plays an important role in vocal production learning in some species as well. If learning a novel sequence of sounds leads to co-articulatory effects that modify the vocal output to produce a new sound, this could then be a case where both vocal usage and production learning could be argued. In humans and birds, there is evidence that the mechanism by which sequencing is learned is distinct from that which matches the spectral element structure to a template. In humans, learning the acoustic structure of phonemes appears to occur via a separate process to their sequencing in speech. When birds learn a new song type, they have to acquire not only the elements that they need to produce but also the sequence and timing of these. There is also evidence that these two components are learned separately in songbirds, but that the processes are tightly integrated, similar to the processes that occur during human speech acquisition. Currently, it is unclear whether this type of sequence learning uses the same neural structures as when the bird learns to give a call in a new social context or whether it shares components used in vocal production learning. Sequence learning is a key area for future study to understand processes by which it can take place and how they relate to, or overlap with the features and mechanisms underlying other aspects of vocal learning behaviour.


Mechanisms

The most accurate and useful classification system of vocal learning is one in which the behavioural categories are mirrored by mechanistic boundaries. Mechanistic understanding is thus key to resolving at least some of the grey areas in classification, such as those discussed above. For these reasons we discuss known and possible mechanisms underlying vocal learning, and in outline some key outstanding questions for future research that will lead to an improved typology and understanding of vocal learning.

Studies in songbirds and humans demonstrate that vocal learning exploits specialized circuitry, but it is not yet known to what extent mechanisms underlying modification of existing vocalizations and learning novel sound types are overlapping or discrete in the brain, or how they evolved. Tyack posits that fine tuning of the acoustic features of existing calls in a repertoire represents a limited form of vocal learning, while the acquisition of a completely novel call type represents complex vocal learning, and that these are distinct behaviours involving different brain circuitry, such that complex vocal learning may have been achieved by supplementing subcortical circuits with new cortical connectivity. Petkov & Jarvis suggest that these extremes represent minima and maxima of a stepwise continuum and that existing circuits have been gradually built upon to increase behavioural complexity. A major challenge for future research will be to elucidate the neural mechanisms underlying the different aspects of vocal modifications and vocal learning.


Vocal usage learning
